1-1
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL GOVERNMENT
1.01 ELECTED OFFICIALS ........................................................................................... 1-1
1.02 APPOINTED OFFICIALS ....................................................................................... 1-1
1.025 CONTRACTS FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES ................................................. 1-4
1.03 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ............................................................................. 1-4
1.04 MUNICIPAL COURT .............................................................................................. 1-7
1.05 GENERAL REGULATIONS GOVERNING ALL VILLAGE OFFICERS .................. 1-8
1.06 ELECTIONS ........................................................................................................... 1-8
1.07 VILLAGE BOARD MEETINGS .............................................................................. 1-8
1.08 PUBLIC RECORDS ............................................................................................. 1-11
1.09 INTEREST ON PASS-THROUGH CHARGES ..................................................... 1-28
1.10 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CITATIONS. ................................................................... 1-28
1.01 ELECTED OFFICIALS.
(1) VILLAGE PRESIDENT. The Village President shall be elected at the regular spring election in odd-numbered years for a term of 2 years commencing on the 3rd Tuesday of April in the year of his election.
(2) TRUSTEES. There shall be 6 Village Trustees. Three Trustees shall be elected at each annual spring election for 2 year terms, commencing on the third Tuesday of April in the year of their election.
(3) MUNICIPAL JUDGE. The Village Municipal Judge shall be elected at the regular spring election for a term of 4 years commencing on May 1 following his or her election.
[Am. 11-20, Eff. 6-17-11]
1.02 APPOINTED OFFICIALS.
(1) VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR. (a) Appointment. The Village Administrator shall be appointed by a majority vote of the members of the Village Board. The Administrator shall hold his office for an indefinite term and shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Board.
(b) Residency Required. The Administrator shall establish permanent residency within the boundaries of the Village or the Village’s extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction established pursuant to §§236.02(5) and 66.0105, Wis. Stats. not later than six (6) months following his or her attainment of non-probationary status. In the event that the Administrator shall fail to establish such residency, or shall thereafter cease to reside within the required area, his or her office shall be automatically forthwith vacated and such vacancy shall be filled as provided by law for the making of the original appointment, provided, however, that residency once established shall not be affected by a subsequent change in the Village’s jurisdictional boundaries.
[Cr.03-18, Eff. 4-21-03; Am. 10-03, Eff. 1-18-10].
(c) Powers and Duties. The Village Administrator shall be responsible for:
1. planning, organizing, coordinating and directing the activities and functions of the Village;
1-2
2. making appointments of department heads;
3. directing and coordinating the activities of all Village Departments;
4. acting as personnel officer, accepting and coordinating
recommendations from department heads on wages, hours and
conditions of employment, supervising all Village employees, except
police officers, as to work assignments, and in that capacity, all Village
employees will be responsible to the Administrator for instructions,
grievances, or any other matters pertaining to their respective duties. It
shall be the responsibility of the Village Administrator to impose
discipline, up to and including dismissal, on employees of the Village
when, in the discretion of the Village Administrator, such action is in the
best interest of the Village, subject to the right of an aggrieved
employee to appeal to the Village Board;
5. informing the Village President and the Village Board, on a regular
basis, of the activities of all Village Departments;
6. supervising the purchase of all supplies and equipment;
7. annually preparing a recommended budget for the consideration of the
Village Board;
8. performing all duties as directed by the Village President and the Village
Board.
[Am. Charter Ordinance No. 2, Eff. 8-22-94; Am. 07-11, Eff 04-17-07]
(d) Salary. The salary of the Village Administrator shall be fixed from time to time by
the Village Board.
(e) Deputy Administrator. The Village Administrator may designate any appointed
Village officer or employee as a Deputy Administrator. Any person so appointed shall,
during the temporary absence or disability of the Village Administrator, perform the duties of the
Village Administrator, except that a Deputy Administrator shall not have the power of the
Administrator to hire, make appointments, terminate, discipline or establish compensation for,
any employee without approval from the Village Board.
[Cr. 12-33, Eff. 12-18-12]
(2) VILLAGE CLERK. (a) The Village Clerk shall be appointed by the Village
Administrator and shall hold office for an indefinite term, subject to removal by the
Administrator. Removal of the Clerk shall, following the completion of any probationary
period established by the Administrator at the time of appointment, be only for just cause.
The Clerk shall have all the powers and duties set forth in §61.25 of the Wisconsin Statutes,
and such further duties as shall be assigned by the Village Board or the Village
Administrator from time to time.
(b) The Village Clerk may appoint a Deputy Clerk, subject to approval of the Village
Administrator. A Deputy Clerk so appointed shall act under the direction of the Clerk and,
during the temporary absence or disability of the Clerk, shall perform the duties of the Clerk.
[Recr. 12-33, Eff. 12-18-12]
1-3
(3) VILLAGE FINANCE DIRECTOR. (a) The Village Finance Director shall, by
virtue of his or her office, be the Village Treasurer. The Finance Director shall be appointed
by the Village Administrator and shall hold office for an indefinite term, subject to removal by
the Administrator. Removal of the Finance Director shall, following the completion of any
probationary period established by the Administrator at the time of appointment, be only for
just cause. The Finance Director shall have all the powers and duties set forth for village
treasurers in §61.26 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and such further duties as shall be assigned
by the Village Board or the Village Administrator from time to time.
(b) The Village Finance Director may, subject to approval of the Village
Administrator, filed in the office of the Clerk, appoint a Deputy Treasurer who shall act under
the direction of the Finance Director and who, during the temporary absence or disability of
the Finance Director, shall perform the duties of the Finance Director. Any Deputy Treasurer
so appointed may, if determined appropriate by the Village Administrator, be designated as
an Assistant Finance Director. The acts of the Deputy Treasurer shall be covered by an
official bond, unless otherwise determined by the Village Board by ordinance.
[Recr. 12-33, Eff. 12-18-12]
(4) CHIEF OF POLICE. (a) Appointment and Term. The Chief of Police shall be
appointed by the DeForest Board of Police Commissioners. Subject to all statutory
procedures and requirements, the Chief shall serve for an indefinite term subject to removal
by the DeForest Board of Police Commissioners for cause.
[Am. 00-56, Eff. 11-6-00; Am. 03-01, Eff. 1-20-03]
(b) Residency Required. The Chief shall establish permanent residency within the
boundaries of the DeForest Area School District not later than six (6) months following the
completion of the applicable probationary period. In the event that Chief shall fail to establish
such residency, or shall thereafter cease to reside in the DeForest Area School District, his
or her office shall be automatically forthwith vacated and such vacancy shall be filled as
provided by law for the making of the original appointment, provided, however, that
residency once established shall not be affected by a subsequent change in DeForest Area
School District boundaries. The Village Board may extend the period for establishing such
residency to a date certain by a 2/3 vote.
[Cr. 03-01, Eff. 1-20-03; Am. 9-24-2003]
(5) FIRE CHIEF AND FIRE INSPECTOR. See §§5.03 and 5.07 of this Code.
[Am. 14-01, Eff. 1-17-14]
(6) ASSESSOR. The Assessor shall be appointed by a majority of the Village Board
for an indefinite term.
[Am. 97-4, Eff. 2-17-97]
(7) VILLAGE ATTORNEY. The Village Attorney shall be appointed by a majority
vote of the Village Board for an indefinite term.
[Am. 97-4, Eff. 2-17-97]
(8) BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector shall be appointed by a
majority vote of the Village Board for an indefinite term. The Building Inspector shall also
act as plumbing inspector and electrical inspector.
[Am. 97-4, Eff. 2-17-97]
1-4
(9) WEED COMMISSIONER. Said officer shall be appointed in April each year by
the Village President, subject to confirmation by the Village Board, for a term of one year
commencing on May 1 following his or her respective appointment.
(10) FORESTER. The Village Forester shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
Village Board for an indefinite term. The Forester shall be responsible for administration of
the urban forestry regulations as set forth in §7.02 and subchapter II of Chapter 16 of this
Code.
[Cr. 10-01, Eff. 1-04-10]
(11) DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICES. The Village Administrator is authorized to
appoint an employee as the Director of Public Services, who shall supervise and direct the
functions of the Village’s Public Works and Utilities Departments and who shall, by virtue of
such appointment, serve as the Zoning Administrator under Chapter 15.
[Cr. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
1.025 CONTRACTS FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Appointments to the
offices of Village Assessor, Village Attorney, Building Inspector and/or Weed Commissioner
may be made in the form of contracts with one or more independent firms, including
partnerships or corporations, regularly engaged in the performance of professional services
attendant to such offices. Such appointments shall designate one member of such firm as
the appointed officer who shall be responsible for the supervision and direction of such other
members of the firm, designated as assistant officers, performing professional services on
behalf of the Village. The provisions of sec. 1.05 of this code shall not apply to
appointments made under this section unless otherwise required by law or by the Village
Board.
[Am. 97-4, Eff. 2-17-97]
1.03 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
(1) BOARD OF REVIEW. (a) Membership. The Board of Review shall consist of
the Village President, two members of the Village Board and two citizen members as
appointed by the Village President. The assessor hired or contracted by the Village shall
also be required to attend all meetings of the Board but shall not vote. The Village Clerk
shall serve as the clerk to the Board of Review and shall not be a voting member.
[Am. 95-25, Eff. 06-05-95]
(b) Powers and Duties. The Board of Review shall have the power and duties
prescribed in §70.47, Wis. Stats.
(2) PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. (a) Membership.
1. Composition. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of 7
members. All members shall, at all times, be residents of the Village.
2. Appointment, Qualifications and Term. Appointments to the Commission
shall be made by the Village President, subject to confirmation by the Village
Board. No member of the Commission shall be an officer of the Village,
except that at least one, but not more than two, Village trustees shall be
members at all times. One trustee shall serve as chairperson of the
commission as designated at the time of appointment. The term of office for
citizen members shall be 3 years and for trustee member(s), 2 years.
1-5
3. Alternate Members. In addition to the regular membership, the Village
President may appoint up to two (2) alternate members to the Commission,
designated at the time of appointment as a first and second alternate.
Alternate members shall not be officers, of the Village. The first alternate shall
act, with full power, only when a member of the Commission refuses to vote
because of interest or when a member is absent. The second alternate shall
so act only when the first alternate so refuses or is absent or when more than
one member of the Commission so refuses or is absent. Alternate members
shall serve for a term of three (3) years.
[Am. 99-25, Eff. 4-26-99; Am. 16-51, Eff. 12-21-16]
(b) Powers and Duties. The Plan Commission shall have the powers and duties
prescribed in §62.23, Wis. Stats. and all other statutes prescribing the powers and duties of
plan commissions.
[Am. 94-8, Eff. 02-21-94; 94-9, Eff. 03-07-94; Am. 14-4, Adopted 2-4-14]
(3) BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. (a) Membership. The Board of Zoning
Appeals shall consist of 5 citizens of the Village, not more than one of whom may be a
member of the Village Board. In addition, there shall be 2 alternate citizen members,
designated as the first or second alternate at the time of appointment, who shall act with full
power only when a member of the Board is absent or refuses to vote because of interest as
provided in §62.23(7)(e) Wis. Stats. Members and alternates shall be appointed by the
Village President to 3 year terms, subject to confirmation by the Village Board.
[Repl. and Recr. 95-39, Eff. 9-5-95]
(b) Powers and Duties. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the powers and
duties described in sec. 15.03 of this Code.
[Am. 93-8, Eff. 03-01-93]
(4) DEFOREST LIBRARY BOARD. (a) Membership. The DeForest Library Board
shall consist of seven (7) members at least five (5) of whom shall be residents of the Village.
Not more than two (2) members may be residents of another municipality. One of such
seven members shall be the administrator of the DeForest Area School District or the
administrator’s designated representative. Not more than one member of the Village Board
shall be a member of the Library Board at any time. All members shall be appointed by the
Village President for a three-year term subject to confirmation by the Village Board.
[Am. 01-53, Eff. 12-3-01]
(b) Powers and Duties. The Library Board shall have the powers and duties
prescribed in 43.58, Wis. Stats.
(5) DEFOREST SEWER UTILITY COMMISSION AND DEFOREST WATER
UTILITY COMMISSION. The Village Board shall constitute the DeForest Sewer Utility
Commission and DeForest Water Utility Commission, respectively.
(6) EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT. See sec. 6.02 of this Code.
(7) HOUSING AUTHORITY.
1-6
(a) Membership. The Housing Authority Board of Commissioners shall consist of
five (5) members, none of whom shall be connected in any official capacity with any political
party and not more than two (2) of whom shall be officers of the Village. Commissioners
shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation by the Village Board.
Each commissioner shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years and shall serve until a
successor is appointed and has qualified.
[Am. 92-37, Eff. 12-7-92]
(b) Powers and Duties. The powers of the Housing Authority shall be vested in the
commissioners thereof in office from time to time. The Housing Authority Board of
Commissioners shall have all powers and duties as provided by §§61.73, 66.1201 and
66.1213, Wis. Stats. as amended from time to time.
[Am. 92-37, Eff. 12-7-92]
(8) ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW APPEALS BOARD. (a) Membership. The
Administrative Review Appeals Board shall consist of the Village President, a Trustee and
one citizen member. The Trustee member shall be appointed annually by the Village
President, subject to confirmation by the Village Board. The citizen member shall be
appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation by the Village Board, for a 3 year
term.
(b) Powers and Duties. See sec. 17.05(2) of this Code.
(9) BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS.
(a) Membership. The membership of the DeForest Board of Police Commissioners
shall consist of five (5) citizen members, individually appointed by the Village President and
confirmed by the Village Board as provided herein.
(b) Appointment and Term. Commissioners shall serve staggered terms of five years
commencing on May 1 in the year of appointment. Between the last Monday of April and
the first Monday of May in each year, the Village President shall appoint one commissioner
to succeed the member whose term expires in that year. Such appointments shall be filed
with the Secretary of the DeForest Board of Police Commissioners and shall be submitted to
the Village Board, and shall be subject to confirmation by the Village Board by majority vote.
A commissioner shall continue to serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
No appointment shall be made which will result in more than three (3) members of the board
belonging to the same political party.
(c) Officers. The Board of Police Commissioners shall adopt rules or bylaws
providing for the selection of a President and Secretary from among its membership and
such other officers as the Board shall deem appropriate. The rules or bylaws shall provide
that the Secretary shall continue in such office until a successor is appointed and qualified.
The Secretary shall keep a record of all of the Board’s proceedings and shall be the
custodian of all records of the Board.
(d) Powers and Duties. The Board Of Police Commissioners shall have and
exercise all powers granted to, and perform all the duties required of, such boards under the
Wisconsin statutes, including but not limited to those powers and duties specified in §§61.65
and 62.13(1) through (5), Wis. Stats., as are applicable to villages.
1-7
(e) Internal Procedures: The Board of Police Commissioners may establish
procedures for its internal operation and conduct of its proceeding, provided such
procedures are not inconsistent with any applicable laws, rules, or regulations contained
within the state and federal constitutions, Wisconsin State Statutes or the Village
Ordinances, as amended from time to time. Any three members shall constitute a quorum.
[Am. and Codified 03-04, Eff. 2-3-03]
1.04 MUNICIPAL COURT.
(1) CREATION. Pursuant to §254.01, 1967 Wis. Stats., the Village Board created
the Municipal Court for the Village of DeForest and provided for the election of a Municipal
Judge. (See §755.01, Wis. Stats.)
(2) JURISDICTION. The Municipal Court shall have such jurisdiction as provided by
§755.045, Wis. Stats.
(3) PROCEDURE.
(a) The Municipal Court shall be open as determined by the Municipal Judge.
(b) The Municipal Judge shall hold court in the Public Safety Building or at such
other place as the Village Board shall determine from time to time.
(c) The procedure in Municipal Court shall be as provided in this section and state
law including, but not excluding because of enumeration, Chs. 48, 755, 800 and 801, Wis.
Stats.
(d) The Municipal Judge shall collect all forfeitures and taxable costs in all actions
before him as provided by law and shall pay over all such moneys to the Village
Administrator not later than the second business day after the receipt thereof.
(4) MUNICIPAL JUDGE, SALARY AND OATH.
(a) Salary. The Municipal Judge shall receive a salary as determined from time to
time by the Village Board which shall be in lieu of fees and costs. No salary shall be paid to
the Municipal Judge for any time during his term for which he has not executed and filed his
official bond and oath as required by §755.03, Wis. Stats.
(b) Bond, Oath. The Municipal Judge shall execute and file with the Clerk of the
Circuit Court for Dane County the oath prescribed by §755.03, Wis. Stats., and a bond in the
penal use of $1,000.
(5) The municipal judge may impose a forfeiture of not more than $200 and/or
imprisonment for not more than 7 days for contempt of court as provided under §800.12,
Wis. Stats.
[Cr. 94-34, Eff. 08-01-94; Am. 11-20, Eff 6-17-11]
1-8
1.05 GENERAL REGULATIONS GOVERNING ALL VILLAGE OFFICERS.
(1) EFFECT. The provisions of this section shall apply to all officers of the Village
regardless of the time of creation of the office or selection of the officer unless otherwise
specifically provided by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board.
(2) OATH OF OFFICE. Every officer of the Village, including members of Village
boards and commissions, shall, before entering upon his duties and within 5 days of his
election or appointment or notice thereof, take the oath of office prescribed by law and file
said oath in the office of the Village Administrator. Any person reelected or reappointed to
the same office shall take and file an official oath for each term of service.
(3) COMMENCEMENT OF TERMS OF OFFICE. The terms of all Village officers
appointed to a definite term shall commence on May 1 following the appointment.
(4) BOND. Every officer shall, if required by law or the Village Board, upon entering
upon the duties of his office, give a bond in such amount as may be determined by the
Village Board with such sureties as are approved by the Village President, conditioned upon
the faithful performance of the duties of his office.
1.06 ELECTIONS.
(1) POLLING PLACE; HOURS. There shall be two polling place in the Village which
shall be located in the DeForest Area Public Library located at 203 Library Street and in
DeForest Village Hall located at 120 South Stevenson Street. The polls shall be open from
7:00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M. on all election days.
[Am. 97-34, Eff. 10-20-97; Am. 16-01, Eff. 01-06-16; Am. 16-47, Eff. 12-21-16]
(2) REDUCTION OF NUMBER OF ELECTION OFFICIALS. Pursuant to §7.32, Wis.
Stats., the Village Administrator may reduce the number of election officials for any given
election to no less than 5 and redistribute the duties of such remaining election officials.
(3) SCHEDULING. Pursuant to sec. 7.30(1) of the Wisconsin Statutes, the Village
Clerk or his or her designee may establish different working hours for different election
officials assigned to the same polling place. Alternate officials may be appointed by the
Board in a number sufficient to maintain adequate staffing of the polling place(s) as it may
determine from time to time.
[Sub. (3) Cr. 02-33, Eff. 9-3-02]
1.07 VILLAGE BOARD MEETINGS.
(1) MEETINGS. (a) Regular Meetings. The Village Board shall hold a regular
meeting on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at 6:00 p.m. and shall adjourn no
later than 11:00 p.m. unless such time is extended by a majority vote of the Board. When a
regular meeting date falls on a legal holiday or on a day an election is being held in the
Village, the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding secular day unless another date is
selected by the Board by majority vote. The date or time of any other regular meeting may
be changed by a two-thirds vote of the Board at any prior meeting which is not less than 28
days prior to the date and time to be established for the subsequent meeting.
[Am. 93-36, Eff. 10-93; Am. 00-33, Eff. 8-4-00; Am. 02-27, Eff 2-1-2003; Am. 10-02, Eff. 1-21-10; Am. 10-34; Eff. 1-1-11]
1-9
(b) Special Meetings. Special meetings of the Board may be called by the Village
President or by 2 Trustees by filing a written request with the Village Administrator at least
24 hours prior to the time specified for such meeting. The Village Administrator shall
immediately post a notice of the meeting together with the agenda and seasonably notify
each Trustee of the time and purpose of such meeting.
(c) Place of Meetings. All meetings of the Board, including special and
adjourned meetings, shall be held in the DeForest Public Safety Building unless specified by
the Board at a previous regular meeting or by written notice posted at the regular meeting
place at least 24 hours (two hours in an emergency) prior to any meeting. In any event, all
board meetings shall be held within the boundaries of the village.
[Am. 02-27, Eff. 7-4-02; Am. 12-15-2003]
(d) Quorum. Four Trustees, including the Village President, shall constitute a
quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time or compel the attendance of
absent members. A call of the house may be ordered by a majority vote if 3 Trustees are
present.
(2) ORDER OF BUSINESS. The business of the Village Board shall be conducted
in the following order:
(a) Call to order by presiding officer.
(b) Roll call. If a quorum is not present, the meeting shall be adjourned, which may
be to a specific date.
(c) Recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance.
(d) Announcements.
(e) Approval of consent agenda
(f) Correction and approval of minutes of previous meeting.
(g) Hear citizens wishing to address the Village Board.
(h) Reports from Village Officers and Department Heads.
(i) Unfinished business from previous meeting.
(j) New business, including introduction of resolutions and ordinances.
(k) Payment of claims.
(l) Communications.
(m) Reports of Committees, Commissions and Boards.
(n) Reports from Administrator.
(o) Report from Village President.
(p) Any other matters that may be brought before the board.
(q) Adjournment.
[Am.02-47, Eff. 11-21-02; Am. 05-09, Eff. 3-7-05]
(2m) MEETING AGENDA.
(a) Preparation of Agenda. The Village President shall be responsible for
determining those items which shall be placed on the agenda for each regular or special
Village Board meeting. The Village President shall include on the agenda for any special
meeting any item contained in a request for the special meeting signed by two trustees
pursuant to sub. (1)(b). Any two trustees may request in writing that the Village President
include any item appropriate for Village Board action on the agenda for a regular meeting.
The Village President shall include any such item on the agenda for the next regular
meeting, provided, however, that if the request is received less than three business days
1-10
prior to a meeting, the President may delay the item until the next subsequent regular
meeting.
(b) Consent Agenda. Notwithstanding the general order of business provided in
sub. (2), the Village President may place any one or more items on a consent agenda under
sub. (2)(e) which, in his or her judgment, are routine or otherwise likely to be approved by
unanimous consent. No separate discussion or debate on matters on the consent agenda
shall be permitted. A single motion, seconded and adopted by majority vote of the Village
Board, shall be sufficient to approve, adopt, enact or otherwise favorably resolve all matters
listed on the consent agenda without separate discussion thereof. When the consent
agenda is announced by the presiding officer at the meeting, any trustee may request
removal of any item from the consent agenda, and such item shall be removed without
further debate or vote. Any trustee may, at any time prior to a vote on the main motion,
announce his or her intention to abstain from voting on any item included within the consent
agenda, and shall be deemed to have abstained on any item so designated regardless of
his or her vote on the main motion. Any item or part thereof removed from the consent
agenda by request of one or more trustees shall be considered separately at an appropriate
time during the meeting as determined by the presiding officer.
[Cr. 05-09, Eff. 3-7-05; Am. 12-22, Eff. 8-4-12]
(3) PRESIDING OFFICER.
(a) Control of Meeting. The Village President shall preserve order and conduct the
proceedings of the meeting. A member may appeal from the decision of the presiding
officer. Such appeal is not debatable and must be sustained by a majority of the members
present, exclusive of the presiding officer.
(b) Absence of Village President. If the Village President is absent at any meeting,
the Village Administrator shall call the meeting to order and preside until the Board selects a
Trustee to preside for that meeting.
(4) COMMITTEES.
(a) Standing Committees.
1. The Village Board shall establish a Public Safety Committee.
[Am. 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
2. Membership.
a. General. The standing committees shall consist of up to 6 citizen
members who are residents of the Village and at least one, but not
more than two, Village trustees. One trustee shall serve as
chairperson of the committee as designated at the time of
appointment. The Village President shall appoint committee members
for one-year terms as soon as practicable after the second Tuesday in
April of each year, subject to confirmation by the Village Board.
[Am. 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
b. [Am. 05-14, Eff. 5-2-05; Repealed & recreated 10-24, Eff. 5-3-10; Repealed 2019-
013, Eff. 7-26-19]
1-11
(b) Special Committees. The Village President shall appoint all special committees
and designate the chairperson of each.
[Am. 93-36, Eff. 10-93]
(c) Committee Reports. Committee reports shall, whenever practicable, be
submitted in writing and shall address all matters referred to the committee with a
recommendation of specific action on each item referred. Informational reports shall also be
provided by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Library Board with a
recommendation regarding any matter which requires Village Board action. Any committee
may require any Village officer or employee to confer with it and supply information in
connection with any matter pending before it. Reports submitted pursuant to this paragraph
may be received by the Board, in lieu of oral reports, upon a single motion unless otherwise
requested by any Trustee.
[Am. 93-36, Eff. 10-93]
(5) ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS. Ordinances, resolutions, bylaws,
communications and other matters submitted to the Board shall be read by title and author
and referred to the appropriate committee by the Village President. No ordinance, resolution
or bylaw shall be considered unless presented in writing by a Trustee. Unless requested by
a Trustee before a final vote is taken, no ordinance, resolution or bylaw need be read in full.
(6) GENERAL RULES. The deliberations of the Board shall be conducted in
accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly
Revised. No person other than a member shall address the Village Board except by
majority vote of the members present. No ordinance, resolution or other motion shall be
discussed or acted upon unless it has been seconded. No motion shall be withdrawn or
amended without the consent of the person making the same and the person seconding it.
(7) SUSPENSION OF RULES. These rules or any part thereof may be
temporarily suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded
vote of 2/3 of the members present.
1.08 PUBLIC RECORDS.
(1) DEFINITIONS. (a) "Authority" means any of the following Village entities having
custody of a Village record: an office, elected official, agency, board, commission,
committee, Village Board, department or public body corporate and politic created by
constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally constituted subunit of the foregoing.
(b) "Custodian" means that officer, department head, division or employee of the
Village designated under sub. (3) or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any
Village record or file, deposit or keep such record in his office, or is lawfully in possession or
entitled to possession of such public records and who is required by this section to respond
to requests for access to such records.
(c) "Record" means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or
electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an authority. "Record" includes,
but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films,
recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), and computer printouts. "Record" does not
include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and the like materials prepared for the
1-12
originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the
originator is working, materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and
have no relation to his office, materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or
bequest, and published materials in the possession of an authority other than a public library
which are available for sale, or which are available for inspection at a public library.
(2) DUTY TO MAINTAIN RECORDS. (a) Except as provided in sub. (7), each
officer and employee of the Village shall safely keep and preserve all records received from
his predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his
office or which are in the lawful possession or control of the officer or employee or his
deputies, or to the possession or control of which he may be lawfully entitled as such officer
or employee.
(b) Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term of
employment, or whenever the office or position of employment becomes vacant, each such
officer or employee shall deliver to his successor all records then in his custody and the
successor shall receipt therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file said receipt with the
Village Administrator, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to such successor upon
the latter's receipt.
(3) LEGAL CUSTODIANS. (a) Each elected official is the legal custodian of his
records and the records of his office, but the official may designate an employee of his staff
to act as the legal custodian.
(b) Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Village Administrator or the Village
Administrator's designee shall act as legal custodian for the Village Board and for any
committees, commissions, boards or other authorities created by ordinance or resolution of
the Village Board, or in his absence or disability or in case of vacancy, the clerk is hereby
designated the legal custodian of all Village records.
(c) For every authority not specified in pars. (a) or (b), the authority's chief
administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but the officer may designate an
employee of his staff to act as the legal custodian.
(d) Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his
absence or the absence of his designee.
(e) The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and to carry
out the duties of an authority under Subch. II of Ch. 19, Wis. Stats., and this section. The
designation of a legal custodian does not affect the powers and duties of an authority under
this section.
(4) PUBLIC ACCESS TO RECORDS; FEES. (a) Except as provided in sub. (6),
any person has a right to inspect a record and to make or receive a copy of any record as
provided in §19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
(b) Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular office
hours.
(c) A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available to
Village employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record.
1-13
(d) The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose
other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is
irreplaceable or easily damaged.
(e) A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and copying
records as follows:
1. The cost of photocopying shall be $.25 per page. Said cost has been
calculated not to exceed the actual cost of reproduction.
[Am.03-28, Eff. 7-21-2003]
2. If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also be
charged.
3. There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost therefor
exceeds $50, in which case the actual cost shall be determined by the legal
custodian and billed to the requester.
4. The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and may
require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment if such estimate exceeds
$5.
5. Elected and appointed officials of the Village shall not be required to pay for
public records they may reasonably require for the proper performance of
their official duties.
6. The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge or at a
reduced charge where he determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in
the public interest.
7. All requests for real estate assessment reports and letters shall be
accompanied by a $50.00 administrative processing fee. Said $50.00 fee
shall cover the administrative costs of preparing the report and shall be in lieu
of all other photocopying and processing fees established herein. Request for
expedited reports shall include an additional $25.00 fee.
[Cr. 93-18, Eff. 5-6-93; Am. 03-06, Eff. 2-3-03]
(f) Pursuant to §19.34, Wis. Stats., and the guidelines therein listed, each authority
shall adopt, prominently display, and make available for inspection and copying at its offices,
for the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its organization and the
established times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the methods
whereby the public may obtain information and access to records in its custody, make
requests for records, or obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof. This paragraph
does not apply to members of the Village Board.
(5) ACCESS PROCEDURES.
(a) A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal custodian. A
request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record without a
reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented by the record does
1-14
not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a request must be in
writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under §19.37, Wis. Stats.
Except as provided below, no request may be refused because the person making the
request is unwilling to be identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may
be refused because the request is received by mail unless prepayment of a fee is required
under sub. (4)(e)4. A requester may be required to show acceptable identification whenever
the requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever security reasons or Federal
law or regulations so require.
(b) Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and
without delay, either fill the request or notify the requester of the authority's determination to
deny the request in whole or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after
conferring with the Village Attorney, determines that a written request is so general as to be
unduly time consuming, the party making the request may first be required to itemize his
request in a manner which would permit reasonable compliance.
(c) A request for a record may be denied as provided in sub. (6). If a request is
made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a written statement of
the reasons denying the request is made by the requester within 5 business days of the oral
denial. If a written request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a written
statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written denial of a request shall
inform the requester that if the request for the record was made in writing, then the
determination is subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under §19.37(1),
Wis. Stats., or upon application to the Attorney General or a district attorney.
(6) LIMITATION ON RIGHT TO ACCESS.
(a) As provided by §19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records are exempt from
inspection under this section:
1. Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or Federal law or
authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law.
2. Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law
enforcement purposes if Federal law or regulations require exemption from
disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a condition to receipt of aids
by the state.
3. Computer programs, although the material used as input for a computer
program or the material produced as a product of the computer program is
subject to inspection.
4. A record or any portion of a record containing information qualifying as a
common law trade secret.
(b) As provided by §43.30, Wis. Stats., public library circulation records are exempt
from inspection under this section.
1-15
(c) As provided by §70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., no information provided to the Village
Assessor pursuant to sec. 2.07 of this Code shall be subject to public disclosure unless a
court of competent jurisdiction has determined that such information is inaccurate.
[Cr. 01-22, Eff. 5-10-01]
(d) In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is not
specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with the Village
Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in part, only if he determines that the harm to
the public interest resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full access
to the requested record. Examples of matters for which disclosure may be refused include,
but are not limited to, the following:
1. Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which were
necessary and given in order to obtain the information contained in them.
2. Records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing.
3. Records of current deliberations concerning employment, dismissal,
promotion, demotion, compensation, performance, or discipline of any
Village officer or employee, or the investigation of charges against a
Village officer or employee, unless such officer or employee consents to
such disclosure.
4. Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or prevention.
5. Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of Village
property, investing of Village funds or other Village business whenever
competitive or bargaining reasons require nondisclosure.
6. Financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data of
specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a substantial
adverse effect upon the reputation of any person referred to in such history
or data.
7. Communications between legal counsel for the Village and any officer,
agent or employee of the Village when advice is being rendered
concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in which the Village or
any of its officers, agents or employees is, or is likely, to become involved,
or communications which are privileged under §905.03, Wis. Stats.
(e) If a record contains information that may be made public and information that
may not be made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the information that may
be made public and delete the information that may not be made public from the record
before release. The custodian shall confer with the Village Attorney prior to releasing any
such record and shall follow the guidance of the Village Attorney when separating out the
exempt material. If, in the judgment of the custodian and the Village Attorney there is no
feasible way to separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without
unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record shall be
withheld from disclosure.
1-16
(7) DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS.
(a) The Custodian may destroy records after retaining them for the minimum time
periods specified in sec. 1.08(8) below. In addition, the Custodian may destroy hardcopies
of records that have been preserved in an electronic format through the Village’s document
management software, pursuant to sec. 1.08(9) below.
[Am. 17-09, Eff. 4-5-17]
(b) Any record whose minimum retention period is not enumerated below or
governed by any other regulation or law shall be retained at least seven (7) years unless a
shorter time period is approved by the State Public Records and Forms Board.
(c) The Custodian shall notify the State Historical Society of Wisconsin ("SHSW") in
writing at least sixty (60) days prior to destroying records, unless the notice requirement is
waived by the SHSW.
(d) The destruction of a record which is the subject of a request for inspection or an
action under §19.37, Wis. Stats. is governed by §19.35(5), Wis. Stats.
(8) RECORD RETENTION SCHEDULE.
[Recr. 94-38, Eff. 8-15-94]
The following records may be destroyed after expiration of the designated retention
periods:
(a) Village Administration
1. Village Board Records
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Minute Book Permanent or transfer to SHSW.
Audio Tapes 1 year.
Ordinances Permanent or transfer to SHSW.
Resolutions Permanent or transfer to SHSW.
Ordinance Book Permanent or transfer to SHSW.
Affidavits of Publication 3 years, provided affidavits of publication of ordinances
are maintained permanently in the ordinance book.
2. Real Property Titles
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Deeds Permanent.
1-17
Opinions of Title Permanent.
Abstracts and Certificates Permanent.
of Title
Title Insurance Policies Permanent.
Plats Permanent.
Easements Permanent.
Leases 7 years after termination of the lease.
Vacation or Alteration of Plat Permanent.
3. Licenses and Permits
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Applications Accepted 4 years for all liquor and beer related license and
Rejected applications, all other applications 3 years.
Receipts 7 years.
License Stubs 4 years for all liquor and beer related license stubs; all
other stubs 3 years.
Monthly Report of Dog 3 years.
Licenses to County Clerk
4. Municipal Borrowing
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Bond Procedure Record 7 years after the bond issue has expired.
Bond Register 7 years after the bond issue has expired.
Bond Payment Register 7 years after the bond issue has expired or following
payment of all outstanding matured
bonds/notes/coupons, whichever is later.
Canceled Bonds, Coupons, Retain until audited.
and Promissory Notes
Certificates of 7 years after the bond issue has expired or following
1-18
Destruction payment of all outstanding matured
bonds/notes/coupons, whichever is later.
5. Fidelity Bonds
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Fidelity Bond 5 years after the bond has expired.
Fidelity Bond Book 5 years after the last bond entered has expired.
Oath of Office 5 years after the term of service covered by the oath
has ended.
6. Legal Opinions
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Legal Opinions Permanent.
7. Municipal Court Records
[Am. 11-20, Eff 6-17-11]
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Audio/Video Recordings 10 years after recording.
of Trials
Municipal Court Case Files 5 years after entry of final judgment.
Municipal Court Exhibits 1 year following the expiration of the statutory period
for appeal unless all parties have stipulated to earlier
return. Exhibits shall be offered to the proffering party
before being disposed of.
Municipal Court Money 20 years after final docket entry.
Judgment Record
(b) Elections
1. Voter Registration Records
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Registry List 90 days after the first Spring or general election
succeeding the election in which the list was used.
1-19
Active Registration Cards Retain in the active file as long as current.
Canceled Registration Cards 4 years after cancellation.
Poll List 90 days after the first Spring or general election
succeeding the election in which the list was created,
provided lists created for federal elections are retained
22 months.
2. Nomination Records
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Nomination Papers 90 days after the election.
Certificate Listing Candidates 90 days after the election.
Nominated by Caucus
3. Campaign Records
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Election Campaign 6 years.
Registration Statements
Election Campaign 6 years.
Financial Reports
4. Election Records and Supplies
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Election Notices 90 days after the election.
Applications for 90 days, provided applications for federal elections are
Absentee Ballots retained 22 months.
Paper Ballots and Voting 90 days after the election.
Machine Recorders Note: Voting machine recorders may be reactivated 14
days following a primary or 60 days following a spring
or general election.
Tally Sheets 90 days after the election.
Inspector's Statement of 90 days after the election.
Defective and Challenged
Ballots
1-20
Statement of the Municipal Permanent.
Board of Canvassers
(c) Finance
1. Accounting
a. Accounts Payable
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Purchase Invoices 7 years, provided record has been audited.
Vouchers 7 years, provided record has been audited.
b. Accounts Receivable
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Accounts Receivable 7 years, provided record has been audited.
Invoices
Receipts 7 years, provided record has been audited.
Collection Blotters 1 year after audit.
c. Books of Original Entry
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Receipt Journal 15 years.
Voucher/Order Register 15 years.
General Journal 15 years.
Journal Voucher 15 years.
Appropriation Journal 15 years.
Appropriation Journal 15 years.
Voucher
1-21
d. Posted Ledger
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
General Ledger 15 years and transfer to SHSW.
Trial Balance Retain until audited.
e. Treasurer's Records
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Cashbook 15 years.
Daily Cash Drawer 1 year after audit.
Reconciliations
Bank Reconciliations 7 years.
Bank Statements 7 years.
Canceled Order Checks 7 years.
Lists of Outstanding Checks 7 years.
Check Register 7 years.
Duplicate Deposit Tickets 1 year after audit.
Bank Credit/Debit Notices 1 year after audit.
Investment Records 7 years.
2. Payroll
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Payroll Support Records 2 years, provided records have been audited.
Employee's Withholding 5 years after being superseded.
Allowance Certificate
Employee's Wisconsin 5 years after being superseded.
Withholding Exemption
Certificate
1-22
Employee Enrollment and 2 years after being superseded or terminated.
Waiver Cards
Employee Earning Records 5 years.
Payroll Check Register 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Payroll Distribution Record 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Payroll Voucher 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Canceled Payroll Checks 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Wage and Tax Statement 5 years, provided record has been audited.
(IRS Form W-2)
Wage and Tax Statement 5 years, provided record has been audited.
(Dept. of Revenue Form WT-9)
Report of Wisconsin 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Income Tax Withheld
Employer's Annual 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Reconciliation of
Wisconsin Income Tax
Withheld From Wages
Federal Deposit Tax 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Stubs
Quarterly Report of 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Federal Income Tax
Withheld
Annual Report of Federal 5 years.
Income Tax Withheld
State's Quarterly 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Report of Wages Paid
Monthly Memorandum Report 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Quarterly Report, 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Payroll Summary
Change in Employee Status 5 years.
Premium Due Notices 5 years, provided record has been audited.
1-23
3. Purchasing
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Purchase Requisitions 1 year after audit.
Purchase Orders 7 years.
Receiving Report 7 years.
Bids, Successful 7 years after the contract has expired.
Bids, Unsuccessful 1 year after audit.
Inventory of Property Retain until superseded.
4. Budgets and Audits
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Budget Worksheets 3 years.
Final Budget Permanent.
Audit Reports Permanent or transfer to SHSW.
(d) Revenue
1. Property Assessment
a. Real Property
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Master Property Record 5 years beyond the life of the structure and then
transfer to Folders SHSW.
Index to Owners Retain until superseded.
Wisconsin Real Estate 5 years after the information has been transferred to
Transfer Returns the Master Property Record Folder.
Transfer Returns Master Property Record Folder.
Deeds (copies) 1 year after the information has been transferred to the
Master Property Record Folder.
1-24
Building Permit 1 year after the information has been transferred to the
Applications (copies) Master Property Record Folder.
Plats Permanent.
Certified Surveys Permanent.
Assessor's Plats Permanent.
Aerial Photographs Retain until superseded.
Tax Exemption Reports 10 years.
Notice of Increased 5 years. Where the assessment has been appealed,
Assessment retain 7 years after the final action of the Board of
Review or the completion of the appeal.
Assessor's Final Report 5 years.
Supplement
Assessor's Final Report 5 years.
Statement of Assessment Retain for life of the assessment roll.
Final Statement of Permanent or transfer to SHSW.
Assessment
Final Real Property 15 years, provided no assessment rolls containing
Assessment Roll forest crop acreage may be destroyed without prior
approval of the Secretary of Revenue.
b. Personal Property
Occupational Tax Returns 5 years.
Merchants', Professions' 5 years.
Statement of Property
Personal Property Worksheets/ 5 years.
Farmers & Personal Property
Not Used for the Production
of Income
Report of Inventory Location 5 years.
List of Beekeepers 3 years.
Request for Exemption 3 years.
of Merchandise in Storage
Statement of Merchandise 3 years.
1-25
Exempted
Assessor's Personal Property 5 years.
Summary Worksheet
Assessor's Final Report 5 years.
Final Personal Property 15 years, provided no assessment roll destroyed
without Assessment Roll prior approval of the Secretary of Revenue.
2. Board of Review
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Form of Objection to Property 7 years after the final action of the Board of Review or
the Assessment and Supporting completion of appeal.
Documentation
Minute Book 7 years and then transfer to SHSW.
Proceedings of the Board of 7 years after the final action of the Board of Review or
the Review on Audio Tapes or as completion of appeal.
Stenographic Notes Including
Any Transcriptions Thereof
Notice of Determinations 7 years after the final action of the Board of Review or
the of the Board of Review completion of appeal.
3. Special Assessments
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Preliminary Resolution 2 years, provided a copy of the resolution is on file with
the public works project records.
Report on Special 2 years, provided a copy of the report is on file with the
Assessment Project public works project records.
Waiver of Special Assessment 1 year or retain 1 year after the final resolution is
Notice and Hearing approved.
Final Resolution Permanent.
Certified Special Assessment Roll Retain until all assessments are collected or for 7
years, whichever is longer.
Statement of New Special 5 years provided record has been audited.
Assessments
1-26
Special Assessment Payment Retain until all assessments are collected or for 7
Register years, whichever is longer.
4. Tax Calculation
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Tax Levy Certification of the 3 years, provided record has been audited.
School District Clerk
Certificates of Apportionment 3 years, provided record has been audited.
State Shared Aid Payment 6 years, provided record has been audited.
Notices
Final Worksheet for Determining 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Allowable Levy
Statement of Taxes Retain final copy permanently or transfer to SHSW.
Statement of New Special 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Assessments
Statement of Sewer Services 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Charges
General Property Tax Credit 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Certification
Explanation of Property Tax 5 years, provided record has been audited.
Credit Certification
Real Property Tax Roll This record is transferred to the county treasurer.
Personal Property Tax Roll 15 years and transfer to SHSW if postponed or
delinquent taxes are not transferred to the county
treasurer.
5. Tax Collection
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Escrow Account List Retain until superseded.
Receipts 7 years provided record has been audited.
Receipt Stub Book 7 years provided record has been audited.
Tax Collection Blotters Retain until audited.
1-27
Statement of Taxes Retain with the tax roll.
Remaining Unpaid
Tax Settlement Receipt 5 years provided record has been audited.
Municipal Treasurer's 5 years provided record has been audited.
Settlement
Personal Property Tax Roll 15 years and transfer to SHSW.
(e) Engineering and Public Works
1. Engineering Services
DESCRIPTION OF RETENTION PERIOD
RECORD
Field Notes Permanent.
Benchmark Books Permanent.
Section Corner Permanent.
Monument Logs
Aerial Photographs Retain until superseded.
Village Maps Permanent.
Water, Storm, and Sanitary Permanent.
Sewer Main Maps
Profile and Grade Books Permanent.
Excavation Plans of Permanent.
Private Utilities
Index to Maps Permanent.
Preliminary Subdivision Plats Retain until superseded by the final plat.
Final Subdivision Plats Permanent.
Annexation Plats Permanent.
Assessor's Plats Permanent.
Structure Plans for Municipal Retain for life of the structure and transfer to SHSW.
Buildings and Bridges
1-28
(9) ELECTRONIC RECORDS.
(a) The Custodian may preserve public records by converting the records into an
electronic format by means of the Village’s document management software. Electronically
preserved records shall meet the standards set forth in secs. 16.61(7) and 16.612, Wis.
Stats., and Wis. Admin. Code Adm 12.
(b) The Custodian who preserves a public record in an electronic format shall
execute a statement of intent and purpose and certification, as provided in sec.
16.61(7)(a)5, Wis. Stats. Each executed statement and certification shall be stored by the
Custodian with the relevant records and kept on file in the Custodian’s office.
[Am. 17-09, Eff. 4-5-17]
1.09 INTEREST ON PASS-THROUGH CHARGES.
[Am. 15-04, Eff. 1-19-15]
(1) APPLICABILITY. This subsection applies to all invoices which are billed to the
Village of DeForest and passed through to the individual responsible for payment.
[Cr. 93-17, Eff. 1993]
(2) INTEREST. Interest at the rate of 12% per annum, compounded monthly, shall
accrue on all invoices owed to the Village of DeForest which are 30 days past due. Charges
covered by sec. 8.02(2) and 8.62 of this Code shall not accrue interest.
[Cr. 93.17, Eff. 1993; Renumbered 15-04, Eff. 1-19-15]
All invoices shall bear the notation: “Interest will be charged at 12% per annum,
compounded monthly, on accounts 30 days past due."
[Cr. 93-17, Eff. 1993]
1.10 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CITATIONS.
Municipal citation for violations of this Code may be issued by any person as
authorized in this section.
[Cr. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
(1) VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR. The Village Administrator may issue citations with
respect to all non-traffic ordinance violations.
[Cr. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
(2) LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS. Citations for all municipal ordinance
violations, including traffic violations, may be issued by:
(a) The Chief of Police;
(b) Any law enforcement officer employed by the Village; and
(c) Any law enforcement officer while providing law enforcement assistance
within the Village, pursuant to §66.0313, Wis. Stats., or under an intergovernmental
agreement.
[Cr. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
(3) Any civilian employee of the Police Department may issue citations with respect
to violations of secs. 3.06, 3.07, 3.10(1), 3.11(3)(g), and 3.11(3)(h), of this Code.
1-29
[Cr. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
(4) The Fire Chief and any Deputy Fire Inspector may issue citations with respect to
violations of all provisions of Chs. 5 and 10, as they relate to fire fighting and fire safety,
protection and prevention, Ch. 11, as they relate to flammable liquids and materials,
fireworks, smoke and fumes, Ch. 14, as they relate to fire safety, prevention and protection,
and secs. 7.06(2),16.01(3)(m), 23.10 and 27.05(2)(n) and (o) of this Code.
[Cr. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
(5) The Building Inspector may issue citations with respect to violations of all
provisions of Chs. 11, 14, 22, 24, 27; and secs. 7.06(2) and (3), 7.071, 7.10, 7.11, 8.02,
8.04, 9.06, 9.07, 12.01(6) and 12.07 of this Code.
[Cr. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
(6) The Director of Public Services may issue citations with respect to violations of all
provisions of Chs. 7, 8, 12.01(6); 22; and 24; and secs. 11.035, 11.05(3)-(6), (9), (11), (13),
23.10, and 27.05(2)(q)1 of this Code.
[Cr. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(7) The Zoning Administrator may issue citations with respect to violations of all
provisions of Chs. 13, 15, 21, 24, 25, and 27 and secs. 11.03(3)-(4) and (7)-(11), 11.05(1)-
(6), (8) and (15) of this Code.
[Cr. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
(8) The Forester may issue citations for with respect to violations of secs. 11.05(5)-
(6) and 11.06, and Subchapter II of Ch. 16 of this Code.
[Cr. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
(9) The Weed Commissioner may issue citations with respect to violations of secs.
11.03(8), 11.05(4)-(6), 11.06, 12.07, 27.05(2)(b),(2)(f) and (2)(q)3 of this Code.
[Cr. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
2-1
CHAPTER 2
FINANCE AND TAXATION
2.01 PREPARATION OF TAX ROLL AND TAX RECEIPTS ......................................... 2-1
2.015 DELINQUENT PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES .................................................. 2-1
2.02 DUPLICATE TREASURER’S BOND ELIMINATED ............................................... 2-2
2.03 BUDGET PROCEDURE ........................................................................................ 2-2
2.04 CLAIMS ................................................................................................................. 2-3
2.05 PURCHASES ......................................................................................................... 2-4
2.055 PUBLIC BIDDING .................................................................................................. 2-4
2.06 ORDER CHECKS, EXECUTION OF ...................................................................... 2-4
2.07 CONFIDENTIALITY OF CERTAIN SUBMITTALS TO BOARD OF REVIEW ........ 2-4
2.08 TRANSIENT ROOM TAX ESTABLISHED ............................................................. 2-5
2.09 GARBAGE/RECYCLING COLLECTION CHARGES FOR TAX EXEMPT PARCELS
.............................................................................................................................. 2-9
2.10 FEE FOR CHECKS RECEIVED AS INSUFFICIENT OR UNCOLLECTIBLE FUNDS
.............................................................................................................................. 2-9
2.11 CHARGES FOR USE OF VILLAGE EQUIPMENT................................................. 2-9
2.12 FEES FOR TAX EXEMPTION REPORTS ............................................................. 2-9
2.13 CONVENIENCE FEE FOR ONLINE PAYMENTS ................................................ 2-10
2.14 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY ......................................................... 2-10
2.01 PREPARATION OF TAX ROLL AND TAX RECEIPTS.
(1) AGGREGATE TAX STATED ON ROLL. Pursuant to §70.65(2), Wis. Stats., the
Village Administrator shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the aggregate amount of
State, County, school and local taxes in a single column in the roll opposite the parcel or
tract of land against which the tax is levied, or, in the case of personal property, in a single
column opposite the name of the person against whom the tax is levied.
(2) RATES STAMPED ON RECEIPTS. Pursuant to §74.19, Wis. Stats., in lieu of
entering on each tax receipt the several amounts paid respectively for State, County, school,
local and other taxes, the aggregate amount of such taxes shall be combined in a single
column on the tax receipt issued by the Village Administrator. The Village Administrator
shall cause to be printed or stamped on the tax receipt the separate proportion or rate of
taxes levied for State, County, school, local or other purpose.
2.015 DELINQUENT PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES.
(1) COLLECTION. The Finance Director shall be responsible for the collection of
all delinquent personal property taxes held by the Village.
(2) INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS. The Finance Director may set an installment
schedule for repayment of delinquent personal property tax. This schedule shall not be
longer than two years and shall be at an interest rate of 8.5%.
(3) CHARGE BACK. The Finance Director shall each year charge back those
personal property tax bills according to the Wisconsin Statutes to the appropriate taxing
jurisdictions. The Finance Director shall not refund the charged back taxes to the other
taxing jurisdictions until the tax is paid in full.
2-2
(4) WRITE OFF. The Finance Director shall write off the uncollectible Village portion
of the personal property tax and supply a list to the Village Board stating the name, tax year,
amount of the personal property tax, and the amount of the tax being written off. This does
not negate the individual(s) from this debt. The Finance Director shall then continue the
collection process in an effort to make the Village whole for any loss it may have incurred as
a result of the personal property tax not being paid.
(5) REIMBURSEMENT OF CHARGE BACK. The Finance Director, upon payment
of any charged back personal property tax, shall remit a reimbursement to the taxing
jurisdictions if that entity has reimbursed the Village for the amount charged back.
[Cr. 96-13, Eff. 3-4-96]
2.02 DUPLICATE TREASURER'S BOND ELIMINATED.
(1) TREASURER'S BOND ELIMINATED. The Village of DeForest elects not to
require a bond on the Treasurer provided for by §70.67(1), Wis. Stats.
[Am. 95-58, Eff.12-4-95]
(2) VILLAGE LIABLE FOR DEFAULT OF TREASURER. Pursuant to §70.67(2),
Wis. Stats., the Village shall be obligated to pay, in case the Treasurer shall fail to do so,
taxes of any kind required by law to be paid by such Treasurer to the County Treasurer.
[Am. 95-58, Eff.12-4-95]
2.03 BUDGET PROCEDURE.
(1) Annually, on or before October 1, each officer, department or board shall file
with the Village Administrator an itemized statement of disbursements made to carry out the
powers and duties of such officer, department or board during the current fiscal year to date,
and a detailed statement of the receipts and disbursements on account of any special fund
under the supervision of such officer, department or board during such year, and of the
condition and management of such funds; also detailed estimates of the same matters for
the remainder of the current fiscal year and for the ensuing fiscal year. Such statements
shall be presented in the form prescribed by the Village Administrator and shall be designed
as the "departmental estimates" and shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main
divisions of all departments.
(2) The Village Board shall consider such departmental estimates in consultation
with the department heads and shall then determine the total amount to be included in the
proposed budget for such department or activity.
[Am. 10-24, Eff. 5-3-10]
(3) The Village Board, with the assistance of the Village Administrator, shall prepare
a proposed budget for presentation at a public hearing. The budget shall include the
following information:
[Am. 10-24, Eff. 5-3-10]
(a) The expense of conducting each department and activity of the Village for the
ensuing fiscal year and corresponding items for the current year and last preceding fiscal
year, with reasons for increase and decrease recommended as compared with
appropriations for the current fiscal year.
2-3
(b) An itemization of all anticipated income of the Village from sources other than
general property taxes and bonds issued, with a comparative statement of the amounts
received by the Village from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and
current fiscal year.
(c) An itemization of the amount of money to be raised from general property taxes
which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed
expenditures.
(d) Such other information as may be deemed appropriate by the Village Board.
The Board shall publish a summary of the budget as required by law and provide a
reasonable number of copies of the detailed budget thus prepared for distribution to citizens.
[Am. 10-24, Eff. 5-3-10]
(4) [Repealed 10-24, Eff. 5-3-10]
(5) The Village Board may, pursuant to §65.90(5), Wis. Stats., at any time by a 2/3
vote of the entire membership, transfer any portion of an unencumbered balance of an
appropriation to any other purpose or object. Notice of such transfer shall be given by
publication within 10 days thereafter in the official Village newspaper.
[Am. 10-24, Eff. 5-3-10]
(6) No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the Village, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual
resolution, or of such resolution when changed as authorized by sub. (5) of this section. At
the close of each fiscal year any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to
the general fund and shall be subject to reappropriation; but an appropriation may be made
by the Village Board, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of
improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed within such year, and
any such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall
have been accomplished or abandoned.
2.04 CLAIMS.
[Am. 16-19, Eff. 07-15-16]
(1) All claims shall be reviewed by the Village Administrator and approved by the
Village Board before payment, except that claims not subject to §893.80, Wis. Stats., may
be approved for payment pursuant to paragraph (2).
(2) Claims not subject to §893.80, Wis. Stats., may be paid from the Village
treasury after the Village Clerk audits and approves each claim as a proper charge against
the treasury, and endorses his or her approval on the claim after having determined that all
of the following conditions have been complied with:
(a) That funds are available for the claim pursuant to the budget approved by the
Village Board.
(b) That the item or service covered by the claim has been duly authorized by the
proper official, department head or board or commission.
(c) That the item or service has been actually supplied or rendered in conformity
with the authorization described in par. (b).
2-4
(d) That the claim is just and valid pursuant to law. The Village Clerk may require
the submission of proof to support the claim as the Clerk considers
necessary.
(3) At each regular Village Board meeting, the Village Clerk shall file with the
Village Board a list of the claims approved by the Clerk showing the date paid, name of
claimant, purpose and amount, along with the check register covering all claims approved
by the Clerk not previously reported under this subsection.
(4) An annual detailed audit of the Village’s financial transactions and accounts
shall be made pursuant to §66.609(2), Wis. Stats.
(5) The Village Clerk may approve the payment of claims pursuant to this section
only if he or she is covered by a fidelity bond of no less than $5,000.
[Am. 16-19, Eff. 07-15-16]
2.05 PURCHASES. No equipment or supplies shall be purchased by any person
unless previously budgeted and approved by the appropriate committee chairman, or
approved by the Village Board. However, emergency purchases not to exceed $500 may
be approved by the Village Administrator and the appropriate Committee Chairman.
2.055 PUBLIC BIDDING. (1) GENERAL PROCEDURES. As a complete
alternative to the requirements established by 61.54 and 61.55 Wis. Stats., the provisions
of 62.15, Wis. Stats., shall be applicable to Village contracts. The authority vested in the
Board of Public Works shall in such case be exercised by the Village Board, or as
delegated by the Village Board.
(2) EXCEPTION. Pursuant to Sec. 62.15(1), Wis. Stats., the Village Board, by
vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members thereof, may determine that any class of
public construction or any part thereof may be done directly by the Village without
submitting the same for bids.
[Cr. 09-23, Eff. 7-25-09]
2.06 ORDER CHECKS, EXECUTION OF. All disbursements of the Village shall
be by order check which shall not be valid unless signed by the Finance Director and
countersigned by the Village Clerk. In the event either the Finance Director or Clerk are
absent from the Village, or if either position shall be permanently or temporarily vacant,
order checks may be signed by deputy treasurer or deputy clerk, respectively, in their stead.
[Am. 03-21, Eff. 6-2-03]
2.07 CONFIDENTIALITY OF CERTAIN SUBMITTALS TO BOARD OF REVIEW.
(1) Information related to income or expenses required to be submitted to the Board
of Review by §70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats. to support or challenge the valuation of property
based on the income method of valuation shall be maintained as confidential and shall not
be disclosed to any person other to one of the following:
(a) the person submitting the information,
(b) such other persons as may be expressly authorized in writing by the person
submitting the information to receive the information,
2-5
(c) the person or entity whose income or expenses are reflected in the information,
(d) any person using the information in the discharge of duties imposed by law or of
the duties of their office, or
(e) any person to whom disclosure is required or authorized by order of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2) This section shall not apply to any information which has been found by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be inaccurate.
[Cr. 01-22, Eff. 5-10-01]
2.08 TRANSIENT ROOM TAX ESTABLISHED.
(1) DEFINITIONS. The following definitions shall apply to the terms used in this
chapter:
(a) Hotel or Motel means a building or group of buildings in which the public may
obtain accommodations for a consideration including, without limitation, such establishments
as inns, motels, tourist homes, tourist houses or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses,
tourist rooming houses, summer camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges and cabins and any
other building or group of buildings in which accommodations are available to the public,
except accommodations rented for a continuous period of more than one month and
accommodations furnished by any hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes, or by
corporations or associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or
educational purposes provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and
associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and excepting
mobile home parks.
(b) Gross Receipts has the meaning as defined in Wis. Stats. §77.51(4) insofar as
applicable.
(c) Transient means any person residing for a continuous period of less than one
month in a hotel, motel or other furnished accommodations available to the public.
(d) Bed and Breakfast Establishment means any place of temporary lodging that
provides four or fewer rooms for rent, which is open for rental more than ten nights in a
twelve month period, is the owner’s personal residence and is occupied by the owner at the
time of rental, and in which the only meal served is breakfast.
(2) ROOM TAX ESTABLISHED. Pursuant to §66.0615, Wis. Stats., a tax is hereby
imposed on the privilege and service of furnishing, at retail, of rooms or lodging to transients
by hotel keepers, motel operators, operators of bed and breakfast establishments, and other
persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective of whether
membership is required for the use of the accommodations. Such tax shall be at the rate of
eight percent (8%) of the gross receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging.
Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by §77.52(2), Wis. Stats.,
and may not be imposed on sales to the federal government and persons listed in
§77.54(9a), Wis. Stats.
[Am. 18-24, Eff. 11-16-18]
2-6
(3) COLLECTION OF ROOM TAX. The tax imposed under this section shall be
administered by the Village Finance Director. The taxes shall be due and payable to the
Village quarterly on or before the last day of the month next succeeding the end of a
calendar quarter for which the tax is imposed. A return shall be filed with the Finance
Director, by those furnishing at retail such rooms, lodging or accommodations on or before
the same date on which such tax is due and payable. Such return shall show the gross
receipts of the preceding calendar quarter from such retail furnishing of rooms, lodging, or
accommodations, the amount of taxes imposed for such period and such other information
as the Finance Director deems necessary. Every person required to file such quarterly
return shall also file an annual return within thirty days of the close of each calendar year.
The annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns, reconcile and adjust for errors in
the quarterly returns and shall contain such additional information as the Finance Director
may reasonably require. Such annual returns shall be made on forms as prescribed by the
Finance Director from time to time. All such returns shall be signed by the person required
to file a return or duly authorized agent but need not be verified by oath. The Finance
Director may, for good cause, extend the time for filing any return, but in no event longer
than one month from the filing due date.
(4) PERMIT REQUIRED.
(a) Every person furnishing rooms or lodging as described in sub. (2) shall annually
file with the Finance Director an application for a permit for each place of business within the
Village where such rooms or lodging are provided. Every application for a permit shall be
made upon a form prescribed by the Finance Director and shall set forth the name under
which the applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his or her place
of business, and such other information as the Finance Director reasonably requires. The
application shall be signed by the owner, if a sole proprietor, and if not a sole proprietor, by
the person authorized to act on behalf of such owner(s).
(b) After compliance with par. (a) above and sub. 9(a) by the applicant, the Finance
Director shall grant and issue to each applicant a separate permit for each place of business
within the Village. Such permit is not assignable and is valid only for the person in whose
name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place designated therein. It shall
at all times be conspicuously displayed at the place for which issued.
(c) At the time of filing of the application for a permit under this section, the applicant
shall pay an application fee of $75.00 therewith, which fee is non-refundable.
(d) Whenever any person fails to comply with this section, the Finance Director may,
upon ten days’ notification and after affording such person the opportunity to show cause
why his/her permit should not be revoked, suspend any and all of the permits held by such
person. The Finance Director shall give to such person written notice of the suspension or
revocation of any of his/her permits. The Finance Director shall not issue a new permit after
the revocation of a permit unless he/she is satisfied that the former holder of the permit will
comply with the provisions of this section. A fee of $50.00 shall be imposed for the renewal
of issuance of a permit that has been previously suspended or revoked.
(5) LIABILITY FOR TAX. If any person liable for any amount of tax under this
section sells out his or her business or stock of goods or quits the business, his or her
successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts of the purchase price to cover such
amount due under this section until the former owner produces a receipt from the Finance
2-7
Director that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a person
subject to the tax imposed by this section fails to withhold such amount of tax from the
purchase price as required, he or she shall become personally liable for payment of the
amount required to be withheld by him or her to the extent of the value of the
accommodations purchased.
(6) AUDIT.
(a) The Finance Director may, by office audit, determine the tax required to be paid
to the Village or the refund due to any person under this section. This determination may be
made upon the basis of facts contained in the return being audited or on the basis of any
other information within the Finance Director's possession or obtained pursuant to
§66.0615(2), Wis. Stats. One or more such office audit determinations may be made of the
amount due for any one, or for more than one, period.
(b) The Finance Director may, by field audit, determine the tax required to be paid to
the Village, or the refund due to any person under this section. The determination may be
made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited or upon any other
information within the Finance Director's possession or obtained pursuant to §66.0615(2),
Wis. Stats. The Finance Director is authorized to examine and inspect the State sales tax
records, and memoranda, of any person in order to verify the tax liability of that person or of
another person. Nothing herein shall prevent the Finance Director from making a
determination of tax at any time.
(c) Any person subject to sub. (3) who fails to comply with a request to inspect and
audit the person's financial records under paragraph (a) or (b) shall be subject to a forfeiture,
not to exceed 5% (five percent) of the tax due under this section.
(7) FAILURE TO FILE RETURN; ESTIMATED TAX. If any person fails to file a
return as required by this section, the Finance Director shall make an estimate of the
amount of the gross receipts under sub. (2). Such estimate shall be made for the period for
which such person failed to make a return and shall be based upon any information which is
in the Finance Director's possession or may come into the Finance Director's possession.
On the basis of this estimate, the Finance Director shall compute and determine the amount
required to be paid to the Village, adding to the sum thus computed a penalty equal to ten
percent (10%) thereof. The tax determined pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed to
have been due on the date the return and tax were to have been filed with the Village.
(8) UNPAID TAXES; INTEREST; FORFEITURES. (a) All unpaid taxes under this
section shall bear interest at the rate of one percent (1.0%) per month on the unpaid
balance from the date due of the return until the first day of the month following the month in
which the tax is paid to the Finance Director. All refunded taxes shall bear interest at twelve
percent (12%) per annum from the due date of the return until the first day of the month
following the month in which said taxes are refunded. An extension of time within which to
file a return shall not operate to extend the due date of the return for purposes of interest
computation. If the Finance Director determines that any overpayment of tax has been made
intentionally or because of carelessness or neglect, or if the tax that was overpaid was not
accompanied by a complete return, the Finance Director shall not allow any interest thereon.
(b) Delinquent tax returns shall be subject to a late filing fee of $75.00, which fee
may be changed from year to year by resolution duly adopted by the Village Board.
2-8
(c) The tax imposed by this section shall be considered as delinquent if not paid:
1. In the case of a timely filed return, within thirty (30) days after the due date
of the return or within thirty (30) days after the expiration of an extension
period, if one has been granted; or,
2. In the case of no return filed or a return filed late, by the due date of the
return,
(d) If any tax due hereunder, including taxes determined under sub. (7), shall fail
to be paid when due, then in such event, the person obligated to pay over the same shall
pay a forfeiture in an amount not to exceed 25% (twenty-five percent) of the room tax due
for the previous calendar year (or the current year if the Village Board is able to determine in
its best judgment, the anticipated amount thereof), or $5,000.00, whichever is less.
(e) If a person fails to file a return when due, for any reason, or files a false or
fraudulent return with intent in any case to defeat or evade the taxes imposed by this
section, the person shall pay a forfeiture of $500.00 per day for each day said return is not
so filed or remains on file containing the false or fraudulent information without a correction
thereof.
(9) RECORDS.
(a) Every person liable for the tax imposed by this section shall keep or cause to
be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the
Finance Director requires. Records shall be retained and available to the Finance Director
for a period of five years after date of filing of the annual return under sub. (3) covering the
records in question.
(b) All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to such
returns, on file with the Finance Director are deemed to be confidential, except the Finance
Director may divulge their contents to the following, and no others:
1. The person who filed the return;
2. Officers, agents or employees of the U.S. Internal Revenue Service or the
Wisconsin Department of Revenue;
3. Officers or agents of the Village of DeForest as may be necessary to
enforce collection.
(10) CONFIDENTIALITY. No person having any administrative duty under this
section shall make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information
obtained by an investigation of records of any person who is required to pay the tax as
imposed by this section, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or
any particular thereof set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy
thereof to be seen or examined by any person, except as provided in sub. (9)(b) and except
as set forth in §66.0615(3), Wis. Stats. Persons violating this section may be required to
forfeit not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00.
2-9
(11) VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
(a) Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this section, who fails to obtain a
permit as required by sub. (4) or who violates any other provisions of this section for which a
specific penalty or forfeiture is not set forth above, shall be subject to a forfeiture as
prescribed in sec. 20.04 of this Code. Each day, or portion thereof, that such violation
continues is hereby deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(b) Any delinquent amounts owed may be placed upon the tax rolls for collection, or
may be collected in a civil action brought by the Village.
[Sec 2.08 Cr. in Am. 03-14, Eff. 4-10-03]
2.09 GARBAGE/RECYCLING COLLECTION CHARGES FOR TAX EXEMPT
PARCELS. Any parcel of real estate that is exempt from general property taxes, but which
receives garbage and recycling collection services from the Village shall be assessed a
special charge equal to the current annual fee charged by the contractor plus a $25.00
surcharge for expenses relative to billing and collection of these charges. The fee shall
cover a period from July 1st of each year thru June 30th of following year, and shall be
payable on or before June 1 of the beginning of a service year.
[Cr. 01-29, Eff. 7-5-01, renum. by revisor]
2.10 FEE FOR CHECKS RECEIVED AS INSUFFICIENT OR UNCOLLECTIBLE
FUNDS. A service charge of $25.00 shall be charged for each check received by the
Village which is returned unpaid after deposit due to insufficient or uncollectible funds in the
account on which the check is drawn. A service charge of $25.00 shall also be charged for
failed ACH payments and all other failed electronic payments to the Village due to
insufficient funds. A closed account shall be considered to have insufficient funds under this
section.
[Cr. 01-29, Eff. 7-5-01, renum. by revisor; Am. 17-39, Eff. 12-29-17]
2.11 CHARGES FOR USE OF VILLAGE EQUIPMENT. The Village Board shall,
from time to time, establish by resolution a schedule of charges for the use of equipment
owned by the Village. The charges shall be based on a reasonable estimate of the cost to
the Village of owning, maintaining, transporting, operating, storing, insuring and replacing
such equipment and shall be applied in determining the amount to be charged in all cases
where any ordinance, contract, resolution or order of the Village Board provides for the
recovery by the Village of costs incurred in abating any nuisance, correcting any condition or
making any improvement to public or private property, or remedying any violation of
Wisconsin law or this Code. Such resolution may also establish a rate for the services of
Village officers and employees in operating such equipment and supervising the activities
for which the charges are imposed.
[Am. 03-13, Eff. 4-10-03]
2.12 FEES FOR TAX EXEMPTION REPORTS. All tax exemption reports filed with
the Village Clerk shall be accompanied by a filing fee equal to fifteen dollars ($15.00) for
each parcel reported. The Clerk is authorized to reject any report for which an appropriate
filing fee is not paid. The fee imposed by this section shall not apply to any church required
to file such a report pursuant to §70.337(1), Wis. Stats.
[Cr. 94-4, Eff. 1-17-94, renum. by revisor; Revisor’s note: Last sentence added by revisor to comply with §70.337(5) as
amended by 1999 Wis. Act. 9.]
2-10
(1) RECREATION PROGRAM CHARGES. Any person electing to make a payment
to the Village by credit card or debit card for recreation program fees shall, as a condition of
utilizing such payment method, pay a surcharge of $2.95.
(2) Other Services. Any person electing to make payment to the Village by credit
card or debit card for utility services, license or permit fees, property taxes, or any other
amount not governed by sub. (1) shall, as a condition of utilizing such payment method, pay
a surcharge of 2.75%, plus an additional charge of $0.50 for payments under $100.
(3) NOTICE OF CHARGES. The Finance Director shall implement appropriate
procedures to assure that users of automated systems and other credit or debit card payors
are notified of the applicability and amount of the surcharge imposed under this section
before making a payment.
[Cr. 08-42, Eff. 11-6-08; Am. 11-24, Eff. 8-2-11; Am. 13-18, Eff. 8-30-13]
2.13 CONVENIENCE FEE FOR ONLINE PAYMENTS. Any person electing to make any
payment to the Village which is authorized to be made by credit card, automated cash
withdrawal or other internet-based system shall, as a condition of utilizing such payment
method, pay a convenience fee as follows:
(a) Payments for utility bills, licenses and permits – 2.75% of the amount paid,
plus $0.50 if the total payment is under $100.00;
(b) Payments for recreation program fees and park reservations – 3.50% of the
amount paid plus $0.30 per transaction.
[Cr. 02-24, Eff. 6-16-08; Am. 2019-012, Eff. 6-18-19]
2.14 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY.
(1) AUTHORITY. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to dispose of any
personal property which has been abandoned, or which has remained unclaimed for more
than thirty (30) days after the department has taken possession of the property, as provided
in this section. The Chief may delegate his or her authority under this section to any officer
of the department.
(2) EVIDENCE. This section shall not apply to any property collected or being
held as evidence in any criminal investigation or prosecution.
(3) FLAMMABLE, EXPLOSIVE OR OTHERWISE DANGEROUS MATERIALS.
Flammable, explosive or incendiary substances, materials or devices that pose a danger to
life or property in their storage, transportation, or use may be disposed of immediately upon
the taking of possession by the department. In the case of such materials having a
commercial value in normal usage and which do not pose an immediate threat to life or
property, the Chief shall make a reasonable attempt to return the materials to their rightful
owners, if known. Any such materials not returned to their owners under this subsection
shall be disposed of in any manner the Chief shall determine to be safe, efficient and
economical.
(4) WEAPONS AND AMMUNITION. The Chief may, on behalf of the Village,
retain or dispose of abandoned, unclaimed or seized dangerous weapons or ammunition in
accordance with §968.20, Wis. Stats.
2-11
(5) PUBLIC SALE. Except as provided in subs. (2) or (3), the Chief may dispose
of any abandoned or unclaimed personal property in accordance with this subsection.
(a) Public Auction. Except as provided in par. (b) all items subject to disposal
under this subsection shall be sold to the highest bidder through a public sale. Public sales
shall include public auctions, including “silent” auctions, solicitation for written bids, or any
other method which provides the general public reasonable notice and an opportunity to
acquire the property by paying more than any other purchaser. Notice of sale, including the
time and place of the sale, if applicable, and the method by which the sale shall be
conducted, shall be published as a Class 3 notice in the official newspaper. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Village Administrator may authorize or require an alternative or additional
method or methods of public notification.
(b) Summary Disposal. Any property remaining unsold after a public sale held
according to par. (a), and any property for which the Village Administrator shall determine
the probable costs of selling a public sale is likely to exceed the purchase price that will be
received for the property, may be donated to any non-profit organization organized under
§§501(a) or 501(c)3 of the Internal Revenue Code, or disposed of at an appropriate
recycling or waste facility.
(6) REPORT OF DISPOSITION. The Chief of Police shall make and preserve an
accurate record of any sale or other disposition of personal property under this section,
including an inventory of all property disposed of, the date and method of disposition, the
consideration received, and the name and address of the purchaser or other recipient of the
property. Each such record shall be filed within ten (10) days after the disposition with the
Village Finance Director, and kept as a public record for at least two (2) years from the date
of disposition. The proceeds of any disposition, after deducting the necessary expenses of
keeping and disposing of the property shall be remitted to the Finance Director, at the time
of filing the corresponding report, for deposit into the Village treasury.
[Cr. 11-13, Eff. 4-19-11]
3-1
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC CODE
3.01 STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED ...................................................................... 3-1
3.02 PROHIBITED SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND MARKERS ............................................... 3-1
3.021 HEAVY TRAFFIC ROUTES [Cr. 16-27, Eff. 08-26-16] ...................................................... 3-2
3.03 SPEED LIMITS ...................................................................................................... 3-4
3.04 THROUGH HIGHWAYS DESIGNATED ................................................................. 3-6
3.05 ONE-WAY STREETS ............................................................................................. 3-7
3.06 PARKING REGULATIONS .................................................................................... 3-7
3.061 STAYING UPON MEDIANS RESTRICTED [Cr. 18-14, Eff. 8-30-18] ............................. 3-12
3.07 ABANDONED VEHICLES ................................................................................... 3-13
3.08 ACCIDENT REPORTS ......................................................................................... 3-15
3.09 DISPLAY OF POWER OR SPEED PROHIBITED ................................................ 3-15
3.095 USE OF COMPRESSION BRAKES PROHIBITED .............................................. 3-15
3.10 TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS ON SCHOOL DISTRICT GROUNDS 3-15
3.105 SCHOOL BUS WARNING LIGHTS [Cr. 13-04, Eff. 02-29-13] ........................................ 3-15
3.11 SNOWMOBILES AND OTHER OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES ............................... 3-16
3.115 NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES .......................................................... 3-19
3.12 PENALTIES ......................................................................................................... 3-20
3.13 ENFORCEMENT .................................................................................................. 3-22
3.14 REFERENCES TO WISCONSIN STATUTES ...................................................... 3-23
3.01 STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions in Chs. 340 to 348, Wis. Stats., describing
and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, exclusive of any provisions
therein relating to penalties to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the
statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment, are hereby adopted and by reference
made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or
prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this
chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure uniform statewide
regulation of traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of the State of Wisconsin.
3.02 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC MAP AND CONTROL DEVICES: PROHIBITED
SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKERS.
(1) DUTY OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE TO ERECT AND INSTALL UNIFORM
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. Whenever traffic regulations created by this chapter,
including a State of Wisconsin traffic regulation adopted by reference in sec. 3.01, require
the erection of traffic control devices for enforcement, the Chief of Police, with the
cooperation of the Public Works Department, shall procure, erect and maintain uniform
control devices conforming to the Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual promulgated by the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation, giving notice of such traffic regulation to the users
of the streets and highways on which such regulations apply. Whenever State law grants
discretion to local authorities in erecting or placement of a uniform traffic control device,
devices shall be erected in such locations and in such a manner as in the judgment of the
Chief of Police will carry out the purposes of this chapter and give adequate warning to
users of the streets and highways of the Village.
3-2
(2) OFFICIAL TRAFFIC MAP.
(a) Official Traffic Map Established. There is hereby established for the Village of
DeForest an Official Traffic Map, dated December 1, 1982, upon which is indicated as of
said date, all existing stop signs, arterial intersections, yield signs, speed zones and school
crossings and which the laws of the State of Wisconsin require the erection or use of official
traffic control devices to enforce such restrictions or limitations. All such restrictions and
limitations set forth on said Official Traffic Map are hereby ratified and affirmed.
(b) Additions to Map. The Village Board may from time to time make additions to or
deletions from the Official Traffic Map and the Chief of Police shall keep such Official Traffic
Map current. Every addition to said Official Traffic Map made after December 1, 1982, shall
indicate the number of the authorizing ordinance or resolution and the date the appropriate
official traffic control device was erected, and every deletion shall indicate the number of the
authorizing ordinance or resolution.
(c) Map to Be Maintained. A copy of the Official Traffic Map shall be maintained and
displayed in the Municipal Building. The Chief of Police shall make appropriate authorized
changes on said map within three working days after the appropriate official traffic control
device is erected or removed, as the case may be.
(d) Violations Prohibited. When official traffic control devices giving notice of the
restrictions, prohibitions and limitations shown on the Official Traffic Map are erected and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section, a violation of the restriction,
prohibition or limitation shown on the Official Traffic Map shall be a violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
(3) PROHIBITED SIGNS AND MARKERS IN HIGHWAYS. No person other than an
officer authorized by this chapter to erect and maintain official traffic control devices, or his
designee, shall place within the limits of any streets or highway maintained by the Village
any sign, signal, marker, marking or monument unless permission is first obtained from the
Chief of Police or State Highway Commission. Any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument
placed or maintained in violation of this subsection shall be subject to removal as provided
in sub. (4) below.
(4) REMOVAL OF UNOFFICIAL SIGNS, MARKERS, SIGNALS AND TRAFFIC
CONTROL DEVICES. The Chief of Police may remove any sign, signal, marker or other
device which is placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this chapter or state law. Any
charge imposed against premises for removal of a prohibited or illegal sign, signal, marker
or device shall be reported by the Chief of Police to the Village Board for review and
certification at its next regular meeting following the imposition of the charge. Any charge
not paid on or before the next succeeding November 15 shall be placed upon the tax roll for
collection as other special municipal taxes.
[Cr. 16-27, Eff. 08-26-16]
3.021 HEAVY TRAFFIC ROUTES.
(1) In this section, “heavy traffic” means all vehicles not operating completely on
pneumatic tires and all vehicles or combination of vehicles, other than motor buses,
designed or used for transporting property of any nature and having a gross vehicle weight
rating of more than 20,000 pounds.
3-3
(2) Heavy traffic routes designated. The following streets or parts thereof within the
jurisdiction of the Village are designated heavy traffic routes:
a. Hwy V from Hwy. 51 to I90/94.
b. North Towne Road from Hwy. V to Vinburn Rd.
c. North and South Main St. From Hwy V to Vinburn Rd.
d. Vinburn Rd from South Main St. to North Towne Rd.
e. North Stevenson from Hwy. V to Yahara Rd.
f. Burton Blvd. to Terminus.
g. Stokely Dr. from Hwy. V to Terminus.
h. Bassett St. from Hwy V to Terminus.
i. Bakke St. from Bassett St. to Stokely Dr.
j. River Rd. from Hwy. V to Innovation Dr.
k. Innovation Dr. from River Rd. to Terminus.
l. South St. from S. Main St. to River Rd.
m. North Towne Rd. from Hwy 19 to Terminus.
n. Bear Tree Pkwy from North Towne Rd to Terminus.
o. Pederson Crossing from Bear Tree Pkwy to Windsor Rd.
p. Reardon Rd. and Loftus Rd. to Terminus.
q. Meridian Dr. from Blanchard’s Crossing to Terminus.
r. Blanchard’s Crossing from Hwy. 19 to Terminus.
s. Duraform Lane from Blanchard’s Crossing to North Towne Rd.
t. Stack Dr. from Duraform Lane to Terminus.
u. Williamsburg Way from Hwy 19 to Hwy 51.
v. Savanah Dr. from Williamsburg Way to Terminus.
w. Holum St. from North Towne Rd. to Main St.
x. Market St. from Holum St. to E. Elm St.
y. Commerce St. from Main St. to R.R. Tracks.
(3) Prohibited routes. Heavy traffic is prohibited from using any Village street or
highway not designated as a heavy traffic route. This paragraph does not apply to the
following:
a. Vehicles driven for the purpose of obtaining orders for supplies or moving or
delivering supplies or commodities to or from any place of business or
residence that can only be accessed from a street or highway not designated
as a heavy traffic route;
b. Vehicles traveling for the purpose of repair or maintenance of electric, gas or
water or sewer service operated by a public utility;
c. Vehicles operated for emergency purposes by a fire department or other
governmental agency;
d. Village streets or highways over which are routed state trunk highways;
e. Vehicles for recreational use;
f. Vehicles transporting construction equipment to or from a site in the Village
for which a building or right of way permit is currently in effect; and,
g. When otherwise directed by a traffic control officer or official traffic sign.
(4) Administration. The Director of Public Services, in cooperation with the police
department, shall administer this section. Administration shall include the following:
3-4
a. Posting of signs. Appropriate signs shall be posted giving notice of this
section and of the heavy traffic routes established in this section. Yellow
signposts may also be used to designate heavy traffic routes.
b. Maps. Heavy traffic routes shall be shown on the official traffic map.
c. The Director of Public Services or the Chief of Police may temporarily have
heavy traffic redirected to a street or highway not designated as a heavy
traffic route in the event of street or utility repairs, or in the event of a snow,
traffic or other emergency.
(5) Liability. Any operator, corporation, owner or agent whose heavy traffic vehicle
damages any village street or highway in violation of this section shall be liable and required
to pay the Village the cost of repair or replacement of the damaged street or highway.
(6) Special and seasonal weight limitations. The Director of Public Services shall
have the authority to impose special or seasonal weight limits on any highway, bridge or
culvert maintained by the Village to prevent injury to the roadway or for the safety of the
users of such bridge or culvert and shall be responsible for erecting uniform traffic control
devices giving notice thereof.
(7) Penalty. In addition to liability caused by violation of this section, anyone
violating the provisions of this section shall pay a forfeiture of not more than $500 for first
offense, and a forfeiture of not more than $1,000 for a second or greater offense made
within any twelve month period.
3.03 SPEED LIMITS. The Village Board hereby determines that the statutory
speed limits on the following streets or portions thereof are unreasonable, unsafe and
imprudent and modifies such speed limits as follows:
[Am. 92-23, Eff. 6-7-93]
(1) SPEED LIMITS MODIFIED. Speed limits are modified from the statutory speed
limit as follows upon the following designated streets or portions thereof:
[Am. 92-23, Eff. 6-7-93; Am. 17-31, Eff. 9-29-17]
(a) To 35 Miles Per Hour.
1. On West North Street (CTH V).
2. On East North Street (CTH V).
[Am. 92-23, Eff. 6-7-93]
3. On River Road from West North Street (CTH V) to Daley Road.
[Cr. 94-39, Eff. 9-6-94]
4. On North Stevenson Street, from 600 feet north of East North Street (CTH V)
north to the Village limits.
[Cr. 96-17, Eff. 4-19-96; Am. 97-33, Eff. 10-10-97]
5. On Vinburn Road.
[Am. 00-32, Eff. 8-20-00]
3-5
6. On North Towne Road from East North Street (CTH V) to 500 feet south of
East Holum Street.
7. On Windsor Road from River Road to a point 100 feet west of Highland Drive.
8. On Pederson Crossing Boulevard.
9. On Reardon Road.
10. On Windsor Road from Pederson Parkway to Highway 51.
(b) To 40 Miles Per Hour.
1. On South Main Street (CTH CV) from Oak Springs Circle to Gray Road.
(c) To 45 Miles Per Hour.
1. On North Towne Road from 500 feet south of East Holum Street to Gray
Road.
2. On River Road from Daley Road south to the Village Limits.
3. On Highway 19 from North Towne Road to Liuna Way (East Entrance).
(d) To 55 Miles Per Hour.
1. On U.S. Highway 51.
2. On Highway 19 from North Towne Road to East Village Limits.
3. On Highway 19 from Liuna Way (East Entrance) to West Village Limits.
[Am. 92-23, Eff. 6-7-93]
(2) SCHOOL CROSSINGS. The following intersections are designated as school
crossings:
(a) Across Stevenson Street at its intersection with East Holum Street.
(b) Across East Holum Street at its intersection with Washington Street.
(c) Across East Holum Street at its intersection with Halsor Street.
(d) Across Columbia Avenue at its intersection with Madison Street.
(e) Across Southbound Drive at its intersection with Jefferson Street.
(f) Across South Cleveland Avenue at its intersection with Jefferson Street.
(g) Across Yorktown Road at its intersection with Rauls Trace.
(h) Across Yorktown Road at its intersection with Constitution Lane.
3-6
(i) Across Southbound Drive at its intersection with Burl Oak Drive.
(j) Across Southbound Drive at its intersection with Country Clover Drivve.
(k) Across Trailside Drive at its intersection with Lexington Parkway.
(l) Across Lexington Parkway at its intersection with Old Indian Trail.
(m) Across Old Indian Trail at its intersection with Seminole Way.
(n) Across Renata Court at its intersection with Bruns Street.
(o) Across Southbound Drive at its intersection with Constitution Lane.
(p) Across DeForest Street at its intersection with South Halsor Street.
(q) Across DeForest Street at its intersection with South Cleveland Avenue.
(r) Across Trailside Drive at its intersection with Hilltop Drive.
[Am. 92-23, Eff. 6-7-93; Am. 17-31, Eff. 9-29-17]
3.04 THROUGH HIGHWAYS DESIGNATED.
(1) In the interest of public safety and pursuant to the authority granted by Wisconsin
law, the following highways or portions thereof are declared to be through highways:
(a) Holum Street, except at Main Street and U.S. Highway 51.
(b) Columbia Avenue between Stevenson Street and Cleveland Street.
(c) Yahara Street east of Stevenson Street.
(d) North Street (County Trunk Highway V).
(e) South Street west of Main Street.
(f) Main Street, except at Holum and North Streets.
(g) Market Street between Holum Street and Murray Street.
(h) Stevenson Street north of Holum Street to North Street.
(i) Cleveland Street between Holum Street and Yahara Street.
(j) Acker Parkway between Main Street and River Road.
(k) Riverwood Bend between South Street and Harvard Drive.
3-7
(2) DESIGNATION OF LOCATION OF STOP AND YIELD SIGNS. In the interest of
public safety, the Village Board, by resolution, has designated the location of stop and yield
signs within the village and has ordered the installation of such signs. In addition, the
location of such signs is indicated on the Official Traffic Map of the Village pursuant to sec.
3.02 of this chapter.
(3) OPERATORS TO OBEY TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. Every operator of a
vehicle approaching an intersection at which an official traffic control device is erected in
accordance with this section shall obey the direction of such official traffic control device as
required by the Wisconsin Statutes incorporated by reference in sec. 3.01 of this chapter.
Operators of vehicles approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering a highway as
required by §346.46, Wis. Stats. Operators approaching intersections at which a yield sign
has been installed shall yield the right of way to other vehicles as required by §346.18(6),
Wis. Stats.
3.05 ONE WAY STREETS. The following streets are designated one-way streets
and no vehicle shall travel in any direction thereon except as indicated:
[Am. 92-23, Eff. 6-7-93]
(1) On Pleasant View Street from South Main Street to Market Street.
(2) On Park Avenue from Madison Avenue to North Cleveland Avenue.
[Am. 92-23, Eff. 6-7-93]
(3) On Norsk Court from South Main Street through the entire west/east segment of
Norsk Court.
[Cr. 14-33, Eff. 12-12-14]
3.06 PARKING REGULATIONS.
(1) PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES. No person shall at any time park or
leave standing any vehicle, upon any of the following highways or parts of highways:
[Am. 93-28, Eff. 7-19-93]
(a) On the north side of the 300 block of Holum Street, directly across from the Fire
Station, as posted.
(b) On the 600 and 700 block of South Main Street, both sides of the highway.
(c) On Holiday Court.
[Am. 93-28, Eff. 7-19-93; Am. 17-34, Eff. 10-27-17]
(d) On the South Side of Jefferson Street, from the western entrance to the High
School parking lot, thence 10 feet west.
[Cr. 94-42, Eff. 9-19-94]
(e) On the South Side of Jefferson Street, from the western entrance to the High
School parking lot, thence 10 feet west.
[Cr. 94-42, Eff. 9-19-94]
(f) On Acker Parkway, at the intersection with North Main Street to a point 156 west,
both sides of the road.
[Cr. 96-10 (renumbered in codification), Eff. 2-23-96]
3-8
(g) On the North side of Yellowwood Lane from Innovation Drive to Conservancy
Plaza.
(h) On the South side of Redspire Lane from Innovation Drive to Conservancy
Plaza.
[Am. 16-35, Eff. 9-30-16]
(i) Along the East side of Outlot 4, Acker Park-First Addition Subdivision, along its
entire length from Acker Parkway south to the Western Green Park parking lot.
[Pars. (g)-(i) Cr. 09-26, Eff. 8-21-09]
(j) On the south side of Ethun Place at the intersection of Ethun Place and Norsk
Court, 15 feet west from the western edge of the intersection, and 14 feet east from the
eastern edge of the intersection.
[Par. (j) Cr. 14-32, Eff. 12-12-14]
(k) On Innovation Drive from the western edge of the intersection with Village Walk
Lane to 150 feet northeast of the northeastern edge of the intersection with Redspire Lane,
both sides of the highway.
[Par. (k) Cr. 15-18, Eff. 5-15-15]
(L) On the east and west sides of North Towne Road, from East North Street (CTH
V) to Vinburn Road, except that parking is permitted on a portion of the west side of North
Towne Road commencing 850 feet south of its intersection with East Holum Street, and
running to an end point 1325 feet north of its intersection with Vinburn Road, except during
the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. on official school days.
[Par. (L) Cr. 15-25, Eff. 5-29-15]
(m) On the North side of Redspire Lane, from a point 200 feet west of Conservancy
Plaza, to a point 230 feet west of Conservancy Plaza.
[Am. 16-35, Eff. 9-30-16]
(n) On South Stevenson Street from DeForest Street to Jefferson Street.
[Par. (n) Cr. 17-36, Eff. 12-29-17]
(o) On Liuna Way.
[Par. (o) Cr. 18-13, Eff. 6-28-18]
(p) On Pederson Crossing Boulevard.
[Par. (p) Cr. 19-06, Adopted 4-16-2019]
(2) PARKING PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN TIMES. No person shall park or leave
standing any vehicle between the hours of 7:30 A.M. and 4:30 P.M. on official school days,
upon any of the following highways or parts of highways:
[Am. 93-28, Eff. 7-19-93]
(a) On the north side of Jefferson Street from Bruns Street west to South Halsor
Street.
[Am. 02-16, Eff. 5-9-02]
(b) On the either side of South Halsor Street from DeForest Street to Jefferson
Street.
[Am. 94-42, Eff. 9-19-94]
3-9
(c) On Evergreen Circle.
[Am. 93-28, Eff. 7-19-93]
(e) On Renata Court.
[Am. 95-50, Eff.10-16-95]
(f) On the west side of Bruns Street, from East Holum Street to Jefferson Street.
[Cr. 97-39, Eff. 12-5-97]
(g) On the south side of Jefferson Street from Bruns Street west to the St. Olaf’s
Church property.
[Cr. 01-01, Eff. 1-18-01]
(h) On the east side of Bruns Street from the driveway at 303 Bruns Street south to
the entryway of the DeForest High School east driveway.
[Cr. 02-16, Eff. 5-9-02]
(i) On the west side of Southbound Drive from the driveway of 324 Southbound to
Rosemal Lane.
[Cr. 11-37, Eff. 12-30-11]
(2a) ADDITIONAL PARKING LIMITATIONS AT CERTAIN TIMES. No person shall
park or leave standing any vehicle between the hours of 7:30 A.M. and 8:30 A.M., nor
between the hours of 2:30 A.M. and 3:30 P.M. on official school days upon any of the
following highways or parts of highways:
[Am. 15-30, Eff. 6-12-15]
(a) On the east side of North Cleveland Street between East Holum Street and
Columbia Avenue.
[Am. 05-02, Eff. 1-20-05; Am. 15-30; Eff. 6-12-15]
(b) On a portion of the south side of East Holum Street, commencing at a point 543
feet west of the intersection with South Cleveland Street, and running to an end point 86 feet
west. This restriction does not apply to school buses.
[Am. 15-30, Eff. 6-12-15]
(c) On a portion of the west side of North Johnson Street, commencing at the
intersection with East Holum Street, and running to an end point 160 feet north of East
Holum Street.
[Par. (c) Cr. 17-35, Eff. 10-27-17]
(2b) ADDITIONAL PARKING LIMITATIONS AT CERTAIN TIMES. No person shall
park or leave standing any vehicle between the hours of 7:30 A.M. and 8:30 A.M., nor
between the hours of 2:30 P.M. and 3:30 P.M., on official school days upon any of the
following highways or parts of highways:
(a) On the east side of North Cleveland Street between East Holum Street and
Columbia Avenue.
(b) On a portion of the south side of East Holum Street, commencing at a point 543
feet west of the intersection with South Cleveland Street, and running to an end point 86 feet
west. This restriction does not apply to school buses.
[Am.12-01, Eff. 1-13-12; Am. 15-30]
3-10
(2c) SEASONAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS. No person shall park or leave
standing any vehicle at any time between the dates of November 15th through April 1,
inclusive, upon any of the following highways or parts of highways:
(a) On West Holum Street west of the westerly curb line of Reigstad Street extended
northerly.
[Cr. 12-34, Eff. 12-28-12; Renumbered by revisor]
(3) LIMITED TIME PARKING. No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle
on any street or portion thereof identified in this subsection for a period in excess of the time
limited herein.
[Am. 93-23, Eff. 7-19-93]
(a) Two Hour Parking.
1. On the east side of North Durkee Street, from Columbia Avenue, 100 feet to
the south.
[Sub. (a) repl. and sub. (b) renum.: 97-30, Eff. 10-10-97]
(3a) LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONE. No person shall park or leave standing
any vehicle, except for the purpose of actively loading or unloading persons or property, but
in no case for a period of time longer thirty minutes, on a part of the south side of East
Holum Street, from a point 35 feet west from Library Street, to a point 80 feet west from
Library Street.
[Cr. 16-09, Eff. 4-15-16]
(4) LIMITED TIME PARKING DURING CERTAIN TIMES. No person shall park or
leave standing any vehicle between the hours of 7:30 A.M. and 4:30 P.M. on official school
days, on any street or portion thereof identified in this subsection for a period in excess of
the time limited herein.
[Am. 93-28, Eff. 7-19-93]
(a) Fifteen Minute Parking.
1. On the South side of Jefferson Street, from the intersection with Bruns
Street, thence 250 feet west.
[Am. 93-28, Eff. 7-19-93; 97-39, Eff. 12-5-97]
2. On the north side of East Holum Street from a point 200 feet west of North
Cleveland Avenue to a point 287 feet west of North Cleveland Avenue.
[Am. 97-27, Eff. 7-25-97]
(b) One Hour Parking.
1. On the south side of Jefferson Street from a point 445 feet east of South
Cleveland Avenue, thence 145 feet east.
[Am. 97-29, Eff. 10-10-97]
(4a) PARKING LIMITATIONS ON N. LEXINGTON PARKWAY DURING SCHOOL
HOURS. The following restrictions apply between the hours of 7:30 A.M. and 3:30 P.M. on
official school days:
[Cr. 14-30, Eff. 10-17-14]
3-11
(a) No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle on the south side of N.
Lexington Parkway from Eagle Nest Lane to Old Indian Trail.
(b) No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle on the north side of N.
Lexington Parkway from Old Indian Trail to Eagle Nest Lane except as follows:
1. Vehicles may be stopped between the entrance and exit of the circle drive in
front of Yahara Elementary School in order to drop students off or to pick
students up from school.
2. School buses may be parked between the exit of the circle drive in front of
Yahara Elementary School and Eagle Nest Lane.
(5) PARKING OF VEHICLES RESTRICTED.
(a) No person owning or having control of any truck, trailer, truck power unit, tractor,
bus, or recreation vehicle in excess of 10,000 pounds gross weight or over 16 feet in length,
or having an enclosed height of more than 8 feet from the roadway, shall park such vehicle
upon any street, avenue or public way in the Village between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. except that parking of such equipment overnight can be allowed as long as there
is a valid building permit in effect and/or a valid contract with the Village or a utility in effect
and that the equipment parked on site is related to the work under construction. Such
parking shall be at or within a reasonable distance of the location of the work and must have
the approval of the Director of Public Services or the Chief of Police.
[Am. 95-52, Eff. 11-10-95; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(b) The provisions of this subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit the lawful
parking of such equipment upon any street, avenue, or public way in the Village for the
actual loading or unloading of goods, wares, or merchandise, providing, however, the
loading or unloading shall be limited to the actual time consumed in such operation.
[Am. 95-52, Eff. 11-10-95]
(6) PARALLEL PARKING EXCEPTIONS. Except as provided in this subsection, all
vehicles shall be parked parallel to the edge of the street headed in the direction of travel of
the nearest traffic lane.
[Am. 93-28, Eff. 7-19-93]
(a) Angle parking is permitted only at the following locations.
1. On the east side of Market Street between Holum Street and Market Street.
2. On the East side of North Main Street from its intersection with East North
Street to a point 130 feet north of such intersection.
[Am. 93-28, Eff. 7-19-93]
(b) Perpendicular parking is only permitted at the following locations:
1. On the east side of North Main Street from a point four (4) feet north of its
intersection with the Community Center driveway, thence 180 feet north.
2. On the west side of North Durkee Street from the intersection with East
Holum Street thence 150 feet north.
3-12
[Am. 93-28, Eff. 7-19-93]
(c) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit parking within or nearer to
any crosswalk, intersection, driveway or other location that is authorized by state law.
[Am. 93-28, Eff. 7-19-93]
(7) No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle having a gross vehicle
weight of more than 8,000 pounds with its motor or any refrigerator unit running for more
than 10 minutes within 300 feet of any residence in the Village between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except for such time as is reasonably necessary for loading or unloading
such vehicle.
[Cr. 04-41, Eff. 12-20-04.]
(8) WINTER PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
(a) No person shall park a motor vehicle, trailer, or any other moveable equipment on
any street in the Village of DeForest between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., from November
15 to April 1 of each year, except that vehicles may be parked on the even house numbered
sides of the streets between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on even-numbered days of the
month, and on odd house numbered sides of the street on odd-numbered days of the
month.
(b) For purposes of this section, parking is defined as leaving a motor vehicle, trailer
or equipment, or permitting any of the foregoing to remain, on a street unattended, but shall
not include the temporary stopping of:
(i) Police, fire or other emergency vehicles so marked.
(ii) Business vehicles while being used for the active delivery or pick-up of goods,
equipment or merchandise while the motor is running.
[Cr. 12-02, Eff. 1-27-12]
(9) PARKING SPACES FOR COMPACT CARS AND SMALLER VEHICLES.
(a) As used in this section, “compact car” means a passenger car with a length of
fifteen feet or less.
(b) The three parking spaces located directly in front of 142 Market Street shall
be for compact cars and smaller vehicles only during times in which an outdoor seating area
adjacent to these parking spaces is lawfully permitted by the Village of DeForest. Counting
north from the intersection of Commerce and Market Streets, these parking spaces are the
5th, 6th and 7th parking spaces on the west side of Market Street.
[Cr. 12-12, Eff. 8-17-12; renumbered by revisor].
3.061 STAYING UPON MEDIANS RESTRICTED.
(a) DEFINITIONS. As used in this section:
1. A “median” is an area not intended for vehicular use dividing a highway
into separates lanes of traffic. A “median” also means the area inside a
traffic circle not intended for vehicular use.
2. A “highway” is as defined under sec. 340.01(22), Wis. Stats.
3-13
(b) RESTRICTIONS ON STAYING ON MEDIANS. No person shall be upon a
median unless that person is actively in the process of crossing the highway. It is
prima facie evidence of a violation of this paragraph if a person stays upon the
median longer than is necessary to cross the highway in a legal manner.
(c) EXCEPTIONS TO RESTRICTIONS. The prohibition in paragraph (b) does not
apply to the following:
1. Persons engaged in law enforcement or rescue activities, including
providing assistance to an injured person or a disabled vehicle.
2. Injured or disabled persons no capable of crossing the highway.
3. Persons directed by law enforcement, fire department personnel or EMS
to stay on a median.
4. Persons engaged in repair or maintenance activities on the highway
under the direction of the Village of DeForest, Dane County or the State
of Wisconsin.
3.07 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
(1) ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED. No person shall abandon any
vehicle unattended within the Village for such time and under such circumstances as to
cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to be abandoned.
(2) DEFINITION. As used in this section "vehicle" means a motor vehicle, trailer,
semitrailer or mobile home as defined in sec. 3.01 of this chapter, whether or not such
vehicle is registered under Ch. 341, Wis. Stats.
(3) PRESUMPTION OF ABANDONMENT. Any vehicle left unattended for more
than 48 hours on any public street or grounds, or on private property where parking is
prohibited, limited or restricted without the permission of the owner or lessee, is deemed
abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance; provided that the vehicle shall not be deemed
abandoned under this section if left unattended on private property out of public view, by
permission of the owner or lessee.
(4) EXCEPTIONS. This section shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building
or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and
manner authorized by the Village.
(5) REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OR SALE. Any vehicle found abandoned in
violation of this chapter shall be impounded by the Police Department until lawfully claimed
or disposed of as provided in this section. If the Chief of Police or his duly authorized
representative determines that towing costs and storage charges for 10 days, as provided in
sub. (6) below, would exceed the value of the vehicle, the vehicle may be junked or sold
prior to the expiration of the impoundment period upon determination by the Chief of Police
that the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or any other reason; provided that complete
vehicles in excess of 19 model years of age shall be sold or disposed of only by auction sale
or sealed bid in accordance with sub. (8) below.
3-14
(6) MINIMUM IMPOUNDMENT PERIOD. The minimum period of impoundment or
storage of a vehicle found in violation of this section shall be 10 days.
(7) NOTICE TO OWNER. The police officer removing or causing the removal of any
vehicle found in violation of this section shall immediately notify the Chief of Police of the
abandonment and location of the impounded vehicle, and shall within 10 days thereafter
notify the owner and lienholders of record, by certified mail, of the impoundment and of their
right to reclaim the vehicle. The notice shall set forth the information contained in
§342.40(3), Wis. Stats., and shall state that the failure of the owner or lienholders to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle under this section shall be deemed a waiver of all
right, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to sale of the vehicle.
(8) SALE. Each retained vehicle not reclaimed by the owner or lienholder may be
disposed of by sealed bid or auction sale as provided in §342.40(3), Wis. Stats.
(9) SALE TO BAR CLAIMS AGAINST VEHICLE. The sale of a motor vehicle under
the provisions of this section shall forever bar all prior claims thereto and interest therein
except as hereinafter provided.
(10) PURCHASER TO REMOVE VEHICLE. The purchaser of any vehicle on
sealed bid or auction sale under sub. (7) above shall have 10 days to remove the vehicle
from the storage area upon payment of a storage fee of $10 for each day the vehicle has
remained in storage after the second business day subsequent to the sale date. Ten days
after the sale, the purchaser shall forfeit all interest in the vehicle and the vehicle shall be
deemed to be abandoned and may be again sold.
(11) REQUEST FOR LIST. Any listing of vehicles to be sold pursuant to this section
shall be made available by the Village Administrator to any interested person or organization
who makes a written request therefor for a fee of $1.00.
(12) NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT. Within 5 days after sale or disposition of a
vehicle under this section, the Village Administrator shall advise the Wisconsin Department
of Transportation of such sale or disposition on a form supplied by the Department.
(13) OWNER MAY FILE. At any time within two years after the sale of a motor
vehicle as provided herein, any person claiming ownership of such motor vehicle or a
financial interest therein may present a claim to the Village Board setting forth such facts as
are necessary to establish such ownership or interest, and that the failure of the claimant to
reclaim the vehicle prior to sale was not the result of the neglect or fault of claimant. If the
Village Board is satisfied as to the justice of such claim, it may allow the same, but in no
case shall the amount allowed exceed the sum paid into the Village treasury as the result of
the sale of such motor vehicle, nor the amount of interest of the claimant therein.
(14) EXEMPTION. Any owner or person operating a registered vehicle which shall
become disabled or inoperative for any reason, and who shall be unable to cause removal
of such vehicle from any alley, street, highway or public place not otherwise regulated as a
restricted parking, stopping or standing zone shall, within 12 hours of such occurrence,
notify the Police Department of the location of the vehicle and shall transfer and deliver clear
title for said vehicle to the Village together with a fee of $25 to offset the cost of towing and
junking charges and shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. When so requested
3-15
by the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, the Chief of Police shall be authorized to
order such vehicle removed and junked directly from the scene of disablement by a
contractor engaged by the Village for towing of disabled vehicles. The provisions of sub.
(11) above shall apply to any vehicle removed under this subsection.
(15) PENALTY. In addition to the cost of impounding and disposing of an
abandoned vehicle, any person convicted of abandoning a vehicle in the Village shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $100 plus the cost of prosecution.
3.08 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
(1) OPERATORS TO FILE. The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident
resulting in injury to, or death of, any person, or property damage to an apparent total extent
of $500 or more, shall, within 10 days after such accident, file with the Chief of Police a copy
of the report required by §346.70, Wis. Stats.
3.09 DISPLAY OF POWER OR SPEED PROHIBITED. No person shall engage
in any speed contest, exhibition of speed or any unreasonable or unnecessary acceleration
or show of power on any street, alley or public parking lot in the Village, including all school
parking lots within the Village.
3.095 USE OF COMPRESSION BRAKES PROHIBITED. No person shall use
motor vehicle brakes within the village limits of the Village of DeForest which are in any way
activated or operated by the compression of the engine of any such motor vehicle or any
unit or part thereof. The penalty for violations of this section shall be as provided in sec.
3.12(6).
[Cr. 02-46, Eff. 11-21-02]
3.10 TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS ON SCHOOL DISTRICT
GROUNDS. Pursuant to the provisions of §118.105, Wis. Stats., the following regulations
shall apply to the grounds of the DeForest School District located within the Village.
(1) HIGH SCHOOL PARKING. All parking on the grounds of the DeForest School
District from 7:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. shall be restricted to areas designated for parking by the
School Board. When signs are erected by the School Board giving notice of such
restrictions, all persons shall park only in areas designated and signed for visitor parking.
There shall be no parking on said grounds between 11:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M., except when
school functions extend past 11:00 P.M., and on such nights there shall be no parking one
hour after the function has concluded.
(2) SPEED LIMITS. No person shall at any time operate a motor vehicle upon the
DeForest School District High School grounds at a speed in excess of 10 miles per hour.
(3) VEHICLES PROHIBITED AT SPECIFIED TIMES. No person shall at any time
operate a motor vehicle, other than a school or emergency vehicle, in or upon any drive
designated for buses only by sign during the hours of 7:30 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. and during the
hours of 3:00 P.M. to 4:30 P.M. on any weekday during the months school is in session.
3.105 SCHOOL BUS WARNING LIGHTS. (a) Use required. Except as provided in
par. (b), whenever a school bus is equipped with flashing red warning lights as specified in
§347.25 (2), Wis. Stats., the operator of said bus shall actuate such lights at least 100 feet
3-16
before stopping to load or unload pupils or other authorized passengers, and shall not
extinguish such lights until loading or unloading is completed and persons who must cross
the highway are safely across.
(b) School bus operators shall not use the flashing red warning lights when:
1. In special school bus loading areas where the bus is entirely off the
traveled portion of the highway; or
2. In residential and business districts where sidewalks and curb are laid on both
sides of the road, unless pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or
unloaded at a location at which there are no traffic signals and such persons must
cross the street or highway before being loaded or after being unloaded.
[Cr. 13-04, Eff. 02-29-13]
3.11 SNOWMOBILES AND OTHER OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES
(1) STATE SNOWMOBILE LAWS ADOPTED. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with
respect to snowmobiles in the following enumerated sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Acts
required to be performed or prohibited by such statutes are required or prohibited by this
section:
(a) §350.01 Definitions.
(b) §350.02 Operation of Snowmobiles on or in the Vicinity of a Highway.
(c) §350.03 Right of Way.
(d) §350.035 Meeting of Snowmobiles.
(e) §350.04 Snowmobile Races, Derbies and Routes.
(f) §350.045 Public Utility Exemption.
(g) §350.047 Local Ordinance to be Filed.
(h) §350.05 Operation by Youthful Operators Restricted.
(i) §350.07 Driving Animals.
(j) §350.08 Owner Permitting Operation.
(k) §350.09 Head Lamps, Tail Lamps and Brakes.
(l) §350.095 Noise Level Requirements.
(m) §350.10 Miscellaneous Provisions for Snowmobile Operation.
(n) §350.101 Intoxicated Snowmobiling.
(o) §350.102 Preliminary Breath Screening Test.
(p) §350.1025 Application of Intoxicated Snowmobiling Law.
(q) §350.103 Implied Consent.
(r) §350.104 Chemical Test.
(s) §350.106 Report Arrest to Department.
(t) §350.107 Officer’s Action after Arrest for Operating a Snowmobile while
Under the Influence of Intoxicant.
(u) §350.11 Penalties.
(v) §350.12 Registration of Snowmobiles; Trail Use Stickers.
(w) §350.13 Uniform Trail Signs and Standards.
(x) §350.135 Interferences with Uniform Trail Signs and Standard
Prohibited.
3-17
(y) §350.15 Accident and Accident Reports.
(z) §350.155 Coroners and Medical Examiners to Report; Require Blood
Specimen.
(aa) §350.17 Enforcement.
(bb) §350.19 Liability of Land Owners.
(cc) §350.99 Parties to a Violation.
(2) APPLICABILITY OF RULES OF THE ROAD TO SNOWMOBILES. The operator
of a snowmobile upon a roadway shall, in addition to the provisions of Ch. 350, be subject to
§§346.04, 346.06, 346.11, 346.14(1), 346.18, 346.19, 346.20, 346.21, 346.215(3), 346.26,
346.27, 346.33, 346.35, 346.37, 346.39, 346.40, 346.44, 346.46, 346.47, 346.48,
346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52, 346.53, 346.54, 346.55, 346.87, 346.88, 346.89, 346.90,
346.91, 346.92(1), and 346.94(1) and (9), Wis. Stats.
(3) SNOWMOBILE AND OTHER OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE OPERATION
RESTRICTED.
(a) General Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, it shall be
unlawful to operate any snowmobile or any other motor-driven craft or vehicle principally
manufactured for off-highway use on the Village streets, alleys, parks, parking lots, or on
any public lands or private lands or parking lots held open to the public. The operator shall
at all times have the consent of the owner before operation of such craft or vehicle on
private lands.
(b) Permitted use of Snowmobiles. Snowmobiles may be operated in the Village on
public right-of-ways only as follows:
1. Snowmobiles may be operated on public streets for the purpose of residential
access. “Purpose of residential access” means for the purpose of traveling
the shortest distance between the snowmobile operator’s residence and a
Village or County snowmobile route or trail that is closest to that residence.
Whenever a snowmobile operator has a choice of streets available to him or
her for the purpose of residential access that include any primary access
streets, a primary access street shall be used. Primary access streets are as
follows:
i. South Street between South Main Street and River Road.
ii. Vinburn Road between South Main Street and U.S. 51.
iii. River Road between West North Street and Cuba Valley Road.
2. Snowmobiles may be operated in the Village on the marked snowmobile
route following County Highway V (“North Street”) between U.S. 51 and River
Road. Snowmobiles may be used on said route for the purpose of residential
access and any other lawful purpose.
3. Snowmobiles may be operated in public parks and on other municipal
property where their use is approved of by the Director of Public Services
solely for the purpose of creating and maintaining ski and other trails.
4. Snowmobiles may be operated for law enforcement and emergency
purposes, as permitted under §350.02, Wis. Stats., by public utilities, as
3-18
permitted under §350.045, Wis. Stats., and for snowmobile events authorized
in accordance with §350.04, Wis. Stats.
(c) Authority to Open and Close Snowmobile Routes and Prohibit Residential
Access. The Chief of Police or Director of Public Services may declare any snowmobile
route, or part thereof, in the Village closed at any time, and may prohibit the use of
snowmobiles for the purpose of residential access in the Village, or part of the Village, at
any time. All snowmobile routes in the Village are closed, and the use of snowmobiles for
the purpose of residential access in the Village is prohibited, when any Dane County
snowmobile trail or route located within one mile of the Village is closed, except that the
Chief of Police or Director of Public Services may subsequently reopen any snowmobile
route or street for the purpose of residential access irrespective of a County trail or route
being closed.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(d) Signs and Markers. The Director of Public Services, or his or her designee,
shall procure, erect, maintain and remove appropriate snowmobile signs and markers as
approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under §350.13, Wis. Stats.
No person shall fail to obey any sign or marker erected in accordance with this section.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(e) Speed Restricted. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the Village at a
speed in excess of 10 miles per hour.
(f) Equipment. No person may operate within the Village a snowmobile without a
muffler in good working order and without displaying a lighted headlamp and tail lamps on
the snowmobile.
(g) Unattended Snowmobiles. No person shall leave or allow a snowmobile owned
or operated by such person to remain unattended on any highway or public property while
the motor is running or with the starting key left in the ignition.
(h) Parking Prohibitions. No snowmobile may be parked on any street or
snowmobile route.
(i) Operation on Sidewalks Prohibited. No person shall operate a snowmobile upon
any sidewalk, pedestrian way or upon the area between a sidewalk and curb of any street,
except for the purpose of crossing by the most direct route to obtain access to an area in
which the snowmobile may be lawfully operated.
(j) Permitting Operation by Improper Persons Prohibited. No owner or person having
charge or control of a snowmobile shall authorize or permit any person to operate such
snowmobile who is not permitted under state law to operate such snowmobile, or who is
under the influence of an intoxicant or a dangerous or narcotic drug.
(k) Written Consent of Owner Required. The consent required under §350.10(f), (k),
and (m), Wis. Stats., and in para. (a) above shall be written consent dated and limited to the
year in which the consent is given. If the property is owned or leased by more than one
person, the consent of each must be obtained.
[Cr. 11-01, Eff. 2-3-11; Am. 11-18, Eff. 7-1-11]
3-19
3.115 NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES.
(1) DEFINITION. As used in this section, “Neighborhood Electric Vehicle”
means a four-wheeled motor vehicle that is propelled by electric power and conforms to the
definition and requirements for low-speed vehicles as adopted in the federal motor vehicle
safety standards for low-speed vehicles under 49 C.F.R. §571.3 (b) and 49 C.F.R.
§571.500. A neighborhood electric vehicle shall be capable of attaining a speed of not less
than 20 miles per hour, and not more than 35 miles per hour on a level paved surface.
"Neighborhood electric vehicle" does not include a golf cart.
(2) USE PERMITTED ON VILLAGE STREETS. Neighborhood electric vehicles
meeting the requirements of sub. (3) may be operated on any Village street having a posted
speed limit of not more than 35 miles per hour by any person holding a valid Wisconsin
operator’s license or a valid license to drive motor vehicles on public highways issued by
another state.
(3) MINIMUM EQUIPMENT STANDARDS. Any neighborhood electric vehicles
operated on public streets within the Village shall be equipped with all of the following:
(a) Headlamps;
(b) Turn signals;
(c) Stop lamps;
(d) Reflex reflectors on both sides and one to the rear;
(e) A driver’s side mirror and either an interior rearview or passenger’s side
mirror;
(f) A vehicle identification number (VIN) that complies with federal law (49 CFR
565);
(g) A parking brake;
(h) A windshield (safety glass) that conforms to 49 CFR 571.205;
(i) Safety belts for each designated seating position that conforms to 49 CFR
571.209 and Federal Motor Safety Standard No.209.
(4) TRAFFIC LAWS APPLICABLE. Neighborhood electric vehicles shall be
subject to all state laws and Village ordinances relating to licensing, operation, parking,
storage, sale, accident reporting, and registration to the same extent as other motor
vehicles.
[Section Cr. 08-31, Eff. 9-19-08]
3-20
3.12 PENALTIES.
(1) FORFEITURE PENALTY. The penalty for violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be a forfeiture as hereinafter provided together with the costs of prosecution
and the penalty assessment imposed by §757.05, Wis. Stats., where applicable. Payment
of the judgment may be suspended by the sentencing judge for nor more than 60 days. Any
person who shall fail to pay the amount of the forfeiture, costs of prosecution and penalty
imposed for violation of any provision of this chapter may, upon order of the court entering
judgment therefor and having jurisdiction of the case, be imprisoned until such forfeiture,
costs and assessment are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
(2) OTHER SANCTIONS. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the
sentencing court to exercise additional authorities granted by the Wisconsin Statutes to
suspend or revoke the operating privileges and registration of the defendant or to order the
defendant to submit to assessment and rehabilitation or attend traffic safety school in
addition to payment of a monetary penalty or in lieu of imprisonment.
(3) FORFEITURES FOR UNIFORM TRAFFIC OFFENSES. Forfeitures for
violations of any traffic regulation set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference in
sec. 3.01 of this chapter shall conform to the forfeiture or penalty permitted to be imposed
for violations of the comparable state statute, including any variations or increases for
subsequent offenses; provided, however, that this subsection shall not permit prosecution
under this chapter of any offense for which an imprisonment penalty may be imposed upon
the defendant.
(4) FORFEITURES FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS.
[Am. 15-12, Eff. 03-13-15]
(a) Forfeitures for Uniform Statewide Parking, Stopping and Standing Offenses.
Minimum and maximum forfeitures for violation of the offenses described in §§346.51 to
346.55, Wis. Stats., adopted by reference in sec. 3.01 of this chapter, shall be:
[Am. 15-12, Eff. 03-13-15]
Section Offense Minimum Maximum
§346.51(1) Improper parking
on/off roadway $20.00 $200.00
§346.52(1) Stopping/standing in
prohibited areas $10.00 $40.00
2nd conviction within
one year $20.00 $100.00
§346.52(2) Stopping/standing
on highway by
grade school $5.00 $40.00
2nd conviction
within one year $10.00 $100.00
§346.53 Parking/standing
where prohibited $5.00 $40.00
3-21
2nd conviction
within one year $10.00 $100.00
§346.54 Improper parking/
standing of
vehicle $10.00 $40.00
2nd conviction
within one year $20.00 $100.00
§346.55(1) Parking on left
side of highway $10.00 $100.00
§346.55(3) Parking on posted
private property $10.00 $100.00
2nd conviction
within one year $10.00 $100.00
(b) Penalty for Violating Winter Parking Restrictions. The penalty for violations of
§3.06(8) shall be a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $50.00, plus applicable
costs and surcharges.
[Am. 15-12, Eff. 03-13-15]
(c) Penalty for Violating Disabled Parking Restrictions. Minimum and maximum
forfeitures for violation of the offenses described in §346.505 Wis. Stats, adopted by
reference in sec. 3.01 of this chapter, shall be the same as set forth in §346.56 (4) Wis.
Stats.
[Cr. 11-35, Eff. 12-30-11; Am. 15-12, Eff. 03-13-15]
(d) Penalty for Other Parking Violations. The penalty for all other parking violations
not included under paragraphs (a) through (c) above shall be a forfeiture of not less than
$5.00 nor more than $20.00.
[Cr. 12-02, Eff. 1-27-12; Am. 15-12, Eff. 03-13-15]
(5) FORFEITURES FOR OTHER VIOLATIONS OF THIS CHAPTER.
[Section Am. 2010-46, Eff. 12-19-10; Am. 12-02, Eff. 1-27-12; Am. 15-12, Eff. 03-13-15]
(a) Violations of State Snowmobile Laws. The forfeiture amounts for violations of
§3.11 of this chapter shall be those set forth in Chapter 350, Wis. Stats.
[Cr. 15-12, Eff. 03-13-15]
(b) Violation of Prohibited Signs Ordinance. The forfeiture amount for violation of
§3.02(3) of this chapter shall be not less than $10 nor more than $20 plus court costs and
surcharges.
[Cr. 15-12, Eff. 03-13-15]
(c) Other Violations of this Chapter. Any person who shall violate any provision
of this chapter for which a penalty is not otherwise specifically provided shall be subject to a
forfeiture amount of not less than $5 nor more than $100 plus court costs and surcharges.
[Cr. 15-12, Eff. 03-13-15]
3-22
3.13 ENFORCEMENT. This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes and this section.
(1) APPLICABLE COURT PROCEDURES. Except as otherwise specifically
provided by the laws of the State of Wisconsin or the provisions of this chapter, the traffic
regulations in this chapter shall be enforced in the Municipal Court of the Village of DeForest
in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 800 and §345.20(2)(b), Wis. Stats.
(2) CITATIONS.
(a) Uniform Citation and Complaint. The Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Citation and
Complaint described and defined in the Wisconsin Statutes shall be used for enforcement of
all provisions of this chapter except those provisions which describe or define non-moving
traffic violations and violations of §§346.71 through 346.73, Wis. Stats. Violations of
§§346.71 through 346.73, Wis. Stats., shall be reported to the District Attorney and the
Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Citation shall not be used in such cases except upon written
request of the District Attorney.
(b) Parking Citations. In consultation with the Village of DeForest Police
Department, the Village Attorney shall recommend a citation for use in enforcing the nonmoving
traffic offenses in this chapter. The form of the citation must be approved by the
Village Board. When approved by the Village Board, such citations may be used for
enforcement of non-moving traffic regulations created or adopted by this Code, including
violations of non-moving traffic regulations defined and described in Chs. 340 through 349,
Wis. Stats., adopted by reference in sec. 3.01 of this chapter. The citation for non-moving
traffic violations shall contain a notice that the person cited may discharge the penalty for
violation of a non-moving traffic regulation by direct payment thereof, as specified in sub.
(3)(b) below, and shall contain notice that the citation may be contested and that any person
contesting the citation must contact the Clerk of Courts to arrange a court date. Non-moving
traffic citations may be issued by law enforcement officers or by civilian employees of the
Police Department. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the use of the Wisconsin
Uniform Traffic Citation or to the approved citation if otherwise applicable.
[Am. 00-07, Eff. 3-20-00]
(c) Issuance of Citations. Citations for violations of this chapter to commence an
action in the municipal court may be issued by any law enforcement officer employed by the
Village, or by any other law enforcement officer while providing law enforcement assistance
pursuant to §66.0313, Wis. Stats. or under an intergovernmental agreement.
[Cr.13-07, Eff. 4-3-13]
(3) DEPOSITS AND STIPULATIONS.
(a) Uniform Traffic Offenses.
1. Who May Make. Persons arrested or cited for violation of moving traffic
offenses created by this chapter shall be permitted to make deposits and
stipulations of no contest or released by the arresting officer in accordance
with the applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes.
2. Delivery or Mailing of Deposit and Stipulation. The deposit and stipulation
shall be delivered personally by the person cited or mailed to Police
Department Headquarters.
3-23
3. Receipt Returned. The official or person receiving the deposit shall furnish
and deliver or mail an original receipt for such deposit to the alleged violator
and shall deliver the deposit and stipulation and a copy of the receipt within
3 days to the Clerk of Court.
(b) Non-Moving Traffic Offenses.
1. Direct Payment of Penalty Permitted. Persons cited for violation of nonmoving
traffic offenses described and referenced in this chapter may
discharge the penalty indicated on the citation, and avoid prosecution, by
forwarding within 7 days of the issuance of the citation to the DeForest
Police Department the amount specified on the citation for the violation. If
not so discharged within 7 days, the penalty will double and will only be
discharged by payment to the DeForest Police Department of double the
amount shown on the citation.
[Am. 00-07, Eff. 3-20-00]
2. Court Prosecution. If the alleged violator does not deliver or mail a deposit
as provided in subpar. 1. above within 10 days of the date of the citation, the
Chief of Police shall forward a copy of the citation to the Village Attorney for
prosecution pursuant to law.
3. Deposits Returned to Village Administrator. Police personnel receiving
deposits for non-moving traffic violations under this subsection shall pay
over such deposits to the Chief of Police. By the end of the next work day
the Chief of Police shall pay over such deposits to the Village Administrator.
Such payment shall be accompanied by an itemized statement for each
deposit.
3.14 REFERENCES TO WISCONSIN STATUTES.
(1) STATUTES SPECIFICALLY INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE. Whenever
this chapter incorporates by reference specific sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, such
references shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes of 1999-2000 as from time to time amended,
repealed or modified by the Wisconsin Legislature.
(2) GENERAL REFERENCES. General references in this chapter to Wisconsin
statutory sections or chapters describing or defining procedures or authority for enactment
or enforcement of local traffic regulations shall be deemed to refer to the most recent
enactments of the Wisconsin Legislature describing or defining such procedures or
authorities.
4-1
CHAPTER 4
POLICE DEPARTMENT
4.01 Police Department .................................................................................................. 4-1
4.02 Chief of Police ........................................................................................................ 4-1
4.03 Police Powers ......................................................................................................... 4-2
4.04 Who May Arrest ...................................................................................................... 4-2
4.05 Special Policemen .................................................................................................. 4-2
4.06 Search and Seizure ................................................................................................ 4-2
4.07 Police to Inspect Taverns ...................................................................................... 4-2
4.08 Fires and Assemblages ......................................................................................... 4-2
4.09 Arrests, Persons Called to Assist ......................................................................... 4-3
4.10 Interfering With or Resisting Police Officer .......................................................... 4-3
4.11 Police Not to Give Bail ........................................................................................... 4-3
4.12 Penalty .................................................................................................................... 4-3
4.01 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
(1) COMPOSITION. The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and
such number of subordinates as the Village Board shall from time to time deem necessary.
(2) REGULATIONS. Members of the Department shall be governed by the rules,
regulations and ordinances adopted by the Village Board and the Wisconsin Statutes.
4.02 CHIEF OF POLICE.
(1) APPOINTMENT. See Sec 1.02(2) of this Code.
(2) POWERS AND DUTIES.
(a) Supervision. The Chief of Police shall have command of the Police force. He
shall see that all laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, resolutions and orders of every kind
applicable within the Village set forth by the Wisconsin Statutes and the Village Board are
enforced.
(b) Arrest. The Chief of Police shall cause to be arrested all persons who shall be
found violating any ordinances or regulations of the Village and all persons chargeable with
offenses punishable by the laws of the State and bring such persons before the proper
tribunal.
(c) Police Record. The Chief of Police shall keep an accurate and complete record
of all complaints, arrests, traffic violations, traffic accidents, convictions and the disposition
of each case handled by the Department. The Chief shall also keep a record of the
accomplishments and performance of each police officer.
(d) Monthly Report. The Chief of Police shall, following the end of each month,
submit to the Village Board a written report on all activities and transactions of the
Department during the preceding month.
4-2
(e) To Attend Village Board Meetings. The Chief of Police shall attend meetings of
the Village Board upon request of the Village President.
(f) Deposit of Fees. All license fee deposits and traffic violation bonds collected by
the Department shall be deposited with the Village Administrator during the next working
day.
(g) Attendance at Board of Police Commissioner Meetings. The Chief of Police shall
attend meetings of the DeForest Board of Police Commissioners upon request of that board.
[Am. 00-56, Eff. 11-6-00]
4.03 POLICE POWERS. All police officers shall have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are prescribed by State and federal law, all ordinances of the Village
and orders, rules and regulations lawfully prescribed by the Village President or the Village
Board. The Chief and each police officer shall possess the powers, enjoy the privileges,
and be subject to the liabilities conferred and imposed by law upon constables, and be taken
as included in all writs and papers addressed to constables, shall arrest with or without
process and with reasonable diligence take before the proper court every person in the
Village engaged in any disturbance of the peace or violating any law of the State or
ordinance of the Village. They shall collect the same fees allowed to constables for similar
services. It shall be their duty to familiarize themselves with provisions of the ordinances
and all rules and regulations relating to the police and govern themselves accordingly.
4.04 WHO MAY ARREST. The Village President, the Village Trustees, the Chief
of Police and members of the Police Department, with or without process or complaint, may
arrest, retain and confine in such place as may be provided by the Village Board until a trial
can be had before a proper court, any and all persons violating the ordinances or
regulations of the Village, and any persons who shall be detected in the act of offending
against any of the provisions of the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
4.05 SPECIAL POLICEMEN. Whenever any emergency may warrant, the Chief,
with the approval of the Village President or the Village Board, may appoint as many
additional police officers as the Village President or the Board shall authorize to properly
police the Village and enforce the ordinances of the Village and the laws of the state. Such
police officers shall be known as special police officers and shall continue in the employ of
the Village only during the existence of the emergency or until discharged by the Village
President or the Village Board.
4.06 SEARCH AND SEIZURE. The police officers of the Village may search and
seize with respect to violation of the Village ordinances under the same restrictions and
rules governing search and seizure with respect to offenses against state statutes.
4.07 POLICE TO INSPECT TAVERNS. The Chief of Police shall see that each
place in the Village licensed to deal in fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor is
periodically visited and inspected by a police officer, and that a record of all violations,
complaints or unfavorable conditions is made at the police station.
4.08 FIRES AND ASSEMBLAGES. The Chief of Police or any other officer
directed by him shall attend all fires and tumultuous assemblages to direct traffic, to save
and protect property and to disperse mobs an arrest such persons as he may find disturbing
the peace or aiding or abetting others in so doing.
4-3
4.09 ARRESTS, PERSONS CALLED TO ASSIST. All persons in the Village,
when called upon by any police officer, shall promptly aid and assist such officer in the
execution of his duties. Failure or neglect to give such assistance shall be and constitute a
violation of this section.
4.10 INTERFERING WITH OR RESISTING POLICE OFFICER. Any person in the
Village who shall willfully resist or in any way interfere with any police officer or member of
the Police Department in the discharge of his duty or shall hinder or prevent him from
discharging his duty as such officer or member, or shall offer or endeavor so to do, and
whoever shall, in any manner, assist any person in custody, shall be subject to the penalty
provided in sec. 4.12 of this chapter.
4.11 POLICE NOT TO GIVE BAIL. The Chief of Police, or other police officer,
shall in no case give bail for any person under arrest.
4.12 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any
order, rule or regulation made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in sec.
20.04 of this Code.
5-1
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION CODE
[Repealed & Recr. 14-001, Eff. 1-17-14]
SUBCHAPTER 1: FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES ............................................................... 5-2
5.01 FIRE DISTRICT. .................................................................................................... 5-2
5.02 DEFOREST AREA FIRE PROTECTION BOARD. ................................................ 5-2
5.03 PERSONNEL AND APPOINTMENTS................................................................... 5-2
5.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF. ............................................................ 5-2
5.05 DEPARTMENT BUDGET. ..................................................................................... 5-3
5.06 POLICE POWER OF DEPARTMENT. .................................................................. 5-3
5.07 FIRE INSPECTORS. ............................................................................................. 5-4
5.08 FIRE INSPECTION FEES ..................................................................................... 5-5
5.09 FEES RELATING TO FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS. ........................................ 5-5
5.10 DUTY OF PUBLIC TO COOPERATE WITH DEPARTMENT. ............................... 5-6
5.11 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO VOLUNTEERS. ....................................................... 5-6
SUBCHAPTER II: FIRE PREVENTION CODE. ..................................................................... 5-6
5.20 PURPOSE AND INTENT....................................................................................... 5-6
5.21 ADOPTION OF WISCONSIN ADMINISTRATIVE CODES AND DEFINITIONS. ... 5-7
5.22 APPLICABILITY. .................................................................................................. 5-7
5.23 OPEN BURNING. .................................................................................................. 5-8
5.24 BURNING OF PRAIRIE AREAS. .......................................................................... 5-9
5.25 POSSESSION OF NOVELTY IGNITION DEVICES BY MINOR. ......................... 5-10
5.26 SALE, STORAGE AND DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS RESTRICTED. ............ 5-10
5.27 COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS PROHIBITED. ..................................................... 5-13
5.28 GUNPOWDER. ................................................................................................... 5-14
5.29 DYNAMITE. ......................................................................................................... 5-14
5.30 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES. ............................................................................... 5-14
5.40 ADDITIONS TO, CHANGE OF USE OR REMODELED BUILDINGS. ................ 5-14
5.41 PLAN SUBMITTALS. .......................................................................................... 5-15
5.42 PERMIT REQUIRED. .......................................................................................... 5-15
5.43 INSPECTION AND TESTING. ............................................................................. 5-16
5.44 NOTIFICATION OF USE OR OCCUPANCY CHANGE. ...................................... 5-16
5.45 REVOCATION OF PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES. .......................................... 5-17
5.46 SERVICE OF CORRECTION ORDERS. ............................................................. 5-18
5.47 VARIANCES. ...................................................................................................... 5-18
5.48 MISCELLANEOUS CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS. ........................................ 5-19
5.49 OPEN FLAMES IN RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED. ....................... 5-20
5.50 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES. ............................................................................... 5-21
5.51 KEY BOX REQUIREMENTS. ............................................................................. 5-21
5.52 FLAMMABLE, COMBUSTIBLE, AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. .................. 5-22
SUBCHAPTER III: ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS ......................................................... 5-23
5.60 PENALTIES. ....................................................................................................... 5-23
5.61 APPEALS ........................................................................................................5-23
5-2
SUBCHAPTER 1: FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES
5.01 FIRE DISTRICT. Fire protection and emergency medical response within the
Village shall be provided through the DeForest Area Fire & EMS District, in accordance with
the joint fire protection agreement in effect between the municipalities comprising the
District. As used in this Chapter, the terms “Fire Department” and “Department” refer to the
DeForest Windsor Fire & EMS Department created by the joint fire protection agreement to
provide services within the District.
5.02 DEFOREST AREA FIRE PROTECTION BOARD.
(1) MEMBERSHIP. The DeForest Area Fire Protection Board shall be composed of
one member of the governing bodies of the Village of DeForest and of each of the towns
which are parties to a joint fire protection agreement with the Village, as set forth in the
terms of the agreement.
(2) MEETINGS. The Fire Protection Board shall meet periodically as may be
required to conduct its business and in accordance with the joint fire protection agreement.
(3) POWERS AND DUTIES. The Fire Protection Board shall have the powers and
duties set forth in the joint fire protection agreement.
5.03 PERSONNEL AND APPOINTMENTS.
(1) FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Fire Protection Board.
(2) DEPUTY CHIEF AND ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEFS. The Deputy Chief and
Assistant Fire Chiefs shall be appointed by the Fire Chief, subject to confirmation by the Fire
Protection Board.
(3) SUBORDINATES. Subordinates shall be appointed by the Fire Chief.
5.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.
(1) GENERAL SUPERVISION. The Fire Chief shall have the general supervision of
the Fire Department, which supervision shall be subject to this chapter, and shall be
responsible for the safety of the members of the Department.
(2) DISCIPLINARY ACTION. The Fire Chief shall have the power to suspend,
demote, expel or otherwise discipline members of the Department, subject to appeal to the
Fire Protection Board.
(3) COMMAND OF FIRE FIGHTING OPERATIONS. The Chief or a designated
command officer shall be present at all fires, and have complete command and entire
responsibility of all firefighting operations, plan the control of the same, direct the action of
the Department when it arrives at a fire, observe that the Department does its duty, grant
leaves of absence at a fire when deemed proper, and see that the fire apparatus is kept in
proper condition at all times.
(4) REPORTS TO THE FIRE PROTECTION BOARD. The Chief shall submit a
written report to the DeForest Area Fire Protection Board not later than March 1 of each
5-3
year, and at such times as the Chief deems desirable, relating to the conditions of various
pieces of apparatus and appurtenances, budget recommendations for the ensuing year, the
number of hydrants and the condition of the same, the number of fires occurring since the
previous report and the date of the same and loss occasioned thereby, the total number of
active members in the Department, and resignations and terminations from the Department.
The Chief shall also report upon the drill and training program of the Department, together
with other pertinent information, including recommendations for such improvements as he or
she deems proper and necessary for the operation of the Department.
(5) ENFORCEMENT OF FIRE PREVENTION ORDINANCES. The Fire Chief shall
assure the enforcement of all fire prevention ordinances of the Village and the state laws
and regulations pertaining to fire prevention and shall keep citizens informed on fire
prevention methods and on the activities of the Department.
(6) FIRE RECORD. The Fire Chief shall keep a record of every fire and EMS call to
which the Department has responded and shall enter in such record the location of the fire
or emergency, the time the alarm was received, the cause of the fire, where the fire started,
the cause of delay, if any, in responding, the amount of insurance carried on buildings and
contents, estimated fire loss, the time the fire was extinguished, the names of the personnel
responding and other pertinent information. Information concerning all calls for service shall
be entered into the Department’s records management system.
(7) CONTROL AND CARE OF APPARATUS. The Fire Chief shall have control of
all apparatus used by the Department and shall be responsible for its proper maintenance.
Emergency repairs may be authorized by the Fire Chief.
(8) APPARATUS INVENTORY. The Fire Chief shall keep an inventory of all
apparatus and equipment and an inventory of all hoses showing dates and results of tests
on each length, which shall be individually numbered. The inventory shall be maintained in
the Department’s records management system.
(9) DUTIES AS COMMANDING OFFICER. The Fire Chief shall perform such other
duties as are usually incumbent on the commanding officer of a Fire Department.
5.05 DEPARTMENT BUDGET. The Fire Chief shall file with the Fire Protection
Board by October 1 a detailed estimate of the appropriations needed for the conduct of the
Department during the ensuing fiscal year, along with anticipated revenues available to
offset Department expenses.
5.06 POLICE POWER OF DEPARTMENT.
(1) POLICE AUTHORITY AT FIRES. The Fire Chief and all officers in command at
any fire are vested with full and complete police authority. Any officer of the Department may
cause the arrest of any person interfering with the activities of the Department in responding
to a fire or other emergency, provided, however, that such arrest power shall not be
exercised unless a law enforcement officer with appropriate jurisdiction is unavailable to
make a timely arrest.
(2) CONTROL OF FIRES. The Fire Chief may prescribe certain limits in the vicinity
of any fire within which no persons excepting firefighters and police officers and those
admitted by order of any officer of the Department shall be permitted to enter. The Chief
5-4
may cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the
preservation of such property from fire or to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect the
adjoining property, and during the progress of any fire may order the removal or destruction
of any property necessary to prevent the further spread of the fire. The Chief may also
cause the removal of all wires or other facilities and the disconnection of all electric or other
services where the same impedes the work of the Department during the progress of a fire
or other emergency.
(3) ENTERING PREMISES. Any firefighter while acting under the direction of the
Fire Chief or other officer in command may enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the
vicinity of any building or other property when on fire for the purpose of extinguishing such
fire.
5.07 FIRE INSPECTORS.
(1) FIRE CHIEF TO BE FIRE INSPECTOR. The Fire Chief shall hold the office of
Fire Inspector with the power to appoint one or more Deputy Fire Inspectors, who shall
perform the same duties and have the same powers as the Fire Inspector. As used
elsewhere in this Chapter, the term “Fire Inspector” means the Fire Inspector and any
appointed Deputy Fire Inspector.
(2) INSPECTION DUTIES.
(a) The Fire Inspector shall conduct routine inspections at each public building and
place of employment at least as often as required by §101.14(2), Wis. Stats. or rules of the
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services. The Fire Inspector shall enforce
the provisions the Fire Prevention Code contained in Subchapter II of this Chapter.
(b) The Fire Inspector shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of fires
occurring within the Village to determine whether they are the result of intentional acts,
carelessness or design flaws. Such investigations may begin immediately upon the
occurrence of such a fire, and if it appears to the officer making such an investigation that
such fire is of suspicious origin and of a significant nature, the Fire Chief shall be notified of
the facts. The Fire Inspector shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue
the investigation of such matters and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the
collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case. The Fire Inspector shall file a
written report of damage associated with every fire in a timely manner. It shall contain a
statement of all facts relating to the cause and origin and circumstances of such fire and
other relevant information.
(c) The Village Attorney and any department head of the Village, upon the request of
the Fire Chief, shall assist in the investigation of any fire that, in the Chief’s opinion, is of
suspicious origin.
(3) RIGHT OF ENTRY.
(a) The Fire Inspector may, at all reasonable hours enter any place of employment
and/or public building, as those terms are defined under §101.01, Wis. Stats., subject to this
chapter for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation deemed necessary to
administer and enforce this chapter.
5-5
(b) The Fire Inspector shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all places of
employment and public buildings as often as may be necessary, but not less than once each
year, unless otherwise provided by law.
[Am. 19-004, Eff. 3-1-2019]
(c) Inspections and/or investigations shall be conducted to determine whether any
violations of the provisions of this chapter and/or the codes or standards adopted by
reference exist on the premises and to order corrections of the violations observed.
(d) The Fire Inspector, upon the complaint of any person or whenever he or she shall
deem necessary, shall inspect any place of employment and/or public building and premises
subject to this chapter.
(e) The interiors of dwelling units will not be inspected unless an inspection is
specifically requested by the owner or occupant, unless otherwise permitted by law.
(4) CLOSING AND VACATING BUILDINGS. The Fire Inspector may order
compliance with this chapter and all other lawful orders or laws relating to fire prevention
and fire protection in existing building and structures. Where the public is exposed to
immediate danger due to a violation of this chapter or an order issued under this chapter,
the Fire Inspector may order the immediate closing and vacating of any building subject to
the violation.
(5) WRITTEN RECORD OF INSPECTIONS. The Fire Inspector shall keep a written
record of each property inspected which shall conform to the requirements of the Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services.
[Am. 19-004, Eff. 3-1-2019]
(6) CORRECTION OF FIRE HAZARDS. When any inspection by the Fire Chief or
any Deputy Fire Inspector reveals a fire hazard, the Chief or the inspector may serve a
notice in writing upon the owner or occupant of the property ordering said person to remove
the fire hazard within a reasonable time period. If the fire hazard is not removed within the
time allowed, it shall be deemed a nuisance and the Fire Chief or the inspector may have
the same removed in an action by the Village against the owner or occupant of the property
and the cost thereof may also be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the
property.
5.08 FIRE INSPECTION FEES.
(1) FEES CHARGED FOR INSPECTION SERVICE. Fees shall be charged for
inspection services provided by the Fire Inspector. A fees schedule will be made by the
Village Board and revised from time to time at the discretion of the Village Board.
(2) [Repealed 19-004, Eff. 3-1-2019]
5.09 FEES RELATING TO FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS. The Village Board may
establish fees for permits, approvals, and other functions performed under this chapter, in
addition to inspection services. Such fees shall accompany each application for such
approval, permit, or other fee related code provision.
5-6
5.10 DUTY OF PUBLIC TO COOPERATE WITH DEPARTMENT.
(1) INTERFERENCE WITH DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL PROHIBITED. No
person may hinder, resist or obstruct any Department personnel in the discharge of their
duties. In addition, no person may interfere with fire fighting, as provided under § 941.12,
Wis. Stats., adopted under Village Ordinance §10.01.
(2) DUTIES OF BYSTANDERS. Every person who shall be present at a fire shall
be subject to the orders of the Fire Chief or officer in command and may be required to
render assistance in removing or guarding property. Such officer may cause the arrest of
any person refusing to obey said orders.
(3) DAMAGE TO EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED. No person shall willfully damage in
any manner any hose, hydrant or fire apparatus belonging to the Village and no vehicle or
railroad equipment shall be driven over any unprotected fire hose when laid down on any
street, private driveway, track or other place to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without the
consent of the officer in command.
(4) COOPERATION WITH FIRE INSPECTOR. No person shall deny any Fire
Inspector free access to any public building or place of employment, as those terms are
defined under §101.01, Wis. Stats., within the Village at any reasonable time for the purpose
of making fire inspections. No person shall hinder or obstruct the Fire Inspector in the
performance of any inspection or the performance of any other duty, or refuse to observe
any lawful direction given by the Inspector.
5.11 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO VOLUNTEERS. All volunteer firefighters, when
responding to fire calls with a private vehicle, shall comply with all traffic regulations.
SUBCHAPTER II: FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
5.20 PURPOSE AND INTENT. The purposes of this subchapter are to:
(1) Provide comprehensive regulations to improve public safety by attempting to
control, limit, restrict and/or eliminate fire hazards.
(2) Improve safety for employees, firefighters, and frequenters of places of
employment and public buildings.
(3) Regulate the installation, use and maintenance of equipment, and the use of
structures, occupancies and open areas with respect to fire protection hazards.
(4) Require the removal and/or reduction of fire hazards, establish
responsibilities and procedures for code enforcement, and set minimum standards for
compliance and achievement of these objectives.
(5) Protect property from the hazards of fire and explosion by establishing
minimum standards for the use, operation, maintenance and inspection of buildings,
structures and premises so they relate to such hazards.
5-7
5.21 ADOPTION OF WISCONSIN ADMINISTRATIVE CODES AND
DEFINITIONS.
(1) The most current versions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, stated
below, and as may be amended from time to time are hereby incorporated into this
subchapter:
(a) SPS 305 Licenses, certification and registration
(b) SPS 307 Explosives and fireworks
(c) SPS 310 Flammable, combustible and hazardous liquids
(d) SPS 314 Fire prevention
(e) SPS 316 Electrical
(f) SPS 318 Elevators, escalators and lift devices
(g) SPS 328 Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors
(h) SPS 340 Gas systems
(i) SPS 345 Mechanical refrigeration
(j) SPS 361-366 Commercial Building Code
(k) SPS 375-379 Buildings Constructed Prior to 1914
(2) In cases of conflict between any provision of this chapter and any regulation
contained in the Wisconsin Statutes or Administrative Code, the most restrictive provisions
shall apply.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, definitions of terms are
those provided in the NFPA 1 version currently adopted and modified under the Wis. Admin.
Code, §SPS 314, Fire Prevention. When used in this subchapter, NFPA refers to the
National Fire Protection Association, and the number following NFPA refers to a code
published by the association.
5.22 APPLICABILITY.
(1) The provisions of Part A of this subchapter shall apply to all individuals and
properties within the jurisdiction of the Village, except as otherwise provided. The provisions
of Part B of this subchapter apply only to public buildings and places of employment in the
Village, as those terms are defined under §101.01, Wis. Stats.
(2) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as applying to the
transportation of any article or thing shipped in conformity with the regulations prescribed
by the Interstate Commerce Commission, or as applying to the military forces of the United
States.
(3) Subject to §5.40 of this subchapter, the provisions of Part B shall apply
equally to new and existing conditions, except that conditions existing at the time of
enactment of this subchapter that are not in strict compliance with the terms of this
subchapter shall be permitted to continue only where the Fire Inspector determines that the
conditions do not pose a distinct hazard to life or adjoining property.
(4) The requirements of this subchapter apply equally to the property owner and
occupants of a building and property.
5-8
PART A – REGULATIONS GOVERNING ALL PROPERTIES
5.23 OPEN BURNING. No person shall kindle, or cause to be kindled, any fire in
or upon any street, alley, public way, park or any other outdoor public or private ground
within the Village, except as permitted by this section.
(1) BURNING OF GRASS, YARD WASTE AND TRASH RESTRICTED.
(a) Grass and Yard Waste Fires Regulated. No person shall kindle any grass or
yard waste fire within the Village without first securing a permit from the Fire Inspector who
shall issue such permit subject to any conditions for the protection of life, health and
property that he or she deems necessary or appropriate.
(b) Trash Burning Prohibited. No person may burn trash, garbage, tires,
petroleum products, or any other waste within the Village.
(2) PERMISSIBLE OUTDOOR BURNING.
(a) Barbecue Grills: Hibachis, gas-fired grills, charcoal grills and similar devices may
be used for cooking, provided that no such device operating with an open flame shall be
used or kindled on any balcony or under any overhanging portion of any building other than
a one- or two-family dwelling. Grilling on ground level is permissible on all private property
and in designated areas of Village parks, provided that the grill is at least 10 feet away from
any structure. The operator of any such device shall assure that smoke is controlled so as
not to unreasonably disturb others in the vicinity or cause dangers on public roadways.
Electrical ranges, grills or similar electrical apparatus listed by a nationally recognized
testing organization are exempt from the locational requirements of this paragraph.
(b) Recreational Fires. Fire pits, outdoor fireplaces and similar devices or structures
may be used outdoors for recreational purposes. Recreational fires shall be subject to the
following restrictions, unless otherwise approved by the Fire Inspector and operated under
conditions determined by the Fire Inspector to be necessary to provide an equivalent level of
fire prevention:
1. All fires shall be supervised at all times by an adult and have the proper
means available to extinguish the fire. No fire shall be left unattended at any
time.at any time.
2. Flammable or combustible liquids shall not be used to ignite the fire. This
subdivision shall not apply to products designed and sold specifically to assist
in the ignition of charcoal fires when used to ignite a fire permitted by this
section.
3. The operator of any such fire shall assure that smoke is controlled so as not
to unreasonably disturb others in the vicinity or cause dangers on public
roadways.
4. Portable fire pits, outdoor fireplace and similar devices may be used only if
listed by a nationally recognized testing organization or approved by the Fire
Inspector.
5-9
5. Fire pits, fireplaces and similar devices shall be used only on noncombustible
surfaces.
6. No fire shall be kindled or maintained under any balcony or overhanging
portion of a building or nearer than the following distances from any portion of
a building or other structure:
a. Portable fire pits: 10 feet.
b. Other fires: 25 feet.
7. Fuel burned shall be limited to dry natural firewood or commercially sold fire
logs, and shall not include lumber, pallets, scrap wood, tree trimmings,
leaves, yard wastes, paper, cardboard or other items.
8. The total fuel area shall not exceed 3 feet in diameter and 2 feet in height.
5.24 BURNING OF PRAIRIE AREAS.
(1) MAINTENANCE BURNING OF PRAIRIE AREAS. The Village Board shall, prior
to March 1 of each year, determine which prairie areas or parts thereof, within the Village
should be burned in accordance with accepted prairie habitat management practices and
authorize the Fire Chief to cause the burning of such prairie areas.
(2) PROCEDURES FOR BURNING.
(a) Notice. Upon receipt of the authorization as provided in sub. (1) of this section,
the Fire Chief shall specify the date or dates upon which each designated area shall be
burned and cause notice thereof to be published in a newspaper likely to give notice to
residents within the Village. Such notice shall include a statement that any such dates may
be postponed at the discretion of the fire chief without further notice.
(b) Determination of Schedule. The Fire Chief shall, to the extent practicable,
adhere to the schedule published pursuant to sub.(a), provided, however, that any schedule
so established shall be modified as necessary to maximize the safety of firefighters and the
public. In establishing a schedule and in making any modification thereto, the chief shall
consider the following:
1. The requirements of any applicable fire code and any other applicable
statute, regulation or ordinance;
2. All applicable firefighting standards and practices;
3. Weather and all other environmental conditions including, but not limited to,
wind speed and direction, moisture, temperature and any other condition
which may affect the amount of smoke generated, the dispersion thereof or
control of the fire;
4. The safety of firefighters and other personnel engaged in the burning
operation and of the citizens and their property;
5-10
5. The adequacy of available personnel, equipment and supplies, including the
supply of water;
6. Any other factor which may affect the health or safety of any person, the
efficiency of the burning operation, the environmental effects thereof or the
training benefits obtained by the Fire Department.
(c) Conduct of Burning Operations. All burning operations authorized in this section
shall be conducted under the direction and control of the Fire Chief. Each such operation
shall be directly supervised by the Chief or Assistant Chief. The Fire Department shall have
all of the powers specified in this chapter when conducting operations under this section.
(3) LIABILITY. Nothing in this section shall be construed to create or increase any
liability which might otherwise be imposed upon the Fire Chief, the Fire Department or any
of its officers or members, the Fire Board, the Village or any of its boards, committees,
officials or employees to any third party.
5.25 POSSESSION OF NOVELTY IGNITION DEVICES BY MINOR.
(1) POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED. No minor may possess any
novelty ignition device, unless under the direct supervision of, or with direct permission of, a
parent or legal guardian.
(2) DELIVERY PROHIBITED. No person may sell, give, deliver or make
accessible, any novelty ignition device to a minor without the permission of the minors
parent or legal guardian.
(3) CONFISCATION. Any novelty ignition device possessed by a minor in
violation of this section may be confiscated by any police officer, the Fire Chief, the Fire
Inspector or authorized designee of the Fire Chief. Once confiscated, these ignition devices
shall be processed as evidence in the case where they were used in the commission of a
crime, or rendered inoperable and disposed of properly.
5.26 SALE, STORAGE AND DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS RESTRICTED.
(1) State Law Adopted. §167.10, Wis. Stats., regulating the sale and use of
fireworks, exclusive of any penalty imposed thereby, is adopted by reference and made a
part of this section as though set forth in full. For purposes of this subsection, “fireworks”
shall mean those items defined as fireworks under §167.10(1), Wis. Stats. and, except as
used in sub. (3) shall also include the following:
(a) Caps containing gunpowder or another explosive mixture, other than those
manufactured and sold for use in firearms;
(b) Toy snakes;
(c) Sparklers;
(d) Any device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers, or to produce
audible or visual effects by ignition of an explosive mixture;
5-11
(e) Any device that is designed primarily to burn pyrotechnic smoke-producing
mixtures, at a controlled rate, and that produces audible or visible effects, or audible and
visible effects;
(f) A cylindrical fountain that consists of one or more tubes and that is classified
by the federal department of transportation as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49
CFR 173.50; and
(g) A cone fountain that is classified by the federal department of transportation
as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50.
(2) Fireworks Use or Display. No person shall use or display fireworks, except
as authorized by a fireworks display permit granted under this section.
(3) Sale and Possession of Fireworks. No person shall sell, or possess with the
intent to sell, fireworks, except as authorized by a fireworks sales permit issued under this
section. This paragraph shall not apply to persons transporting fireworks through the Village
to a city, town, village or county where the possession of the fireworks is authorized by
permit or ordinance if the fireworks remain in the Village for less than 12 hours. A permit for
the sale of fireworks authorizes such sales only by persons or organizations legally qualified
to sell products within the Village, including holders of direct sellers’ permits issued under
§9.05(4).
(4) Fireworks Permits. Permits for the display or sale of fireworks under pars. (2)
and (3) shall be issued as provided in this paragraph.
(a) Application. Applications for permits under this subsection shall be filed with
the Village Clerk, on a form provided by the Clerk, at least 45 days prior to the requested
date(s) of possession, sale, use or display. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee in an amount determined from time to time by the Village Board
by ordinance or resolution. The application shall contain the following information:
1. The applicant’s name, permanent residence address, telephone number,
driver’s license number and issuing state. A copy of the driver’s license shall
be attached to the application by the Clerk;
2. The name, address and telephone number of any business entity on whose
behalf the applicant is applying;
3. The address or other location description of the property where the permitted
activities will be conducted;
4. Specific identification of the products to be sold, stored or used in the
permitted activity;
5. A drawing or other adequate description of the methods and facilities to be
used to store and secure the fireworks before, during and after the
completion of the permitted activities, as applicable.
6. A statement whether the applicant or the business for which the application is
made has been charged with or convicted of a violation of a state or federal
5-12
law or municipal ordinance relating to the use, possession or sale of fireworks
or firearms, or of any criminal offense, within the previous five (5) years, and
the details of each such charge or conviction.
(b) Investigation of Applications. Upon receipt of each application, the Village
Clerk shall immediately refer it to the Chief of Police who shall promptly make an
investigation of the statements made in such application and report thereon to the Clerk.
The Clerk shall also forward a copy of the application to the Fire Chief, who shall review the
application and comment on any fire or other public safety concerns raised by the
application. Upon receipt of such reports, the Clerk shall promptly forward them to the
Village President or his or her designee, for a determination on the application.
(c) Decision on Applications. The Village President, or his or her designee, shall
review the application and the reports of the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief and shall
approve, deny or conditionally approve the requested permit within 45 days of the date of
application and notify the Clerk of such decision. No application shall be approved, and no
permit shall be issued, unless the President or designee determines all of the following:
1. The application is complete, and all information required by sub. (4)(a) has
been provided;
2. All information contained in the application appears to be accurate and is not
materially misleading or otherwise untrue.
3. The applicant and any entity on whose behalf the applicant has applied have
not been found guilty of violating any criminal law or ordinance involving the
improper handling, storage, sale, use or other activities involving fireworks,
firearms or explosives, or which otherwise involved circumstances directly
related to the fitness of the applicant to conduct the activities authorized by
the permit, within the previous five (5) years;
4. No charges are currently pending against the applicant or any entity on
whose behalf the applicant has applied, alleging a violation of a federal or
state law or regulation, or any municipal ordinance, regulating the handling,
storage, sale, use or other activities involving fireworks, firearms or
explosives, unless the President or designee has cause to believe that the
charges cannot be proven.
5. Based on the application and the reports, the President or designee is
satisfied that the activities authorized by the permit will be conducted at a
place and in a manner which adequately protects the public from significant
risk of harm to persons or property and from unreasonable annoyance.
(d) Conditions on Approval. The approving official may impose any conditions
deemed reasonably necessary to assure that the permitted activities conform to the
representations contained in the application and all applicable laws, and to otherwise protect
the public health, welfare and safety.
5-13
(e) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the decision to grant or deny an
application under this subsection may appeal to the Administrative Review Appeals Board
under Chapter 17, not later than 20 days following the date of the decision.
(f) Liability and Insurance. No permit under this subsection shall be issued until
the applicant has filed with the Village Clerk a certificate of liability insurance naming the
Village of DeForest as an additional insured, in the amount of $1,000,000 for bodily injury to
one person; $2,000,000 for injury to more than one person; and $1,000,000 for damage to
property, and has agreed in writing to indemnify and hold the Village of DeForest harmless
from any claims or liability, including attorney fees and other defense costs, which may arise
from the applicant’s possession, use, or display of fireworks.
(g) Display of Permit Cards. The Village Clerk shall issue a permit card to each
permittee whose application is approved under this subsection, containing sufficient
information to identify the permittee and specifying the activities allowed, and the dates
during which they are allowed, by the permit. A copy of the permit shall be forwarded by the
Clerk to the Fire Chief prior to the effective date of the permit. A permit card issued under
this paragraph shall be prominently displayed at the site of the permitted activities at all
times while the permit holder is engaging in the permitted activities.
(5) General Regulations.
1. A permit issued under this subsection is not transferable from person to
person or from one location to another.
2. No permit shall be issued under this subsection to any person under the age
of 18 years.
3. Smoking and the use of matches, lighters or other flame or spark producing
devices shall not be allowed in or within 25 feet of any fireworks storage area,
outdoor tent sales area or firework display areas requiring a permit under this
subsection, and “No Smoking” signs shall be posted accordingly.
4. At least one portable fire extinguisher approved by the Fire Chief shall be
located within 50 feet of all fireworks storage or display areas requiring a
permit under this subsection.
(6) Enforcement. Any law enforcement officer, the Fire Chief or any other fire
inspector may immediately suspend any permit issued under this subsection if he or she
finds a violation of the terms of the permit, or any state, federal or Village law, regulation or
ordinance governing the safe and lawful sale, storage, use or handling of fireworks. All
permittees shall comply with all lawful orders of such officials and shall immediately
discontinue all activities requiring a permit under this subsection when the required permit is
suspended. Decisions by such officers may be appealed as provided in par. (4)(e) of this
section.
5.27 COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS PROHIBITED. No person shall permit on
premises he controls any empty boxes, waste paper, excelsior, rags or other combustible
materials in such quantities or manner as to create a fire hazard.
5-14
5.28 GUNPOWDER. No person shall keep or store more than 5 pounds of
gunpowder at any place within the Village without the written permission of the Fire
Inspector. Any dealer, permitted to keep at a place of business in excess of 5 pounds of
gunpowder, shall not keep more than 50 pounds at any one time, and such gunpowder shall
be kept in a safely constructed box painted yellow with the word "gunpowder" printed or
painted thereon in black letters not less than 5 inches in height and equipped with handles
so that the same may be readily moved in case of fire, and such box shall be kept in such
part of the dealer's place of business as may be directed by the Fire Inspector.
5.29 DYNAMITE. No person shall keep or store within the Village any
nitroglycerine, dynamite, giant powder or other explosives more violent than gunpowder
without the written permission of the Fire Inspector or otherwise than in accordance with the
conditions prescribed in such permission as granted and in no case shall more than 25
pounds of any such explosive be stored or kept within 300 feet of any dwelling or other
occupied building. The Fire Inspector may direct the place and the manner of keeping the
same and the precautions to be observed in connection therewith.
5.30 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to
affect the responsibility of any persons owning, operating, or installing equipment, for injury
to persons or damage to property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Fire Chief, any
Fire Inspector, the Village, any person, firm, company or agent(s) for the Village be deemed
to have assumed any liability by reason of any inspection or re-inspection authorized herein
or any permit issued as herein provided or by reason of the disapproval or approval of any
equipment and/or system.
PART B – REGULATIONS GOVERNING PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PLACES OF
EMPLOYMENT.
5.40 ADDITIONS TO, CHANGE OF USE OR REMODELED BUILDINGS.
(1) If fifty (50) percent or more of the total floor area of a building is remodeled
and/or added, the entire building shall be brought into compliance with the construction
requirements of this subchapter.
(2) If twenty-five (25) but less than fifty (50) percent of the total floor area of a
building is remodeled and/or added, that part of the building which is remodeled and/or
added shall be brought into compliance with the construction requirements of this
subchapter.
(3) If less than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of a building is
remodeled and/or added, the construction requirements of this chapter need not be met
unless the building includes dwelling units. If the total floor area includes dwelling units, that
part of the building which is remodeled and/or added shall be brought into compliance with
this subchapter.
(4) Paragraphs (1) - (3) shall be applied to the cumulative area of additions and/or
remodeling occurring on or after the effective date of this ordinance.
(5) If the use of and/or contents of any existing building is changed in a manner that
increases the fire hazards presented as determined by the Fire Inspector, the building shall
be brought into compliance with this subchapter.
5-15
(6) Those portions, elements, systems or components of existing buildings and
structures to be altered or modified on or after the effective date of this subchapter shall, to
the extent the alteration, modification or the addition affects a building element or
component relating to subject matters regulated by this subchapter, be designed,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of this subchapter
in effect on later of the following:
(a) The date plans for the alteration or modification are conditionally approved by
the Fire Inspector.
(b) The date the local building permit is issued.
(c) The date the replacement is initiated, where paragraphs (a) and (b) do not
apply.
5.41 PLAN SUBMITTALS.
(1) No Fire Protection, Fire Alarm, Fire Control, and/or Fire Suppression System
and/or any portion thereof shall be installed, altered, added on to, or have any appliance
removed until plans therefore are submitted to and conditionally approved by the Fire
Inspector and a permit issued under §5.42 of this subchapter submitted to the Fire Inspector
for review and conditional approval.
(2) All plans for Fire Protection, Fire Alarm, Fire Control, and/or Fire Suppression
Systems and/or any portion thereof must meet or exceed the applicable NFPA and Fire
Inspector requirements.
(3) A minimum of three copies of each plan, specification, and required calculation
shall be submitted. Two copies of each may be retained by the Fire Inspector.
(4) An AutoCAD electronic file of the plans shall also be submitted to the Fire
Inspector with each submittal and upon the completion of each project with the as-built
conditions.
(5) A completed permit application must accompany all plan submittals.
(6) All plan reviews shall be for general code compliance only. Plan reviews do not
affect the responsibility and/or liability of any contractor, architect, engineer, designer or any
other responsible party for the system(s) reviewed. The Village, its agents and/or firm or
persons hired by the Village to review plans are not responsible for and do not accept any
responsibility and/or liability for the system(s) reviewed.
5.42 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(1) A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Inspector prior to the start of installation
and/or alteration of any portion of a Fire Protection, Fire Alarm, Fire Control, and/or Fire
Suppression System.
(2) The permit application shall be signed by the individual assuming complete
responsibility for the system(s) included in the plans.
5-16
(3) The permit application for all fire sprinkler and standpipe systems shall be signed
by an individual holding a valid Wisconsin Automatic Fire Sprinkler Contractors License, and
permits may be issued only to applicants so qualified.
(4) The applicable permit, inspection and/or plan review fees shall be submitted with
each permit application. Plans will not be reviewed until all fee(s) have been received by the
Fire Inspector.
(5) An operational permit issued by the Fire Inspector is required for the use of any
building or portion thereof as a high-piled combustible storage area exceeding five-hundred
(500) square feet.
(6) Any person who begins installation and/or alteration of any system regulated by
this section prior to obtaining the required permit will be charged three (3) times the
applicable permit fee.
(7) A permit shall be issued under this section by the Fire Inspector upon a review
and determination by the Fire Inspector that the submitted application and plan complies
with all applicable fire codes and the requirements of this Chapter.
5.43 INSPECTION AND TESTING.
(1) Every Fire Suppression System and Fire Alarm Systems required under this
chapter shall be inspected by the Fire Inspector prior to having any of its parts concealed in
any manner whatsoever. The Fire Inspector shall be provided forty-eight (48) hours’ notice
prior to any requested system inspection.
(2) The Fire Inspector shall witness all tests of Fire Control Systems, Fire Alarm
Initiating Devices, Notification Appliances, and any other required system requiring an
operational test. The Fire Inspector shall be given forty-eight (48) hours’ notice prior to any
system test.
5.44 NOTIFICATION OF USE OR OCCUPANCY CHANGE.
(1) Whenever there is a change in use or occupancy of a public building or place
of employment, other than a building used exclusively for residential purposes both before
and after the change, a new certificate of occupancy shall be required. The owner shall
submit notification of the changes in writing to the Building Inspector within five working days
after the change. The information shall consist of the following:
(a) Name and address of occupancy;
(b) Owner’s name, address and phone number(s);
(c) Agent’s name, address and phone number(s);
(d) A description of the nature of the change in use or occupancy; and,
(e) Other information as required by the Building Inspector.
5-17
(2) No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of any building or
structure, or any space within a building, structure, or space of a building or structure either
in a different division of the same occupancy group or in a different occupancy group, unless
the building or structure complies with the requirements of this Chapter and Chapters 14
and 15 of this Code for the new occupancy. This subsection shall not apply to temporary
use changes authorized under sub. (4) or changes approved in advance by the Fire
Inspector and Building Inspector which result in a new occupancy that will be less
hazardous, based on life and/or fire risk, than the existing use.
(3) An inspection by the Fire Inspector shall be required for any new or changed
use or occupancy, including temporary use changes. Upon an owner submitting notification
of a change in use or occupancy to the Building Inspector, the Building Inspector shall
promptly notify the Fire Inspector of the notification and the need for an inspection by the
Fire Inspector, who shall promptly perform such inspection. Upon the Fire Inspector
completing an inspection, and having determined that the new occupancy meets the
requirements of this Chapter, a new certificate of occupancy shall be issues by the Building
Inspector unless the Building Inspector determines that the building or structure is in
violation of Chapter 14 or Chapter 15 of this Code.
(4) TEMPORARY USE. The Fire Inspector and Building Inspector may permit a
building or portion of a building to be used temporarily in a manner that differs from the
approved use for the building or space, or may approve a temporary building to be used by
the public, subject to all of the following provisions:
(a) The Fire Inspector and Building Inspector shall determine the timeframe within
which the temporary use is permitted, based on the extent to which hazards are created by
the temporary use.
(b) The Fire Inspector shall enforce the maximum occupancy load as determined by
the Building Inspector.
(c) The temporary use meets all applicable building and zoning requirements within
Chapters 14 and 15 of this Code.
(5) FIRE SAFETY. The Fire Inspector may condition approval of a certificate of
occupancy and temporary use on the installation of fire protection and control devices, and
other life safety provisions that the Inspector shall determine reasonably necessary to
minimize the risk to the occupants from fire or explosion.
5.45 REVOCATION OF PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES.
(1) The Fire Inspector shall revoke any permit or certificate issued under this chapter
in any case where he or she finds that any of the conditions for the issuance have not been
met or maintained or where there has been false statement or misrepresentation of any
material fact in the application or plans on which the issuance was based.
(2) The Fire Inspector shall promptly notify the permit or certificate holder of the
revocation and, if so requested by the permit or certificate holder, the effective date of the
revocation shall be deferred pending a hearing before the Chief of the Fire Department. The
5-18
decision of the Chief for revocation, following the hearing, shall be final subject to review
under Chapter 17 of this Code.
5.46 SERVICE OF CORRECTION ORDERS.
(1) The service of correction orders shall be made upon the owner. Service may be
accomplished by personal delivery to the owner or by leaving the order with a person
apparently in charge of the premises. If an owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the
Village, service may be accomplished by mailing a copy of the order to the owner’s last
known post office address.
(2) Conditions that pose imminent threats to life or safety of the occupants shall
require immediate correction. All other violations shall be corrected within a specified time
period or by a specified date, as the Fire Inspector shall determine.
(3) If an owner of any property, after issuance and proper service of an order by the
Fire Inspector, fails to comply with the order, the Village may cause the work to be
completed and the cost of such work shall constitute a special charge against the property
upon which the work is done and shall be levied against such property pursuant to
§66.0627, Wis. Stats.
(4) No person shall refuse to permit, or shall prevent or interfere with, any entry into
or upon any building or premise by the Fire Inspector who is lawfully on the premises or
interfere with any such inspection. If consent to enter onto personal or real properties which
are not public buildings or places of employment, or to portions of public or places of
employment buildings which are not open to the public, has been denied, the Fire Inspector
shall seek a special inspection warrant under §66.0119, Wis. Stats.
5.47 VARIANCES.
(1) The Fire Inspector shall have the power to grant variances to any of the provisions
of this subchapter upon application in writing by the owner or occupant, or an authorized
agent, when there are practical difficulties preventing strict compliance with this subchapter,
provided that the spirit of this subchapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and
substantial justice done. The Fire Inspector shall enter the terms of such variance upon the
records of the Village Building Inspector, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the
applicant and the DeForest Windsor Fire Department.
(2) The Fire Inspector may require tests as proof that a requested variance will
comply with the intent of this subchapter. Such tests shall be made by an approved agency
at the expense of the person requesting approval of the variance.
(3) If technical expertise is unavailable within the Village because of new-technology,
processes, products, facilities, materials and uses attending the design, operation or use of
a building or premises subject to inspection by the Fire Inspector under this chapter, the Fire
Inspector may require the owner or the person in possession or control of the building or
premises to provide a technical opinion and report on any matter relevant to fire safety as
determined by the Fire Inspector. The opinion and report shall be prepared by a qualified
engineer, specialist, laboratory or fire safety organization, acceptable to the Fire Inspector,
and shall analyze the fire safety properties of the design, operation or use of the building or
premises and the facilities and appurtenances situated thereon, and prescribe the
5-19
necessary recommended changes. The Village may independently acquire technical
assistance from any consultant and may charge the cost thereof to the applicant for the
variance.
(4) Village approval of a variance does not obviate the need of an owner or occupant
to seek approval of the variance by the Department of Safety and Professional Services,
pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 314.01(4), Fire Prevention.
5.48 MISCELLANEOUS CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS.
(1) INSPECTIONS, TESTING AND RECORD KEEPING.
(a) The Fire Inspector shall inspect all fire alarm system installations. All
equipment must be inspected prior to any equipment being installed. The Inspector must be
notified at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to any fire alarm component being concealed.
(b) The Fire Inspector may witness all acceptance tests. The Inspector must be
notified within forty-eight (48) hours prior to any testing.
(c) Two copies of the completed fire alarm system record of completion required
by NFPA 72 must be provided to the Fire Inspector prior to final acceptance.
(d) Permanent records shall be provided in accordance with NFPA 72. This
includes a completed “Fire Alarm System Inspection and Testing” form.
(2) FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS ROADS, FIRE LANES, AND PUMPER PADS.
Unobstructed fire lanes that are accessible from a public road shall be provided for every
building or portion of a building in accordance with this subchapter.
(a) Fire lanes shall have an unobstructed width of twenty-four (24) feet edge of the
lane closest to the building at least 10 feet from the building.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any persons to park a motor vehicle on, or otherwise
obstruct any fire lane.
(c) Where any part of a multi-family building is two (2) or more stories in height, the
minimum unobstructed width of the fire lane parallel to one side of the building shall be
twenty (20) feet.
(d) For occupancies where a special hazard exists or where the size or configuration
of the building or the building contents limits normal fire apparatus access, the Fire Inspector
may require the installation of a fire pumper pad.
(e) Fire pumper pads shall be located outside of the building collapse zone in an
area acceptable to the Fire Inspector.
(3) FIRE HYDRANTS.
(a) INTENT: The intent of this section is to insure adequate water supply for
firefighting purposes to structures, buildings, and other premises. For the purpose of placing
hydrants, "normal access routes" are defined as pavement, sidewalks, streets, driveways
5-20
and paths leading to a building that are clear and maintained year-round. A normal access
route does not include grass, parking stalls, ditches, hills, shrubs, flower beds, fences, walls
or any other area not typically used for ingress or egress to a building.
(b) WHERE REQUIRED: Fire hydrants shall be provided as follows:
1. Buildings. Any building or structure, other than single and two family
dwellings and structures not intended for human habitation or the storage of
personal property, hereafter erected, shall have installed at the owner's
expense, approved fire hydrants. Hydrants shall be located so that no part of
the building is more than three hundred (300) feet from an approved hydrant
by normal access routes. One hydrant shall be located within one hundredfifty
(150) feet of each Fire Department sprinkler or standpipe connection in
addition to the required hydrant fulfilling the three hundred (300) foot
coverage rule. Required hydrants must be free standing and shall be installed
not less than forty (40) feet from the building exterior wall and not closer than
fifty (50) feet to another hydrant. Public hydrants across divided roads or
highways shall not be used to fulfill the hydrant requirements for the building
or premises. The Fire Inspector shall approve the actual location of all private
hydrants. A copy of the building plan including site plans shall be provided to
the Fire Inspector for Fire Department use, in addition to any copies or
building plans required by the Building Inspector.
2. Mobile home parks. Any new mobile home or trailer park, and any mobile
home or trailer park which expands by adding additional units or area to the
present court site, shall provide an approved fire hydrant within three hundred
(300) feet, as measured along normal access routes, of each building or unit
within the park.
(c) APPROVED FIRE HYDRANT. Every approved fire hydrant shall have two 2½”
connections with National Standard threads and one 5” Storz connection and an operating
nut size approved by the Fire Inspector. The connecting water line between the public water
main and the approved fire hydrant shall not be less than six inches. All fire hydrants shall
be installed in compliance with standards of the Village Water Utility and the NFPA. All fire
hydrants shall be installed and maintained in such a manner and location so as to be
accessible at all times to the Fire Department apparatus. All hydrants shall be installed,
tested, in service, and accessible to the Fire Department prior to any above ground
construction or combustibles being brought onto the site.
(d) HYDRANT FLOWS. Hydrant flows shall be as required under the NFPA and the
rules of the Village Water Utility. Hydrants shall be color coded to designate their flowage
rates, as set forth by the NFPA.
(e) REPLACEMENT OF EXISTING FIRE HYDRANTS. When any fire hydrant is
replaced in the Village the new fire hydrant shall be an approved fire hydrant complying with
the standards set forth in par. (c).
5.49 OPEN FLAMES IN RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED. No person
shall light a match or other flame-producing device in any retail mercantile establishment
except in areas approved for such purposes by the Fire Inspector. It shall be the duty of the
person in charge of such an establishment to enforce the regulations of this section. A
5-21
plainly printed notice of the provisions of this section shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in all retail mercantile establishments.
5.50 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES. For the purpose of this paragraph, the following
minimum standards shall apply to the storage, handling, and display of live Christmas trees
and foliage:
(1) Trees and foliage shall be stored not closer than ten feet from any gasoline
pump or other device for the storage or transfer of petroleum products.
(2) Aisles or clear spaces of not less than three feet shall be maintained in the
storage area at all times.
(3) A fire extinguisher with a "2A-10BC" rating or greater shall be provided by the
merchant for each seventy-five (75) feet of travel, display and/or storage areas.
(4) All storage and sales of live Christmas trees and foliage shall be held outside of
buildings.
(5) It shall be unlawful to operate any ignition device, or to smoke or carry lighted
smoking materials or open flames in areas where live Christmas trees or foliage are
displayed, sold, or stored. The person in charge of the Christmas tree sales shall post a "NO
SMOKING" sign in locations designed to give persons entering the area a notice of this
regulation.
5.51 KEY BOX REQUIREMENTS.
(1) The following structures shall be equipped with an access box at or near the main
entrance or such other location as required by the Fire Inspector:
(a) Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm system or
automatic fire suppression system, or which are secured in a way that restricts access
during an emergency.
(b) Multifamily residential structures that have restricted access through locked
doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units.
(c) Nursing homes, CBRFs and other health care facilities.
(d) All educational occupancies.
(e) Any other structure determined by the Fire Inspector to present unreasonable
difficulties in obtaining prompt access during an emergency.
(2) All newly constructed structures subject to this section shall have the access box
installed and operational prior to initial occupancy. All structures in existence on the effective
date of this section and which are subject to this section shall install an access box within a
reasonable time as determined by the Fire Inspector.
(3) The owner of a structure required to have an access box shall keep the following
inside the box:
5-22
(a) Keys to locked points of ingress and egress whether on the interior or exterior.
(b) Keys to all locked mechanical equipment and electrical and elevator control
rooms.
(c) All keys needed to open any alarm panels.
(d) Floor plans or maps as required by the Fire Inspector.
(e) Keys to other areas as determined necessary by the Fire Inspector to assure
sufficient access for firefighting purposes.
(4) All items required to be kept in the access box shall be the most currently used and
must be continually updated.
(5) The size and type of required access box shall be determined by the Fire Inspector.
(6) The Department shall be provided with a key for each access box, and a new key
shall be provided any time the lock for the access box is changed so as to require a different
key to open the box.
(7) Notwithstanding the provisions of pars. (1)-(6), any building or site that has twentyfour
hour, seven-days per week guard service and any occupancy that remains open for
business twenty-four hours per day, seven-days per week, is exempt from the access box
requirement unless otherwise ordered by the Fire Inspector.
5.52 FLAMMABLE, COMBUSTIBLE, AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
(1) The following items shall not be stored in any multi-family building except in
locations, and under conditions, approved by the Fire Inspector:
(a) Charcoal, unless stored in a metal container equipped with a metal cover.
(b) Oily rags or oily dust mops.
(c) Flammable liquids, other than small quantities of household cleaning products,
painting supplies and similar consumer items stored in their original containers and
maintained for use by individual residents.
(d) Bottles gases, including propane, acetylene, oxygen or other substances of a
similar combustible nature.
(e) Gasoline, diesel fuel and other motor fuels, whether stored in separate containers
or contained within motor driven equipment.
(f) Dangerous or hazardous amounts of flammable, combustible or explosive
material as determined by the Fire Inspector.
(g) Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings, or other
highly flammable materials as determined by the Fire Inspector.
5-23
(h) Dangerous accumulations of dust or waste materials in HVAC systems, dryer
ducts or other locations susceptible to ignition sources.
SUBCHAPTER III: ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS
5.60 PENALTIES.
(1) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter, or who fails to
comply with any order made hereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement
of specifications or plans submitted and conditionally approved hereunder, or any permit
issued hereunder, shall for each and every violation and noncompliance be subject to a
forfeiture as provided in §20.04.
(2) False Alarms. If the Fire Department responds to three or more false alarms to
any parcel of real property in any 12-month period, the owner of such property shall be liable
to the Village for the actual cost of equipment and personnel that was used to respond to the
alarm.
5.61 APPEALS.
(1) Except as it relates to firework permits under 5.26 of this Chapter, any person
aggrieved by a decision of the Fire Inspector or any other administrative officer in
interpreting or applying this Chapter may appeal the decision as provided in this section.
(2) Appeals shall be submitted in writing to the Fire Chief for a review of the initial
determination within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed from.
(3) The decision of the Fire Chief shall be final, subject to review under Chapter 17
of this Code.
6-1
CHAPTER 6
EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT
6.01 Policy and Purpose ................................................................................................ 6-1
6.02 Emergency Preparedness Commission ............................................................... 6-2
6.03 Emergency Preparedness Coordinator ................................................................ 6-2
6.04 Utilization of Existing Services and Facilities ...................................................... 6-3
6.05 Mutual Aid Agreements ......................................................................................... 6-3
6.06 Emergency Regulations ........................................................................................ 6-3
6.07 Local Emergencies ................................................................................................. 6-3
6.08 Obstruction of Emergency Operations ................................................................. 6-3
6.09 Succession of Officers ........................................................................................... 6-4
6.10 Penalty .................................................................................................................... 6-4
6.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
(1) Emergency preparedness shall mean the preparation for, and the caring out of,
all emergency functions, which the Village is capable of performing, during and after an
emergency.
(2) The Village recognizes that several types of hazards pose a threat, significant in
frequency and/or magnitude, to lives, property or environment. These include: tornadoes,
down bursts and other summertime severe storms; floods; ice storms; blizzards; drought;
earthquakes; fires; explosions; hazardous material releases to the air, ground or water
during transportation or at a fixed location, including radiological releases; accidental or
intentional nuclear detonations due to terrorist or military activity; aircraft crashes; other
major accidents; and civil disturbances.
(3) Consequences in major emergencies include: mass casualties; damage to and
destruction of homes, facilities; vehicles and other property; disruption of power, fuel,
communications, water and other vital services; damage to the infrastructure and
environment; looting and other disruption of law and order; disruption of government
functions and economic and financial efforts.
Additional effects on Village officials and departments include, complex operating
conditions; severe stress and fatigue; and intense scrutiny of the preparedness and
response efforts.
(4) The Village Board finds that the public safety, convenience and welfare require:
(a) The creation and maintenance of a Village Emergency Preparedness
Commission.
(b) Provisions for the exercise of necessary powers and to insure the coordination of
all Village and private resources during emergencies; and
(c) Provisions for the rendering of cooperation and mutual aid between this Village
and other political subdivisions of the State.
6-2
(5) It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the
Village that all emergency functions be coordinated to the maximum extent practicable with
existing services and facilities of this Village and with comparable functions of the federal,
state and county governments and other political subdivisions, and of various private
agencies to the end that most effective preparation and use may be made of manpower,
resources and facilities for dealing with any disaster that may occur.
6.02 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS COMMISSION.
(1) COMPOSITION: The Emergency Preparedness Commission of the Village shall
consist of the following members:
The Village President
A member of the Public Safety Committee
The Chief of Police
The Fire Chief
One citizen member who is a resident of the Village
The citizen member shall be appointed by the Village President and approved by the
Village Board and shall serve a two year term commencing on June 1 of each even
numbered year. The Public Safety Committee appointee shall be appointed annually by the
Village President at the time when committee appointments are made, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board. The appointee from the Public Safety Committee shall
serve as chair of the Commission and the Emergency Preparedness Coordinator shall serve
as Secretary of the Commission.
[Am. 13-19, Eff. 10-1-13]
(2) DUTIES OF THE EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS COMMISSION: The
Commission shall be an advisory and planning group and shall advise the Coordinator and
the Village Board on all matters pertaining to emergency preparedness and shall provide for
establishment of operating procedures which will ensure the purposes set forth herein. The
Commission shall meet once during the first quarter of every year at a time determined by
the Chairperson. Additional meetings shall be held when called by the Chair or upon the
request of any two commissioners.
[Am. 13-19, Eff. 10-1-13]
6.03 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS COORDINATOR.
(1) APPOINTMENT: The Emergency Preparedness Coordinator shall be the Chief
of Police.
(2) POWERS AND DUTIES: The Coordinator shall coordinate all activities involved
in emergency preparedness within the Village and shall maintain liaison and cooperation
with emergency preparedness agencies and other organizations of other political
subdivisions and of the state and federal governments, and shall participate in county and
state emergency preparedness activities upon request, and shall have such additional
authority, duties and responsibilities as authorized by this chapter and as may from time-totime
be required by the Village Board.
The Coordinator shall, under the direction and control of the Commission, direct the
preparation of a comprehensive general plan for the emergency preparedness of the
6-3
Village. When the Village Board has approved the plan and the same has been signed by
the Village President, it shall be the duty of all agencies of the Village to perform the duties
and functions assigned by the plan.
6.04 UTILIZATION OF EXISTING SERVICES AND FACILITIES. In developing
the comprehensive general plan, the Commission shall utilize the services, equipment,
supplies and facilities of the existing departments and agencies of the Village to the
maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all such departments and
agencies shall cooperate with and extend such services and facilities as are required by the
Commission.
6.05 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS. Any existing mutual aid agreement between
the Village and any political subdivision in Dane County will not be effected by this chapter.
6.06 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS. Whenever necessary to meet an
emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Village Board, the
Village President may by proclamation promulgate and enforce such orders, rules and
regulations relating to the conduct of persons and the use of properties as shall be
necessary to protect the public peace, health and safety, and preserve lives and property
and to ensure the cooperation necessary in emergency situations. Such proclamations shall
be posted in three (3) public places and may be rescinded by the Village Board by resolution
at any time.
6.07 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
(1) The Village Board may, by ordinance or resolution, declare a state of emergency
to exist within the Village whenever conditions arise by reason of war, conflagration, flood,
heavy snow storm, blizzard, catastrophe, disaster, riot, or civil commotion or acts of God,
and including conditions which, without limitation because of enumeration, impair
transportation or other vital facilities of the Village. Such ordinances or resolutions shall limit
the period of the emergency to the time during which the emergency conditions exist or are
likely to exist.
(2) Whenever, because of emergency conditions as described in sub. (1), the
Village Board is unable to properly meet, the Village President may exercise the powers of
the Village Board which, in his or her discretion, appear necessary and expedient to address
the emergency conditions. Any proclamation issued by the Village President under this
paragraph shall be subject to ratification, alteration, modification or repeal by the Village
Board as soon as it can meet, provided, however, that no subsequent action by the Board
shall affect the prior validity of the proclamation.
(3) Upon the declaration by the Governor, The Village Board or Village President of
a state of emergency, the Emergency Preparedness Coordinator or other official designated
by the Village Board shall issue all necessary proclamations as to the existence of such
state of emergency and shall issue such disaster warnings or alerts as shall be required in
the comprehensive plan. All Village agencies shall take action in accordance with the plan
after the declaration of an emergency or the issuance of official disaster warnings.
6.08 OBSTRUCTION OF EMERGENCY OPERATIONS. It shall be unlawful for
any person to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay the enforcement of any order, rule, regulation
or plan issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any order, rule
6-4
regulation or plan issued pursuant to the authority contained in this section.
6.09 SUCCESSION OF OFFICERS.
(1) DESIGNATION OF SUCCESSORS. The Village President, subject to the
confirmation by the Village Board, shall annually designate not less than three (3) individuals
who shall automatically succeed to the position of Village President and Emergency
Preparedness Coordinator in the event that such officers are unavailable, as defined in
§166.08 (2) (e), Wis. Stats. at the time an emergency is or could be declared pursuant to
sec. 6.07 of this ordinance or pursuant to state law. At the time of the making of such
appointments, the president shall specify the order in which the emergency interim
successors so named shall automatically succeed to the respective offices.
(2) POWERS OF SUCCESSORS. Any emergency interim successor who shall
assume office pursuant to sub. (1) shall possess all the powers and duties of the office to
which he or she has succeeded for such time as the emergency conditions exist or until the
officer or a preceding emergency interim officer shall again become available to exercise
the powers and discharge the duties of his or her office.
6.10 PENALTY. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
plus the cost or prosecution.
7-1
CHAPTER 7
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
7.01 Street and Sidewalk Grades ................................................................................ 7-1
7.02 Street and Sidewalk Excavations and Openings ................................................ 7-1
7.03 Obstructions and Encroachments ...................................................................... 7-4
7.04 Snow and Ice Removal ......................................................................................... 7-4
7.05 Sale or Display of Merchandise Prohibited ........................................................ 7-4
7.06 House Numbering System Established .............................................................. 7-5
7.07 Utility Extensions Required ................................................................................. 7-5
7.071 Underground Electric Distribution Systems ....................................................... 7-5
7.08 Special Improvements and Assessments .......................................................... 7-6
7.09 Construction Standards ....................................................................................... 7-8
7.10 Permits ................................................................................................................ 7-10
7.11 Moving Buildings................................................................................................ 7-10
7.12 Street Rights of Way .......................................................................................... 7-10
7.13 Penalty ................................................................................................................ 7-11
7.01 STREET AND SIDEWALK GRADES.
(1) ESTABLISHMENT. The grades of all new streets, alleys, and sidewalks shall be
approved by the Village Board during review of the engineering design for said streets,
alleys and sidewalks.
7.02 STREET AND SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS AND OPENINGS.
[Repl. & Recr. 09-25, Eff. 2-1-10]
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. No person, shall make, or cause to be made, any
excavation in or under any street, alley, or sidewalk or engage in other construction activities
on public lands or within the public right of way without first obtaining a permit from the
Building Inspector. The provisions of this section shall apply to those portions of private
driveways that are within the public right of way. This section shall not apply to employees or
contractors of governmental entities performing work in public rights-of-way over which such
governmental entity has jurisdiction.
(2) APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Such permit shall be issued only upon a written
application signed by the applicant, which shall include the following:
(a) a description and location of the work proposed to be performed with such
certainty that the same may at all times be readily located;
(b) a complete copy of the construction plans for the proposed work;
(c) the purpose for which said excavation is to be made;
(d) the date and time it is proposed to begin making the same; and
(e) the duration of time from making of the excavation to completion of all repair to
the area.
7-2
(3) FEE. The fee for such permit is $25.00 and shall accompany the application.
(4) GUARANTEE. (a) The application shall provide that, in consideration of
granting the permit to make such excavation, such applicant will leave the street, sidewalk,
or alley in as good condition as the same was in when the work was commenced, and will
keep the place where such excavation is made properly guarded at all times and lighted by
night so as to sufficiently warn travelers. Such application shall further provide that such
applicant will save the Village harmless from any damages, costs, and charges that may
accrue from the applicant's excavation or alteration of such street, sidewalk, or alley.
(b) The person to whom such permit is issued shall be responsible for all defects
occurring within one year from the completion of the work and shall be liable for all damages
resulting from such defects. The permittee hereunder shall repair all such defects during the
said one year period. Any cost of maintenance or repair incurred by the Village during the
one year period shall be promptly reimbursed by the permittee.
(c) Whenever the Village Administrator shall find that any such work has become
defective within one year of the date of completion, he or she shall give written notice
thereof to the contractor or to his surety stating the defect, the work to be done, the cost
therefor to the extent known and the period of time deemed by the Village Administrator to
be reasonably necessary to complete said work. After receipt of such notice, the contractor
or the surety must within the time specified, repair the defect or indemnify the Village for the
cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice.
(5) ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. Upon receipt of an application under this section, the
Building Inspector shall consult with the Village Forester with respect to the potential impact
of the proposed work on any tree within or adjacent to the location of the work. If the
Building inspector determines that all requirements of this Code will be met, and that the
construction will be completed without substantial risk to the public health, safety or welfare,
he or she may issue the permit.
(6) TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PERMIT. Any permit issued under this section
shall be conditioned on compliance with all general ordinances of the Village and any
specific conditions determined necessary by the Building Inspector to protect the public
health, safety and welfare. Such conditions may include any conditions or special
requirements recommended by the Village Forester to preserve or protect any public trees
or trees on private property that may be affected by the work. All permits issued under this
section shall state a termination date established by the Building Inspector which shall be
not later than twelve (12) months from the date of issuance. The term of any permit may be
extended prior to its expiration by written approval of the Building Inspector.
(7) GENERAL PERMIT FOR REPAIR BY UTILITY PROVIDERS. (a) General
Provisions. Any firm or corporation which owns or operates facilities for the distribution of
natural gas, electricity or telecommunications service may apply for a general permit valid
for up to one year. The purpose of such permit shall be to expedite the process of routine
repair or replacement of facilities by eliminating the requirement for a separate written permit
for each repair occurrence. Such permit shall be valid for the term expressed in the permit.
General permits issued under this subsection shall not authorize new construction of any
facilities without a separate application and permit for such work.
7-3
(b) Conditions of General Permits. All general permits issued under this subsection
shall be conditioned upon:
1. Notification. The permittee shall notify the Director of Public Services prior to
commencing a necessary repair, and shall provide the location, date and time
of the work. Notification may be accomplished through the Digger’s Hotline
process. When a Digger’s Hotline request is received, the village utility staff
shall provide a copy of the notification to the Director of Public Services and
the Village Forester. Emergency repairs necessary to protect life and
property, and other necessary repairs during non-business hours shall be
exempt from pre-notification but shall be reported on the next business day.
2. All work performed pursuant to a general permit issued under this subsection
shall be subject to the standards and specifications set forth in §16.24 and
any special conditions specified in the permit.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(8) DISPLAY OF PERMIT. Any person receiving a permit under this section shall
exhibit said permit to any police or other officer of the Village upon demand. General
permits issued under sub. (8) need not be displayed at the site of the work, but shall be
provided as soon as practicable following a request.
(9) EMERGENCIES. In case of emergency, the Village Administrator, the Chief of
Police, the Director of Public Services, or the designated Public Works Department
emergency contact employee may waive the requirements of this section.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(10) EXCAVATIONS IN UNPAVED STREETS. When excavations are made in
macadam streets or unpaved streets and alleys, they shall be made and filled in the
following manner: The excavation shall be filled with gravel, sand, or crushed stone, firmly
tamped or flushed with water, and all earth, stone or other material excavated shall be
hauled away by the person authorized to make the excavation unless otherwise permitted in
writing by the Village. The surface shall be restored with material similar to the surrounding
pavement, compacted or rolled, and left in an even, level condition.
(11) EXCAVATIONS IN PAVED STREETS. When excavations are made in paved
streets they shall be made and repaired in the following manner: The opening in the
pavement shall be sawed and the pavement base must be at least 8 inches larger in all
directions than the size of the trench to be excavated so that there may be a shoulder of
solid earth 8 inches wide on all sides of the opening to support the new pavement. Should
the sides of the trench erode or collapse during the progress of the work, additional
pavement must be removed so the 8 inch shoulder is maintained. The excavation shall be
filled to the bottom of the pavement section with gravel, sand or crushed stone, firmly
tamped, and all stone, earth and other material excavated shall be hauled away by the
person authorized to make such excavation unless otherwise permitted in writing by the
Village. The pavement section shall be restored with material to match the surrounding
pavement and shall be finished to an even, level surface.
(12) INSPECTIONS. All work shall be inspected by the Village for workmanship and
materials. Any work found to be defective shall be promptly repaired or replaced by the
7-4
permittee. The person to whom such permit is issued shall be responsible for arranging for
the Village to inspect all work.
7.03 OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS.
(1) PROHIBITED. No person shall encroach upon or in any way obstruct or
encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds, land dedicated to public use, or any
part thereof, or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any
public way adjoining the premises of which he is the owner or occupant, except as provided
in sub. (2) below.
(2) EXCEPTIONS. The prohibition of sub. (1) above shall not apply to the following:
(a) Public utility encroachments duly authorized by state law or the Village Board.
(b) Temporary encroachments or obstructions authorized by permit granted
pursuant to §66.0425, Wis. Stats.
(c) Excavations and openings permitted under sec. 7.02 of this Code.
7.04 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
[Am. 18-05, Eff. 2-15-18]
(1) The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land in the Village abutting a public
sidewalk shall keep such sidewalk clear of snow and ice.
(2) No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice upon any
public sidewalk, alley, public place or street. Snow shall not be piled at or near intersections
so as to obstruct the view of pedestrians or operators of motor vehicles.
(3) The Village may summarily remove any snow or ice from a sidewalk and charge
the cost of said removal to the abutting property owner, pursuant to §66.0907, Wis. Stats.,
as a special tax to be levied.
(4) The cost of snow and ice removal incurred by the Village because of a violation
of sub. (2) may be charged to the owner of the property from which the snow and ice was
removed. If not paid within 30 days, such charge shall be extended upon the current or next
tax roll as provided in §66.0627(4), Wis. Stats.
(5) In addition to the remedies provided in this section, the Village may bring a
forfeiture action against any person violating sub. (1) or (2).
7.05 SALE OR DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE PROHIBITED. No person shall
display, sell, or offer to sell anything of value or service of any kind, on any street, sidewalk
or alley within the Village. No person shall display, sell, or offer to sell anything of value or
service of any kind within a public park unless authorized by the Village Board.
7-5
7.06 HOUSE NUMBERING SYSTEM ESTABLISHED.
(1) The Director of Public Services or his/her designated alternate shall maintain an
official house numbering record for the Village and shall establish and place on file a
number for each parcel created within the Village or annexed into the Village.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(2) Each property owner shall affix to his/her house or other building having a street
address, evidence of his official number where it will be plainly visible from the street.
(3) For new construction, each owner, contractor, or builder shall affix to the house
or other building having a street address, evidence of the official number where it will be
plainly visible from the street, prior to the issuance of the occupancy permit.
7.07 UTILITY EXTENSION REQUIRED. All utility, water and sewer mains and
service laterals to the abutting property shall be installed before any street is permanently
surfaced or resurfaced.
7.071 UNDERGROUND ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS.
(1) PURPOSE. The Board of Trustees of the Village of DeForest does hereby declare
it to be the public policy of the Village of DeForest to require underground electrical facilities.
The exercise of police power to implement this public policy is based on the public benefit
received including (but not limited to) the following reasons:
(a) Clearing scenic views;
(b) Improving civic appearance;
(c) Removing safety hazards which are a danger to pedestrians and motorists;
(d) Overcoming the threat of temporary loss of service due to high winds and ice
conditions;
(e) Eliminating damage to overhead equipment by wildlife;
(f) Eliminating damage to wildlife by overhead equipment;
(g) Eliminating trimming of street trees required to prevent damage to overhead wires.
This section is adopted to facilitate the orderly replacement of and/or transfer from
overhead distribution systems consistent with desirable aesthetic goals and sound economic
practices.
(2) DEFINITIONS. In this section the following definitions shall apply:
(a) The term "distribution system" means electric lines and associated facilities,
designed and operated at less than 40,000 volts, that deliver power to customers.
(b) The term "underground" means below the surface of the earth.
7-6
(c) The term "construct" means the building, erection, placement, replacement or
extension of a distribution system.
(3) UNDERGROUND CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED.
(a) All distribution systems, including extensions of existing systems, constructed on or
after the effective date of this ordinance in the Village of DeForest shall be constructed
underground unless the topography, soil, rock or other physical conditions would make
underground construction unreasonable or impractical.
(b) Temporary overhead facilities may be installed to serve a construction site or where
necessary because of severe weather conditions. Within a reasonable time after weather
conditions have moderated or upon completion of the installation of the permanent
underground distribution system, such temporary facilities shall be replaced by said
underground system and the temporary overhead facilities removed.
(4) AREA OF APPLICATION. All territory within the limits of the Village of DeForest
shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
(5) SEVERABILITY. If any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of a decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase hereof.
(6) PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each and every violation thereof. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense. The assessment of a forfeiture under this
subsection shall not preclude the Village of DeForest from seeking injunctive relief or any other
remedy available under the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
[Cr. 96-27, Eff. 6-7-96]
7.08 SPECIAL IMPROVEMENTS AND ASSESSMENTS.
(1) GENERAL APPLICATION.
(a) In the case of any public improvement constructed or installed in exercise
of the police power or special taxing power of the Village, as may from time to time be
determined by the Village Board, the property specially benefitted may be assessed
pursuant to the provisions of this section as authorized by §66.0701 Wis. Stats.
(b) The total cost of any special improvement to be paid in whole or in part
by special assessment shall include the direct and indirect costs reasonably attributable
thereto including, but not limited to, materials and supplies, labor, equipment, site
preparation and restoration, damages occasioned by the special improvement, interest on
bonds or notes issued in anticipation of the collection of assessments, and a reasonable
charge for engineering, legal, and administrative costs.
(c) The assessment for any special improvement shall be based upon the
cost as defined in paragraph (b) above and shall be apportioned among the individual
parcels specially benefited. Such apportionment shall be computed on a reasonable basis if
7-7
based on the Village’s police power, and shall not exceed the value of the benefits accruing
to the assessed parcel if based on the taxing power.
(2) SIDEWALK REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT. In any case where the Village Board
determines that any public sidewalk is defective, unsafe or otherwise in need of repair or
replacement, the Village will cause the necessary work to be completed at Village expense.
(3) PROCEDURE. The procedure for levying special assessments under this
ordinance shall be as specified in §66.0703(4)-(11), Wis. Stats.
(4) PAYMENT BY INSTALLMENTS.
(a) The Village Board may, as part of its resolution approving any special
assessment, require payment of assessments in full or may allow payment by installments.
Should the Board allow payment by installments, the owner of property against which an
assessment has been levied shall pay such assessment in up to ten (10) equal annual
installments as specified in the resolution, with interest accruing on the unpaid balance as
provided in par. (b), unless the owner elects to make payment in full. Said election shall be
made in writing to the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days after publication of an installment
assessment notice as provided in §66.0715(3)(c), Wis. Stats. An election must be signed by
all owners of the assessed parcel, and any election made shall apply only to the parcels
specified in the election. Any owner making such election shall make payment of the entire
assessment, along with any accrued interest, on or before November 1 next following the
date of the election. The Clerk shall, as to each lot or parcel for which a timely election is
made, enter the amount of the installment due each year on the tax roll until all installments
have been entered.
(b) Except as provided in sub. (5)(c), interest on assessments payable in
installments pursuant to par. (a) shall accrue at a rate determined as follows:
1. For projects for which the Village’s cost is fully financed through bonds, notes
or other third party financing, at a rate equal to the rate paid by the Village to
finance the improvements for which the assessment is levied plus 1%.
2. For projects for which the Village’s cost is fully paid from the Village’s general
and/or utility funds as part of its annual budget, at a rate of 10% per annum.
3. For projects for which the Village’s cost is partially funded through third party
borrowing and partially through the Village’s general and/or utility funds, at a
rate determined by the Village Board as part of the resolution levying the
special assessment.
(5) DEFERRAL OF ASSESSMENTS.
(a) General. The Village Board may, as part of its resolution approving the
levy of special assessments, defer the due date for payment of the assessment against any
parcel of land while no use is made of the public improvements for which the assessment
has been levied.
(b) Period and Terms of Deferral. The period and terms of deferral shall be
determined by the Village Board as part of the final assessment resolution. Any deferred
7-8
assessment under this section may be prepaid at any time and in all cases shall be due and
payable in full on the earliest of:
1. The expiration of the deferral period specified in the resolution levying the
assessment;
2. January 31 next following the date the parcel ceases to meet the criteria for
which the deferral was granted;
3. The date of the occurrence of any activity or event relating to the parcel as
specified in the resolution levying the assessment; or
4. The date of issuance of a tax certificate for the parcel against which the
assessment has been levied.
(c) Accrual and Payment of Interest. Interest shall accrue on the outstanding
balance of any assessment deferred for five (5) years or less under this subsection, or for
which annual interest payments are required, at an annual interest rate calculated as
interest for installments in accordance with sub. (4)(b). In the event the Village allows for
deferral of all or any part of a special assessment for longer than five (5) years, or on any
assessment for which the interest is not paid in annual installments, the interest rate shall be
as established by the Village Board as part of the resolution.
(6) DEFAULT.
Upon the default of any owner to pay any installment of any special assessment or
any accrued interest when due, or to pay the entire assessment by the due date after
making an election to do so under sub. (4)(a), the entire assessment for the parcel shall
become immediately due and payable. After default, all amounts due shall bear interest at
the rate of 12% per annum from the due date for the payment until paid in full. Any amounts
in default shall be extended on the tax roll as a delinquent tax and collected in the same
manner as delinquent real estate taxes.
[Cr. 02-05, Eff. 2-12-02; Am. 12-17, Eff. 8-7-12]
7.09 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
(1) STREETS. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with design approved by
the Village Board.
(2) CURB AND GUTTER. Any property owner may install, repair, or replace any
curb or gutter on a street abutting his or her property, at his or her own expense, upon
approval of plans therefor by the Village. Such owner shall submit to the Building Inspector
plans and specifications describing the proposed installation, repair, or replacement with
sufficient detail to permit the Village or its consultants to determine whether the proposed
construction will meet all applicable Village standards.
7-9
(3) SIDEWALKS.
(a) Subgrading. When cutting the subgrade for sidewalks, the material shall be
excavated to a depth 2 inches below the underside of the concrete and brought to grade
with sand. When filling is required, the subgrade shall be brought to proper grade in uniform
layers not to exceed 6 inches in thickness and shall be thoroughly compacted mechanically.
(b) Width and Thickness of Sidewalks and Driveways. All sidewalks, unless
specifically approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall have a standard width
of four (4) feet with a traverse slope of 1/4 inch per foot toward the curb and gutter. The
minimum thickness of any part of a sidewalk shall be 4 1/2 inches and, in places where
driveways cross, a minimum thickness of six (6) inches. Portions of any sidewalk where
driveways or laterals cross shall be reinforced as approved by the Village Engineer.
(c) Concrete. All sidewalks shall be one course concrete construction, 6 bag mix,
with 4 inch slump. The surface shall be struck, trawled and brushed in a uniform and even
manner. Contraction joints shall be located transversely every 5 feet at a depth of one inch.
Expansion joints shall be one inch thick and shall be located transversely at each property
line, and in addition, one expansion joint shall be located at least every 20 feet.
(4) DRIVEWAYS.
(a) Width. No driveway shall exceed 20 feet in width at the outer or street edge of
the sidewalk, nor 26 feet in width at the curb.
(b) Interference With Intersections Prohibited. At street intersections, a driveway
shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from the street intersection area and shall not
occupy areas of the roadway deemed necessary by the Building Inspector for effective
traffic control or for highway signs and signals.
(c) Interference with Street Prohibited. No driveway apron shall extend out into the
street farther than the face of the curb.
[Sub. (4)(d) Repl. 95-23, Eff. 6-9-95]
(d) Number of Approaches Limited. No more than one driveway entrance approach
shall be constructed for any lot or premises.
[Am. 95-7, Eff. 2-24-95]
(e) Workmanship and Materials. All driveway entrances and approaches which are
constructed across sidewalks shall be paved in accordance with the requirements for
sidewalk construction in sec. 7.09(3) of this chapter. Portions of any driveway where laterals
are under the driveway shall be reinforced as approved by the Village Engineer. A curb cut
for a driveway entrance may be made only by removing and reconstructing the entire curb
and gutter section or by sawcutting the existing curb using a “profile curb cut” with the curb
head removed by using a machine type concrete saw specifically designed for this type of
work. Driveway surfaces shall connect with the street pavement and sidewalk in a neat,
workmanlike manner.
[Am. 97-24, Eff. 7-7-97].
7-10
7.10 PERMITS.
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall construct, repair, or replace any street,
curb and gutter, sidewalk, alley or driveway without first obtaining a permit from the Building
Inspector unless the work involved is part of utility installation or repair work done by a utility
or a contractor for a utility. The applicant for a permit shall file the application with the
Building Inspector and furnish a drawing designating his/her property lines, the location and
width of the proposed improvements and the location of any driveways and street
intersections within 100 feet of the property.
(2) FEE. The fee for such permit is $25 and shall accompany the application.
7.11 MOVING BUILDINGS.
(1) BOND REQUIRED. Before any building is moved within, out of, or into the
Village, a permit must first be obtained from the Building Inspector. Before a permit to move
any building is granted by the Building Inspector, the party applying therefor shall give a
bond in the sum of $5,000 with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the Village
Attorney ensuring, among other things, that said party will satisfy any judgments, costs or
expenses which may in any way accrue against the Village and will save the Village
harmless against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses in consequence of granting of
such permit.
(2) FEE. The fee for such permit shall be $25 and shall accompany the application.
(3) CONTENTS OF PERMIT: REGULATION. Every permit to move a building shall
state all conditions to be complied with, designate the route to be taken, and limit of time for
moving. The moving of a building shall be completed in a timely manner with the least
possible obstructions to thoroughfares. Flashing amber lights shall be kept in conspicuous
places at each end of the building during the night.
(4) INSPECTION AND REPAIR OF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. Every person
receiving a permit to move a building shall, within one day after the building reaches its
destination, report that fact to the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall thereupon
inspect the streets and highways within the Village over which said building has been moved
and ascertain their condition. If the removal of said building has caused any damage to the
streets or highways, the house mover shall forthwith place them in as good repair as they
were before the permit was granted. Upon failure of the house mover to do so within 10
days thereafter to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector, the Village shall repair the
damage done to such streets and highways and hold the mover and the sureties of the bond
given by the house mover responsible for the payment of the same.
7.12 STREET RIGHTS OF WAY. Any tree, shrub, hedge, fence, or other
obstruction planted or constructed within the right of way of any Village street shall be done
at the property owner's risk. In the event any street is widened or sidewalk constructed, any
such planting or obstruction shall be removed at the property owner's expense. The Village
shall have no liability for damage to, or the loss or destruction of, any such planting or
obstruction.
7-11
7.13 PENALTY. The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
as provided in sec. 20.04 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation of this chapter occurs or continues.
8-1
CHAPTER 8
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
Subchapter I - DEFOREST WATER UTILITY
8.01 Management ................................................................................................... 8-1
8.02 Rules and Regulations .................................................................................. 8-2
8.03 Outside Water Service ................................................................................... 8-2
8.04 Private Well Abandonment ........................................................................... 8-2
8.05 Impact Fees for Water Utilities ...................................................................... 8-4
[Cr. 05-12, Eff. 4-21-05]
8.06 Temporary Use of Village Water Meters ....................................................... 8-7
[Cr. 18-03, Eff. 2-7-18]
Subchapter II - DEFOREST SANITARY SEWER UTILITY
8.50 Intent ............................................................................................................... 8-9
8.51 Definitions ...................................................................................................... 8-9
8.52 Sewer Main Extensions ............................................................................... 8-11
8.53 Management, Operation & Control ............................................................. 8-12
8.54 User Rules & Regulations ........................................................................... 8-13
8.55 Control of Industrial & Septage Wastes ..................................................... 8-16
8.56 Compliance with MMSD Ordinance ............................................................ 8-16
8.60 User Charge System .................................................................................... 8-17
8.62 Payment of Sewer & Service Charges ........................................................ 8-19
8.63 Disposition of Revenue ............................................................................... 8-19
8.64 Audit ............................................................................................................. 8-20
8.70 Violations & Penalties ................................................................................. 8-20
Subchapter III – DEFOREST STORMWATER UTILITY
[Cr. 04-31, Eff. 11-18-04]
8.80 Stormwater Utility Established ................................................................... 8-21
8.81 Authority ...................................................................................................... 8-21
8.82 Management and Operations ...................................................................... 8-21
8.83 Powers and Duties ....................................................................................... 8-22
8.84 Definitions .................................................................................................... 8-22
8.85 Rates and Charges ...................................................................................... 8-23
8.86 Credits .......................................................................................................... 8-24
8.87 Customer Classifications ............................................................................ 8-26
8.88 Billing and Penalties .................................................................................... 8-27
8.89 Appeals ........................................................................................................ 8-27
8.90 Special Assessment and Charges .............................................................. 8-28
8.91 Severability .................................................................................................. 8-28
SUBCHAPTER I: DEFOREST WATER UTILITY
8.01 MANAGEMENT. The DeForest Water Utility shall be managed by the
DeForest Village Board.
8-2
8.02 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
(1) GENERAL. The rules and regulations governing the operation of the DeForest
Water Utility shall be those on file with and approved by the Wisconsin Public Service
Commission. A violation of any such rules and regulations shall be a violation of this
chapter.
(2) OPERATING RULES.
(a) All persons now receiving water service from the Utility or who may hereafter
make application therefor shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by all rules and
regulations as filed with the Public Service Commission and as provided in these
ordinances.
(b) The applicable provisions of Wisconsin Administrative Code Ch. PSC 185
relating to water service are hereby adopted by reference and made part of these rules as if
set forth in full. A violation of any provision of this section be punishable as provided in §
20.04 of this Code.
8.03 OUTSIDE WATER SERVICES. No water service shall be extended outside
the Village limits except by written agreement between the Village and one or more
contiguous municipalities.
[Repl. & Recr. 94-23, Eff. 6-23-94]
8.04 PRIVATE WELL ABANDONMENT.
(1) PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is prevent contamination of groundwater
and to protect public health, safety and welfare by assuring that unused, unsafe or
noncomplying wells or wells which may serve as conduits for contamination or wells which
may be illegally cross-connected to the municipal water system, are properly abandoned.
(2) APPLICABILITY. This section applies to all wells located on premises served by
the Village of DeForest municipal water system.
(3) DEFINITIONS. The following terms as used in this section shall be defined as
follows:
(a) "Municipal water system" means a system for the provision to the public of piped
water for human consumption when such system has at least 15 service connections or
regularly serves at least 25 year-round residents owned or operated by a city, village,
county, town sanitary district, utility district or a federal, state, county or municipal owned
institution for congregate care or correction or a privately owned water utility serving any of
the above.
(b) "Noncomplying" means a well or pump installation which does not comply with
the provisions of Ch. NR 812, Wis. Admin. Code, in effect at the time the well was
constructed, a contamination source was installed, the pump was installed or work was
done on either the well or pump installation.
8-3
(c) "Pump installation" means the pump and related equipment, used for
withdrawing water from a well including the discharge piping, the underground connections,
pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling faucets and well seals or caps.
(d) "Unsafe" means a well or pump installation which produces water which is
bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with substances in exceedance of the
standards of Chs. NR 809 or 140, Wis. Admin. Code, or for which a Health Advisory has
been issued by the Department of Natural Resources.
(e) "Unused" means a well or pump installation which is not in use or does not have
a functional pumping system.
(f) "Well" means an excavation or opening into the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving, or other methods for the purpose of obtaining groundwater for consumption
or other use.
(g) "Well Abandonment" means the filling and sealing of a well according to the
provisions of Ch. NR 812, Wis. Admin. Code.
(4) ABANDONMENT REQUIRED. All wells located on premises served by the
municipal water system shall be abandoned in accordance with the terms of this section and
Ch. NR 812, Wis. Admin. Code, by October 31, 1993 or no later than one (1) year from the
date of connection to the municipal water system, whichever occurs last, unless a well
operation permit has been obtained by the well owner from the Village Board or from the
Village Administrator.
(5) WELL OPERATION PERMIT. The Village Board or the Village Administrator
may grant a permit to a private well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed five
(5) years providing the conditions of this subsection are met. An owner may request renewal
of a well operation permit by submitting information verifying that the conditions of this
subsection are met. The Village Board, or its agent, may conduct inspections or have water
quality tests conducted at the applicant's expense to obtain or verify information necessary
for consideration of a permit application or renewal. Permit applications and renewals shall
be made on forms provided by the Village Clerk. The following conditions must be met for
issuance or renewal of a well operation permit:
(a) The well and pump installation meet or are upgraded to meet the requirements
of Ch. NR 812, Wis. Admin. Code,
(b) The well construction and pump installation have a history of producing
bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by at least two (2) samplings taken a minimum of
two (2) weeks apart. No exception to this condition may be made for unsafe wells, unless
the Department of Natural Resources approves, in writing, the continued use of the well,
(c) There are no cross-connections between the well and pump installation and the
municipal water system, and
(d) The proposed use of the well and pump installation can be justified as being
necessary in addition to water provided by the municipal water system.
8-4
(6) ABANDONMENT PROCEDURES.
(a) All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this section shall be abandoned
according to the procedures and methods of Ch. NR 812, Wis. Admin. Code. All debris,
pump, piping, unsealed liners and any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing
operations shall be removed prior to abandonment.
(b) The owner of the well, or the owner's agent, shall notify the Village Administrator
at least 48 hours prior to commencement of any well abandonment activities. The
abandonment of the well shall be observed by the Water and Sewer Superintendent.
(c) An abandonment report form, supplied by the Department of Natural Resources,
shall be submitted by the well owner to the Village Administrator and the Department of
Natural Resources within ten (10) days of the completion of the well abandonment.
(7) PENALTIES. Any well owner violating any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be punished by forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 and the
cost of prosecution. Each day of violation is a separate offense. If any person fails to comply
with this section for more than ten (10) days after receiving written notice of the violation, the
Village may cause the well abandonment to be performed and the expense to be assessed
as a special tax against the property.
(8) WELL OPERATION PERMIT FEES. An applicant for an initial well operation
permit for any well shall pay at the time of application a permit fee of $350.00. An applicant
for renewal of a permit in effect at the time of application shall pay a fee of $250.00. Any
fees charged for extracting, analyzing or reporting the analysis of water samples shall be
separately paid by the applicant. A well operation permit application shall not be considered
complete until the permit application fee is paid.
[Sec. 8.04 Cr. 92-18, Eff. 2-4-93]
8.05 IMPACT FEES FOR WATER UTILITY FACILITIES.
(1) PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to establish the mechanism for the
imposition of impact fees upon new development to finance the capital costs of acquiring,
establishing, upgrading, expanding, and constructing public water utility facilities which are
necessary to accommodate land development. This section is intended to assure that new
development bears an appropriate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to
provide public facilities within the Village of DeForest and its service areas as they are
required to serve the needs arising out of land development.
(2) DEFINITIONS. As used in this section:
(a) “Capital costs” means the capital costs to construct, expand or improve Public
Facilities as defined in par. (f), including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering
and design costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities, except that not more than
10% of capital costs may consist of legal, engineering and design costs unless such costs
relate directly to the public improvement for which the impact fees imposed actually exceed
10% of the capital costs.
8-5
(b) "Developer" means any person or entity who applies for a building permit for
purposes of Development as defined in par. (c).
(c) “Development” means any man made change to improved or unimproved real
property, any change in the use of any structure or land, or any other activity if such change
or other activity requires or involves a new connection to the Village Water Utility system or
the replacement of an existing water meter with a higher capacity meter.
(d) “Impact Fee” means the fee imposed pursuant to this section.
(e) "Needs Assessment" means the report of the evaluation of the Village's
anticipated needs for new and/or expanded public water utility facilities caused by new
Development. The report, entitled "Village of DeForest Report on Impact Fees," prepared
by Virchow Krause & Co. LLP dated February 15, 2005, is on file in the office of the Village
Clerk.
(f) “Public facilities” means facilities for the supply and storage of water as identified
in the Needs Assessment. Public Facilities shall not include any part of the water
distribution system other than the storage and supply facilities for which the Impact Fee
under this section is calculated as set forth in the Needs Assessment.
(g) “Village” means the Village of DeForest.
(3) IMPOSITION OF FEES.
(a) Impact Fee Imposed. Impact Fees under this section are hereby imposed on all
residential and nonresidential Development.
(b) Basis for Impact Fee Calculation. The Impact Fees imposed by this section are
established based on the impact fee report titled “Village of DeForest, DeForest Wisconsin,
Report on Water Impact Fees" prepared by Virchow Kraus & Company dated February 2,
2005. The amount of the Impact Fees established hereby shall be reviewed by the Village
Board periodically provided, however, that the fees shall not be increased unless a new
needs assessment is prepared which establishes a basis for the increased fees.
(c) Amount of Impact Fees. Impact Fees imposed under this section shall be
determined based on the size of each water meter to be installed to serve the Development.
In the event an existing water meter is to be replaced with a higher capacity meter, the
Impact Fee shall be limited to the amount by which the fee that would be imposed on a new
connection with the higher capacity meter exceeds the charge that would apply to the
replaced meter. Impact Fees shall be determined as follows:
8-6
Meter Size Impact Fee
5/8" or ¾" $700
1" $1,750
1¼" $2,625
1½" $3,500
2" $5,600
3" $10,500
4" $17,500
6" $35,000
(d) Fee Credits. The fees imposed by this section shall be reduced to compensate
the Developer for other capital costs imposed by the Village in connection with the
Development to provide or pay for Public Facilities, including special assessments, special
charges, land dedications or fees in lieu of land dedications. Such credits shall be given
only for such costs, fees or dedications required by the Village and which relate to the new
Public Facilities for which the fees under this section are imposed.
(4) PAYMENT OF IMPACT FEES. All required Impact Fees shall be paid in full by
the Developer prior to issuance of a building permit for any Development. No building permit
shall be issued unless the Impact Fee imposed by this section is paid.
(5) IMPACT FEE REVENUE ADMINISTRATION.
(a) Accounting. Revenues from Impact Fees collected pursuant to this section shall
be placed in one or more segregated, interest-bearing accounts and shall be accounted for
separately from other Village general and utility funds. Impact Fee revenues and interest
earned thereon may be expended only for the capital costs for which the Impact Fees were
imposed.
(b) Refunds. Impact Fee revenues imposed and collected but not used within twenty
(20) years after collection to pay the capital costs for which they were imposed shall be
refunded on a prorated proportional basis, as determined by the Village Board, to the then
current record owner or owners of the property with respect to which the Impact Fees were
imposed.
8-7
(6) USE OF IMPACT FEES. Impact Fees collected under this section shall be used
solely for the purpose of paying the proportionate costs of providing public facilities that may
become necessary due to Development. These costs may include the costs of debt service
on bonds or similar debt instruments when the debt has been incurred for the purpose of
proceeding with designated public facilities projects prior to the collection of all anticipated
Impact Fees for that project, to reimburse the Village for advances of other funds or
reserves, and such other purposes consistent with §66.0617, Wis. Stats. as approved by the
Village Board.
(7) APPEALS. The payment of an Impact Fee imposed under this section may be
contested as to the amount, collection or use of the Impact Fee to the Village Board,
provided that the applicant files a written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk within thirty
(30) days of the decision being appealed. Such notice of appeal shall be entitled “Notice of
Appeal of Impact Fee” and shall state the applicant’s name, address, telephone number,
address (if available) and legal description of the land upon which the Development for
which the Impact Fee is imposed is located, and a statement of the nature of and reasons
for the appeal. The Village Clerk shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the Village
Board at a regular meeting as soon as reasonably practicable under the circumstances and
shall notify the applicant of the time, date and place of such meeting in writing by regular
mail, deposited in the mail no later than ten (10) days before the date of such meeting. Upon
review of such appeal, the Village Board may adjust the amount, collection or use of the
Impact Fee upon just and reasonable cause shown.
(8) SEVERBILITY. If any section, phrase, sentence, or portion of this section is for
any reason determined invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portions shall be deemed separate, distinct, and independent provisions, and such
determination shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. If this section, or
any provision herein, is determined to be invalid or unenforceable as to any individual
property or set of circumstances, such determination shall not affect the applicability thereof
to any other property or circumstances.
8.06 TEMPORARY USE OF VILLAGE WATER METERS
(1) PURPOSE. The Public Service Commission requires the use of a water meter
by customers with service connections greater than 1-inch for whom the Utility cannot
immediately install a water meter but for whom the Utility is supplying service temporarily,
such as for construction. This section establishes a mechanism by which customers who
require use of a Village water meter on a temporary basis may borrow a water meter from
the Village, and establishes a deposit schedule for the use of Village water meters.
(2) APPLICATION. A customer may apply for temporary use of a Village water
meter by completing the Temporary Water Meter Deposit form on file with the Utility,
attaching a written request including a clear statement of the location at which the temporary
water meter will be used, and the length of time for which the meter is requested, and
providing a deposit based on the meter size.
(3) DEPOSIT. The required deposit is refundable if the temporary water meter is
returned in satisfactory condition, as determined by the Utility, and upon full payment of all
billing charges for water usage. The deposit amount is determined according to the following
schedule:
8-8
Meter Size Deposit Fee
1.5” $1,150.00
2” $1,350.00
3” $1,650.00
4” $2,850.00
(4) USE. The customer shall only install the temporary water meter at the location
for which the Utility has provided written approval. Upon approval, the customer shall
receive a temporary water meter and a check valve that shall be used with the temporary
water meter.
(a) The customer shall report readings from the temporary water meter to the
Utility Office between the 20th and 25th day of each month. Failure to make a
timely report of the temporary water meter readings shall result in a $10.00
penalty each instance that the meter reading is not reported.
(b) The customer shall pay monthly for water usage. The utility will bill each
customer monthly for water usage, including a minimum bill charge when
applicable; but failure to receive a billing does not release the customer from
payment obligation. Late fees will be applied to outstanding charges not paid
by due date. In the event that a meter reading cannot be obtained or if the
meter is found to be defective, the amount of water used and billed will be
estimated by the Utility by using meter readings and water usage from a
period of similar service or if none exists then the Utility will estimate water
usage using the best information available.
(c) The customer shall submit the temporary water meter for inspection by the
Utility once every three months.
(d) The customer shall not keep the temporary water meter and check valve for
longer than six months, and shall return the temporary water meter and all
other equipment issued by the Utility, no later than six months from the date
of its issue.
(5) LIABILITY. From the date that the temporary water meter is issued until the
temporary water meter and all other equipment issued by the Utility have been returned to
the Utility, the customer shall be responsible for the temporary water meter and any other
equipment supplied by the Utility. The customer shall be liable to the Village for any damage
to the meter and all other equipment issued by the Utility.
(6) PENALTIES.
(a) Damage, repairs and/or equipment replacement will result in loss of all or part
of the meter deposit fee and/or additional charges, as determined by the
Utility.
(b) If the customer does not submit the temporary water meter for inspection at
least once every three months, or keeps the temporary water meter for longer
8-9
than six months, the Utility may confiscate the temporary water meter without
notice, and the deposit shall not be returned to the customer.
(c) If the customer is negligent in the use of the temporary water meter, fails to
properly use the temporary water meter, or tampers with the temporary water
meter, the Utility may confiscate the temporary water meter without notice,
and the deposit shall not be returned to the customer.
(d) If the Utility revokes uses of the temporary water meter for any reason, the
deposit will not be returned to the customer.
(e) No person shall tamper with the temporary water meter. Any person found to
be responsible for tampering with the temporary water meter shall, in addition
to the applicable forfeiture, pay all damages caused by such tampering.
SUBCHAPTER II: DEFOREST SANITARY SEWER UTILITY
8.50 INTENT.
(1) This subchapter regulates the extension and use of public and private sewers
and drains and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewerage system within
the Village.
[Am. 13-03, Eff. 3-1-13]
(2) This subchapter provides for levying and collecting wastewater collection and
treatment service charges, sets uniform requirements for discharge into the wastewater
collection and treatment systems and enables the Village to comply with the administrative
provisions and other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by State or Federal
law and the ordinances of MMSD.
[Am. 13-03, Eff. 3-1-13]
(3) This subchapter provides a means for determining wastewater volumes,
constituents, and characteristics, the setting of charges and fees, and the issuing of permits
to certain users.
8.51 DEFINITIONS. As used in this subchapter:
(1) “CARPC” shall mean the Capital Area Regional Planning Commission, or any
successor agency designated as the areawide water quality planning agency pursuant to
Wis. Admin. Code §NR121.06(2), for the geographical area that includes the Village.
(2) "CBOD" shall mean carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand or the quantity
of oxygen used in the biochemical degradation of organic material in five (5) days at 20
degrees C when the oxidation of reduced forms of nitrogen is prevented by the addition of
an inhibitor.
8-10
(3) "GARBAGE" shall mean the residue from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce.
(4) "HIGH STRENGTH WASTEWATER" shall mean wastewater having organic
concentrations of CBOD greater than 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and/or suspended solids
greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and/or TKN greater than 40 milligrams per liter
(mg/l) and/or total phosphorus (TP) greater than 10 milligrams per liter (mg/l).
(5) "LATERAL" shall mean the extension from the public sewer to the inner face of
the building wall.
(6) "MAY" is permissible.
(7) "MMSD" shall mean the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District.
(8) "MMSD ORDINANCE" shall mean the Sewer Use Ordinance of MMSD, including
any amendments thereto.
(9) “MMSD CONNECTION CHARGES” mean Interceptor Connection Charges,
Treatment Plant Connection Charges and any other charges imposed on the Village by
MMSD as a result of the extension of sanitary sewer service to new areas or
redevelopments which result in changes in use of parcels.
(10) "NATURAL OUTLET" shall mean any outlet, including those from storm sewers,
into a water course, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
(11) "NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER" shall mean wastewater
with concentrations of CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and total phosphorus (TP) no greater
than 200, 250, 40, and 10 milligrams per liter (mg/l) respectively.
(12) "OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS" shall include all costs associated
with the operation and maintenance of the sewage system.
(13) "PERSON" shall mean any and all person, including any individual, firm,
company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise,
government agency, or other entity.
(14) "REPLACEMENT COSTS" shall include all costs necessary to replace
equipment as required to maintain capacity and performance during the design life of the
facility. A separate, segregated, distinct replacement fund shall be established and used for
only replacement of equipment.
(15) "SEWAGE" shall mean a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, institutions, or other
structures.
(16) "SANITARY SEWER" shall mean a sewer that carries sewage.
8-11
(17) "SEPTAGE" shall mean the wastewater or contents of septic or holding tanks,
dosing chambers, grease interceptors, seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage trenches,
privies or portable restrooms.
(18) "SEWER SERVICE CHARGE" shall mean the service charge levied on users of
the wastewater collection and treatment facilities for payment of use-related capital
expenses as well as the operation and maintenance costs, including replacement costs, of
said facilities.
(19) "SEWER SYSTEM" means the public sanitary sewers within the Village . The
facilities which convey wastewater from individual structures on private property to the public
sanitary sewer, or their equivalent, are specifically excluded from the definition of "sewer
system," except that pumping units and pressurized lines for individual structures or groups
of structures shall be included as part of a sewer system when such units are owned and
maintained by the Village and/or MMSD.
(20) "SHALL" is mandatory.
(21) "STANDARD METHODS" shall mean the examination and analytical
procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water, Sewage, and Industrial Water" published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation, in compliance with 40 CRF 136, "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for
Analysis of Pollutants."
(22) "SUSPENDED SOLIDS" shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in, water, wastewater, septage, or other liquids, and that are removable
by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods.
(23) "TKN" shall mean total Kjeldahl nitrogen or the quantity of organic nitrogen and
ammonia as determined in accordance with Standard Methods.
(24) "TP" shall mean the quantity of total phosphorus as determined in accordance
with the Standard Methods.
(25) “URBAN SERVICE AREA” shall mean a sewer service area designated in the
applicable areawide water quality plan adopted pursuant to §283.83, Wis. Stats. and Wis.
Admin. Code §NR121.
(26) "WASTEWATER FACILITIES" shall mean the structures, equipment and
processes required to collect, carry away, store, and treat domestic and industrial waste and
septage and dispose of the effluent and sludge.
[Am. 13-03, Eff. 3-1-13]
8.52 SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS.
(1) REQUIRED APPROVALS.
(a) Urban Service Area. Sanitary sewer service shall be extended only within the
boundaries of an Urban Service Area. A property owner who seeks to have the Urban
8-12
Service Area boundaries amended to include his or her property shall make the request in
writing to the Planning and Zoning Administrator and shall provide all information requested
by the Village for inclusion in the amendment application. Any application, processing or
other fees charged by the Capital Area Regional Planning Commission or other reviewing
agency shall be paid by the property owner. Any fees payable at the time of submission of
an application by the Village shall be paid in advance by the property owner, and any fees
payable after submission of the application shall be due upon invoicing by the Village.
(b) MMSD Annexation. Sanitary sewer service shall not be provided to any parcel
until it has been annexed to MMSD. A property owner who seeks to have the Village
petition for annexation of his or her property to the District shall make such request in writing
to the Planning and Zoning Administrator. All fees charged by MMSD for the filing or
processing of the petition shall be paid by the property owner to the Village prior to filing of
the petition.
(c) MMSD Connection Approval. All sanitary sewer main extensions shall be
subject to approval by MMSD as provided in the MMSD Ordinance. If the Village extends its
sewer mains at the request of a property owner, any application or plan review charges
made by MMSD shall be reimbursed to the Village by the person making the request for the
extension within 30 days of invoicing by the Village.
(2) MMSD CONNECTION CHARGES. In any case where the extension of the
Village’s sanitary sewer system to serve new parcels, or any other event initiated at the
request of a property owner, results in the imposition of MMSD Connection Charges against
the Village, the owners of the parcels within the new service area upon which the charges
are assessed shall reimburse the Village for the entire cost thereof. The payment to the
Village shall be due not later than 30 days after the date of an invoice for such charges from
the Village, and in all cases shall be paid before any building permit shall be issued allowing
a sanitary sewer connection within the assessed area.
(3) OUTSIDE SEWER SERVICES. No sanitary sewer service shall be extended
outside the Village limits except by written agreement between the Village and one or more
contiguous municipalities.
(4) COST RECOVERY. Any person connecting a sewer main extension to a sewer
main constructed at the expense of a subdivision developer to serve property located
outside that developer’s subdivision, shall reimburse the developer for a portion of the cost
of the existing main determined in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code §PSC187.05. This
subsection applies only to connections made within three (3) years after completion of the
developer-funded extension. Any payment due a developer under this subsection shall be
paid within sixty (60) days from the date the person connects to the extension.
[Cr. 13-03, Eff. 3-1-13]
8.53 MANAGEMENT, OPERATION AND CONTROL.
(1) GENERAL. Management, operation, and control of the sewer system for the
Village shall be vested in the Village Board; all records, minutes, and written proceedings
thereof shall be kept by the Village Clerk.
8-13
(2) CONSTRUCTION. (a) The Village Board shall have the power to construct
sewer lines and related facilities for public use, shall have the power to lay sewer pipes in
and through easements, alleys, streets, and public grounds of the Village, and shall have
the power to do such work as it may deem necessary or convenient in the management of
the sewer system.
(b) The Village Board, its officers, and employees shall have the power to enter
upon any land for the purpose of making examinations as may be necessary in the
performance of their duties under this chapter without liability therefor.
(c) The Village Board shall have the power to purchase or otherwise acquire for the
Village all real and personal property which it may deem necessary or convenient for the
construction of the sewer system, or for the maintenance, repair, or replacement thereof, or
for additions thereto.
(3) MAINTENANCE BY PROPERTY OWNER. (a) Each property owner shall
maintain the sewer service from the street main to and within the building served, including
all controls between the same, at his or her own expense, except when damaged as a result
of negligence on the part of the Village. The owner of every facility connected to the sewer
system shall keep his or her service pipes in good repair and protected from frost at the
expense of the owner and shall prevent any unnecessary overburdening of the sewer
system.
(b) When any sewer service is to be re-laid and there are two or more buildings on
such service, each building shall be disconnected from such service and a new sewer
service shall be installed for each building.
(4) TITLE TO REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY. All property, real, personal,
and mixed, and any interest therein, acquired for the construction or maintenance of the
Village sewer system, all plans, specifications, diagrams, papers, books, and records
connected therewith, and all buildings, machinery, and fixtures pertaining thereto, shall be
the property of the Village.
8.54 USER RULES AND REGULATIONS.
(1) GENERAL.
(a) The rules, regulations, and sewer rates of the Village shall be considered a
contract with every person whose property is connected to or uses the Village sewer system
and every such person, by connecting with the sewer system, shall be considered as having
agreed to be bound thereby.
(b) The sewer service to any property may be disconnected or discontinued for
violation of any rule contained herein or of any order of the Village Board regulating the use
of the sewer system and shall not be re-established except by order of the Village Board
upon payment of all arrears, the expenses and established charges of disconnection and
reconnection, and upon such other terms and the Village Board may determine.
(c) The Village may amend these rules, regulations, and applicable sewer use rates
as it deems advisable.
8-14
(2) USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
(a) Within the Village, the owner of each parcel of land adjacent to a sewer main on
which there exists a building usable for human habitation or in a block through which such a
system is extended, shall connect to such system as required under §12.01 of this Code.
(b) The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the Village and which property
either abuts on a street, alley, or right-of-way in which a public sewer is located, or has a
public sewer main located within its boundaries, shall at his or her expense, install suitable
toilet facilities therein and connect such facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance
with this section.
[Am. 13-03, Eff. 3-1-13]
(c) The use of septic tanks, holding tank, or private sewage disposal system within
the Village shall be prohibited except in areas where public sewer is not available.
(d) Any septic tank, cesspool or similar private wastewater disposal facility that is
abandoned shall be completely removed or filled with suitable material.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in
any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the Village or in any area under
the jurisdiction of the Village any human excrement, septage, garbage, or other
objectionable wastes.
(f) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Village or in any
area under the jurisdiction or the Village any wastewater or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided.
(3) PLUMBERS. No person shall perform any plumbing or pipefitting work in
connection with the sewer system without first receiving an appropriate license from the
State of Wisconsin and obtaining permission from the Village. All service connections to the
sewer main shall comply with the State of Wisconsin Plumbing Code. After sewer
connections have been made to any building or upon any premises, no person shall make
any alterations, extensions, or attachments, unless the party ordering such work exhibits the
proper permit for the same from the Village.
(4) APPLICATION FOR SEWER SERVICE.
(a) Every person desiring to connect property to the sewer system shall file an
application in writing to the Village on forms provided by the Village for that purpose.
Applications shall be available at the office of the Village. The application shall state fully
and truthfully all wastes which will be discharged. If the applicant is not the owner of the
premises, the written consent of the owner shall accompany the application.
(b) If it appears that the service applied for will not provide adequate service for the
contemplated use, the Building Inspector may reject the application. If the Building
Inspector approves the application, he or she shall issue a permit for service as shown on
the application.
8-15
(c) If it appears that the service applied for will not meet the established standards
and criteria for discharge into the public sewer system, the Village may require pretreatment,
require control of the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or recover the increased costs
of handling and treating such wastes.
(5) EXPENSE OF CONNECTION. Building sewers or laterals connected to a public
sewer shall be installed at the sole expense of the applicant for sewer service.
(6) BACKFLOW PREVENTOR. All floor drains shall have a backflow prevention
valve installed at the owner's expense.
(7) MULTIPLE CONNECTION PROHIBITED. No user shall allow any other person
or other service to connect to the sewer system through his or her lateral and no person
shall allow the connection of his or her premises to the sewer system through the lateral of
another.
(8) VACATING OF PREMISES OR DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE. Whenever
premises served by the sewer system are to be vacated or whenever any person desires to
discontinue service from the system the Village shall be notified in writing.
(9) USER TO ALLOW INSPECTION. Every person shall allow the Village or its duly
authorized agents to enter his or her premises or building to examine the pipes and fixtures
and the manner in which the drains and sewer connections operate. Such persons shall at
all times and without concealment answer all questions put to them relative to their use of
the sewer system.
(10) UTILITY RESPONSIBILITY.
(a) No claim shall be made against the Village, its officers, employees, or
representatives by reason of the breaking, clogging, stoppage, or freezing of any service
pipes; nor from any damage arising from the repair of mains, the making of connections or
extensions; nor from any other work that may be deemed necessary by the Village.
(b) The Village may discontinue or disconnect service at any time for repairs or other
necessary purpose. Whenever it shall become necessary to discontinue or disconnect
service, the Director of Public Services shall, if practical, give notice to each customer within
the affected area of the time when such service will be discontinued or disconnected and the
approximate time when such service shall be restored.
[Cr. 13-03, Eff. 3-1-13; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(11) EXCAVATIONS.
(a) Whenever any excavations are made in streets, highways or other public areas
for laying of service pipe or making repairs, all material removed shall be deposited in a
manner that will result in the least inconvenience to the public.
(b) No person shall leave any such excavation made in any street or highway open
at any time without adequate barricades and warning devices. During the night, warning
lights shall be maintained at such excavations.
8-16
(c) In refilling the opening after the service pipes are laid or repairs are complete, the
fill material shall be placed in layers of not more than nine (9) inches in depth and each layer
thoroughly compacted to prevent settling. All such work, and the replacing of sidewalks and
streets, shall be completed such that the final construction is of at least the quality existing
before the land was disturbed, and shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public
Services.
[Cr. 13-03, Eff. 3-1-13; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(d) No opening of the street for tapping the pipes shall be permitted when the
ground is frozen except by order of the Village Board.
(12) TAPPING OF THE MAINS. Connections to the sewer system other than
building sewer connections shall be made in accordance with the MMSD Ordinance.
(13) INSTALLATION OF BUILDING LATERALS.
(a) All building laterals on private property shall be installed in accordance with Wis.
Admin. Code. Ch. SPS 382.
[Am. 13-03, Eff. 3-1-13]
(b) All laterals shall be inspected upon the completion of placement of the pipe and
before backfilling and shall be tested before or after backfilling.
8.55 CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL AND SEPTAGE WASTES.
(1) CONTROL MANHOLES.
(a) Each person discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer shall construct and
maintain one or more control manholes or access points to facilitate observation,
measurement, and sampling of wastes, including domestic sewage from such person's
premises.
(b) Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and constructed in a
manner acceptable to the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District. If measuring devices
are permanently installed, they shall be of a type approved by MMSD.
(c) Control manholes, access facilities, and related equipment shall be installed and
maintained in a safe condition by and at the expense of the person discharging the industrial
waste and shall be accessible and in proper operating condition at all times. Plans for
installation of the control manholes or access facilities shall be approved by MMSD prior to
the beginning of construction.
(2) WASTEWATER MEASUREMENT, SAMPLING, AND REPORTING. Wastewater
flow measurements, sampling and reporting shall be conducted in accordance with the
MMSD Ordinance.
8.56 COMPLIANCE WITH MMSD ORDINANCE. All use of the public sewer
system shall comply with the MMSD Ordinance.
8-17
8.60 USER CHARGE SYSTEM.
(1) SERVICE CHARGE POLICY. It shall be the policy of the Village Board to obtain
sufficient revenues to pay the cost of the operation and maintenance of the sewer system,
including replacement costs, through a system of sewer service charges as defined in this
section. The system shall assure that each user of the sewage system pays a proportionate
share of the cost of such facilities, including any charges imposed by MMSD.
(2) CHARGES IMPOSED. A sewer service charge is hereby imposed on each lot,
parcel of land, building, or premise served by the public sewer and wastewater facilities or
otherwise discharging sewage, including industrial wastes, into the public sewage system.
Such sewer service charge shall be payable as provided herein and an amount
determinable as follows:
(a) CATEGORY A service charges shall be imposed on users whose water use is
metered and whose sewer discharges are limited to normal domestic strength wastewater.
The Category A sewer service charge shall be determined as follows:
Service Charge = Customer Charge + Volume Charge
Customer Charge = A basic service charge based on the size of the water meter
Volume Charge = A charge based on metered water usage in thousands of gallons
multiplied by a volume rate
Volume Rate = The volume unit price expressed in dollars per 1,000 gallons
(b) CATEGORY B service charges shall be imposed on users whose water use is
not metered and whose sewage discharges are limited to normal domestic strength
wastewater. The Category B sewer service charge shall be determined as follows:
Service Charge = Equivalent Residential Units multiplied by the Equivalent
Residential Unit Rate
No user shall be assigned less than one Equivalent Residential Unit. The number of
Residential Unit Equivalents for non-residential users shall be as determined by the Village
Board.
(c) CATEGORY C service charges shall be imposed on all users whose sewage
discharges include high strength wastewater. The minimum Category C service charge shall
be based on a concentration of 200 mg/l CBOD, 250 mg/l suspended solids, 40 mg/l TKN,
and 10 mg/l TP. The form of the Category C service charge is as follows:
Service Charge = Customer Charge + Volume Charge + High Strength Surcharge
The Customer Charge and the Volume Charge are as defined under the Category
A service charge.
High Strength Surcharge = the excessive CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and TP
multiplied by the respective CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and TP rates. The excessive
CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and TP are the portions of each of these constituents that
8-18
are in excess of normal domestic strength wastewater. The excessive amounts of CBOD,
suspended solids, TKN, and TP are expressed in pounds and their respective rates are
expressed in dollars per pound.
(d) Excess Sewerage Surcharge. In addition to the rates specified in pars. (a) - (c),
any customer whose sewerage discharge volumes are separately monitored by the Village
or MMSD, and whose measured volumes are determined to exceed the volume of water
measured by the customer’s water meter, shall pay a surcharge calculated as the sum of the
following:
1. The applicable volume rate multiplied by the difference between the
measured effluent volume and the metered water volume; plus
2. The difference between the customer’s customer charge and the customer
charge that would apply to a meter providing the volume of water equal to the
customer’s measured sewer discharges.
[Par. (d) Cr. 17-40, Eff. 12-20-17]
(e) Establishment of Rates. The various rates and charges to be applied to sewer
service under this section shall be established by resolution of the Village Board and shall
remain in effect until changed by subsequent resolution.
[Am. and Renumbered 17-40, Eff. 12-20-17]
(f) Purchased Treatment Cost Adjustment. The rates established pursuant to par. (d)
shall be adjusted automatically to reflect any subsequent increase or decrease in the rates
charged by Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District. The adjustment will be effective for
service rendered on and after the effective date of the change in rates for service provided
by MMSD. The Finance Director shall calculate the appropriate rate adjustment to
accurately reflect changes in MMSD charges based on volume and/or load. The utility shall
provide notice to its customers of such changes in rates resulting from application of this
paragraph with the next billing following the rate adjustment.
[Cr. 08-10, Eff. 3-18-08; Renumbered 17-40, Eff. 12-20-17]
(g) General Inflationary Cost Adjustment. The rates established pursuant to par. (d)
shall be adjusted effective for the first billing period of each year to reflect the increase or
decrease in the consumer price index over the previous year. The adjustment shall apply to
all utility operating costs other than MMSD charges. The Finance Director shall calculate
the appropriate rate adjustment not later than 30 days prior to the billing date for such billing
period. As used in this paragraph, “consumer price index” means the revised Consumer
Price Index for All Urban Consumers – Midwest Region, as published by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor (1982-1984=100) most recently
reported prior to the effective change date.
[Cr. 08-10, Eff. 3-18-08; Renumbered 17-40, Eff. 12-20-17]
(h) Review of Rates. Notwithstanding any adjustments made pursuant to pars. (e)
or (f), the rates for sewer service shall be reviewed by the Village Board not less than
biennially. Rates shall be adjusted, as required, to reflect the actual number and size of
users and projected costs of operation, maintenance and capital improvements. Users shall
be notified annually of the applicable rates and the portion of service charges attributable to
operation, maintenance and debt service.
8-19
[Am. and Renumbered 08-10, Eff. 3-18-08; Am. and Renumbered 17-40, Eff. 12-20-17]
(3) REASSIGNMENT OF SEWER USERS. The Village will reassign sewer users
into appropriate sewer service charge categories if wastewater sampling or other information
indicates a change of categories is necessary.
8.62 PAYMENT OF SEWER AND SERVICE CHARGES.
(1) PAYMENT AND PENALTIES. The sewer service charge shall be billed quarterly
and shall be paid to the Village not later than twenty (20) days after the end of each billing
period. A surcharge of 3% of the total service charge will be added to all bills not paid by
the due date as provided herein.
(2) CHARGES ARE LIEN. All sewer service charges shall be a lien upon the
property serviced pursuant to § 66.0821(4)(d), Wis. Stats., and shall be collected in the
manner therein provided.
(3) COLLECTION OF UTILITY BILLS IN ARREARS.
(a) All sewer service charges unpaid and in arrears on October 1 of each year shall
be collected in accordance with the procedure hereinafter provided pursuant to the authority
granted in §§66.0809 and 66.0821, Wis. Stats.
(b) On or about October 15 of each year the Village shall mail a notice of sewer
service charges unpaid to the occupant and to the owner of the premises receiving such
utility service. In the event any such utility bill is not paid by November 1 thereafter, the
Village Finance Director shall add a penalty of 10%. In the event any such utility bill is not
paid on or before November 15 thereafter, the Finance Director shall place the amount of
such arrearage, together with penalty, on the tax roll as tax against the lot or parcel of real
estate for which sewer services were provided.
(4) JOINT LIABILITY FOR UTILITY BILLS. The owner of the premises, the
occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for
the service to such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the Village only
upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are
jointly and severally liable therefor to the Village.
8.63 DISPOSITION OF REVENUE.
(1) SEWER UTILITY ACCOUNT. The amount received from the collection of
charges authorized by this subchapter shall be credited to a sewer utility account which shall
show all receipts and expenditures of the sewer system.
(2) REPLACEMENT EXPENSES. Charges collected for replacement expenses
shall be credited to a segregated, non-lapsing replacement account to be used exclusively
for replacement of capital facilities and equipment.
(3) APPROPRIATIONS. When appropriated by the Village Board, the credits to the
sewer utility account shall be available for the payment of the expenses of operation,
maintenance, repairs, and depreciation of the sewage system consistent with 40 CFR
8-20
35.929. Any surplus outside the purview of 40 CFR 35.929 in said account shall be
available for the payment of principal and interest of bonds issued and outstanding or which
may be issued to provide funds for said additions and improvements and other necessary
disbursements or indebtedness, and the Village Board may pledge such surplus or any part
thereof for any such purpose. All present outstanding sewer system general obligations
bonds, including refunding bonds, shall be paid from the sewer utility account as to both
principal and interest.
(4) EXCESS REVENUES. Excess revenues collected will be applied to operation
and maintenance costs for the next year.
8.64 AUDIT. The Village shall conduct an independent annual audit of all
accounts maintained for the deposit or disbursement of charges collected pursuant to this
subchapter. Results of the audit shall be used to ensure that adequate revenues are
available relative to increasing operation, maintenance and replacement costs and debt
service. The findings and recommendations of the audit shall be published.
8.70 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
(1) DAMAGE TO THE SYSTEM. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewer system.
(2) WRITTEN NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Any person connected to the sewage
system found to be violating a provision of this subchapter other than those set forth under
sub. (1) shall be served by the Director of Public Services with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease and/or
correct all violations in accordance with the notice.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(3) IMPROPER DISCHARGE.
(a) Any person found to be responsible for accidentally or intentionally allowing a
deleterious discharge into the sewer system which causes damage into the sewage system
and/or receiving water body shall, in addition to the applicable forfeiture, pay all damages
caused by such discharge.
(b) Any person responsible for an accidental or intentional discharge that may have
a detrimental impact on the sewer system shall immediately report the nature and amount of
the discharge to the Madison Metropolitan Sewage District and the Village.
(4) LIABILITY TO VILLAGE OF DEFOREST FOR LOSSES. Any person violating
any provision of this chapter shall be liable to the Village for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned by reason of such violation or which the Village may suffer as a result thereof.
(5) DAMAGE RECOVERY. The Village shall have the right of recovery from all
persons for any expense incurred for the repair or replacement of any part of the sewage
system damaged in any manner by any person by the performance of any work under their
control, or by any negligent acts.
8-21
(6) PENALTIES.
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter or any
rules, regulations or orders of the Village or who shall connect a service pipe or discharge
without first having obtained a permit therefor; or who shall violate any provision of the
Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative Code, or any other regulations which are
incorporated in this subchapter by reference, shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less
than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 plus any applicable penalty assessments, jail
assessments and the costs of prosecution. Each day in which any violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
(7) APPEAL PROCEDURES.
(a) Any user affected by any decision, action or determination, including cease and
desist orders, made in the interpretation or implementation of this subchapter may file with
the Village a written request for reconsideration within ten (10) days of such decision, action,
or determination setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for
reconsideration.
(b) The Village, upon receiving the request for reconsideration, shall publish the
request in the local newspaper and the Village Board shall render a decision on the
request for reconsideration to the user in writing within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the
request. The cost of publication shall be paid by the applicant at the time reconsideration is
requested.
SUBCHAPTER III: DEFOREST STORMWATER UTILITY
[Created 04-31, Eff. 11-15-04]
8.80 STORMWATER UTILITY ESTABLISHED. The DeForest Stormwater Utility
is hereby established as a separate utility of the Village to operate and maintain the
stormwater management facilities and functions of the Village in accordance with the
policies and directives of the Village Board and this subchapter.
8.81 AUTHORITY. The Stormwater Utility is created pursuant to the authority
provided in Chapters 61 and 66 of the Wisconsin Statutes including, without limitation, the
authority granted in the following sections: §§61.34, 61.36, 66.0621, 66.0627, 66.0701,
66.0703, 66.0809, 66.0811, 66.0813 and 66.0821.
8.82 MANAGEMENT AND OPERATIONS. The operation of the Stormwater
Utility shall be under the general supervision of the Village Board. The Director of Public
Services will oversee and be in charge of the day to day operations of the Utility.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
8-22
8.83 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(1) Facilities. The Village, through the Stormwater Utility, may acquire, construct,
lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair, manage and
finance such facilities as are deemed proper and reasonably necessary for a system of
storm and surface water management. Such facilities may include, without limitation by
enumeration, surface and underground drainage facilities, sewers, watercourses, retaining
walls, ponds, basins, streets, roads, ditches and such other facilities as will support a
stormwater management system.
(2) Rates and Charges. The Village Board, shall establish such rates and
charges as are necessary to finance any necessary property or easement acquisition and
the planning, design, construction, maintenance and operation of stormwater management
facilities in accordance with the procedures set forth in this subchapter for the Stormwater
utility. The Village may advance funds or services to the Stormwater Utility from time to time
and the Utility shall reimburse the actual amount or value of such advances as determined
by the Village Board.
(3) Budgeting Process. The Director of Public Services shall prepare an annual
budget for the stormwater utility, which shall include all operation, maintenance and capital
costs, debt service and other costs related to the operation of the utility. The costs shall be
allocated among the various rate classifications as determined by the Village Board. The
budget shall be approved by the Board in accordance with the procedures and requirements
of Wis. Stats. §65.90.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(4) Excess Revenues. All stormwater fees collected, and any other revenues
appropriated to, or attributable to the operation of, the stormwater utility shall be maintained
in a segregated Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund. Any excess of revenues over
expenditures from stormwater utility operations in a given year shall be maintained in the
Enterprise Fund and shall be used in future years exclusively for purposes consistent with
this subchapter.
8.84 DEFINITIONS. As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the
meanings set forth below:
(1) "Director" shall mean the Director of Public Services or his or her designee.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(2) "Equivalent Runoff Unit" or "ERU" shall mean the estimated average
horizontal measurement of impervious area of a fully developed single family parcel within
the Village as determined from time to time by the Village Board. One ERU is determined
on the effective date of this subchapter to be equivalent to 2900 square feet.
(3) "Impervious Area" or "Impervious Surface" shall mean a horizontal surface, or
the horizontal area included in a sloped surface, that is compacted or covered with a layer of
material such that it significantly reduces the ability of rainwater or other surface water to
penetrate the ground below. The term includes, but is not limited to, semi-impervious
surfaces such as compacted clay, as well as streets, roofs, sidewalks, patios, parking lots,
driveways and other similar surfaces.
8-23
(4) "Duplex" shall mean a residential building containing two dwelling units.
(5) "Duplex Unit" shall mean a dwelling unit within a duplex.
(6) "Dwelling Unit" shall mean one or more rooms within a building that are
arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one group of individuals living as a single
housekeeping unit.
(7) "Farmstead Home Site" shall mean that portion of any agricultural property
which contains a single family home, duplex unit or multifamily unit, regardless of whether
the dwelling unit is on a separate lot or parcel.
(8) "Lot" shall have the meaning defined in §15.02(43) of this Code.
(9) "Multifamily Property" shall mean a residential building consisting of three or
more dwelling units.
(10) "Multifamily unit" shall mean a dwelling unit within a multifamily property.
(11) "Non-residential Property" shall mean any developed lot or parcel other than
residential property as defined herein, and includes, but is not limited to, transient rentals
(such as hotels and motels), mobile-home parks, commercial, industrial, institutional,
governmental property and parking lots.
(12) "Residential Property" shall mean any lot, parcel or farmstead home site
developed for residential purposes including single family homes, duplex units, multifamily
units, but not including transient rentals (such as hotels and motels) and mobile-home parks.
(13) "Single Family Home" shall mean any residential building containing only one
single dwelling unit.
(14) "Undeveloped Property" shall mean property that has not been altered by the
addition of any improvements such as a building or other structure, paving or the installation
of substantial impervious landscaping; A property shall be considered developed pursuant to
this chapter, upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon substantial completion of
construction if no such certificate is issued or where construction is at least 50% complete
and construction is halted for a period of three (3) months.
8.85 RATES AND CHARGES.
(1) The rates charged by the Stormwater Utility shall be established from time to
time by Village Board resolution at sufficient levels to fund the capital, operating and other
expenses set forth in the adopted budget which are not funded by other sources of revenue.
Service charges so established shall be in addition to any assessments or charges imposed
under any other provision of this Code.
(2) A copy of the current rates shall be maintained at all times on file with the
Village Clerk and available to the public during normal business hours.
8-24
(3) Service charges established by the Board may include the following
components:
(a) Equivalent Runoff Unit Charge (ERU). The ERU charge shall be the basic
service fee charged to each property in the Village based upon the amount of impervious
area as reasonably determined by the Director under §8.87.
(b) Special Charge (SC). A special charge may be imposed on property located
in an area specially benefited by a particular stormwater management facility or service.
Any special charge will be developed to reflect the benefits and/or services in a particular
area which the Board determines cannot equitably be charged to all property throughout the
Village.
(c) Connection Charge. A one-time charge may be imposed when a property is
converted from undeveloped to developed property or otherwise becomes connected to the
Village stormwater management system. The charge shall be determined by the Village
Board from time to time, and may vary based on the size of the parcel of property or other
factors determined appropriate by the Village Board.
(4) The Village Board may make such other classifications of properties or
customers in order to achieve a reasonable and fair allocation of the costs of the Stormwater
Utility among the properties benefited.
8.86 CREDITS.
(1) The Village Board may grant credits against the ERU, SC and connection
charges as provided in this section. The total of all credits may not exceed 50% of
applicable charges.
(2) Any property owner requesting a credit shall file with the Director an
application therefor on a form provided by the Director, together with a review fee
established by the Village Board, identifying the stormwater facilities, management practices
or services for which the credit is claimed and the financial benefit to the utility. If the
Director determines that additional engineering analysis is necessary to properly complete
his or her review and to make an appropriate recommendation thereon, the Director may
deny the application unless the applicant agrees to pay the cost of the necessary
engineering services.
(3) Credits may be granted under any of the following circumstances:
(a) Any multifamily or nonresidential property owner may seek a credit against
the ERU charge where the owner has installed and maintained facilities that result in the
detention, retention, or infiltration of stormwater on site and such facilities demonstrably
reduce the financial obligations of the stormwater utility.
(b) Any multifamily or nonresidential property owner may seek a credit against
the ERU charge for that portion of the property that does not drain into any stormwater
conveyance or facility operated or maintained by the stormwater utility.
8-25
(c) Any property owner may seek a credit against the SC charge if stormwater
from the property does not drain into any stormwater conveyance or facility that is the
subject of the special charge.
(d) Any property owner may seek a credit against any applicable charges based
on services rendered to, and at the request of, the Utility in the form of public educational
programs relating to stormwater management or other topics determined to be beneficial to
the Utility by the Village Board.
(4) The Director shall evaluate the quantifiable benefits in both quantity and
quality management measures in reviewing requests for credits, where applicable. In all
cases, the Director shall submit a written recommendation to the Village Board as to
whether a request for credit should be granted, denied, or granted in part and denied in part.
The written recommendation shall also set forth the reason or reasons for such
recommendation.
(5) Credit applications shall be decided by the Village Board and shall be either
one-time credits or may be continuing credits against recurring charges as determined
appropriate by the Village Board. The Village Board shall grant a credit under sub. (3)(a)
only if it finds all of the following:
(a) If the credit is based on special facilities or management practices under sub.
(3)(a):
1. The facilities installed or practices undertaken will reduce the expenses
incurred by the utility by limiting the quantity and/or improving the quality of
discharges into the facilities of the utility from the property;
2. The property owner has, by contract, deed restriction or other method
approved by the Village Board, ensured that the Village may legally enforce
any operational or maintenance programs necessary to assure that the
facilities or practices will continue to provide the benefits on which the credit
is based;
3. The investment of the property owner in the facilities or management
practices exceeded the investment that would otherwise be necessary in
order to comply with any other Village ordinance or to obtain any land
division or development approval from the Village;
4. The investment of the property owner in such facilities or management
practices is disproportionate to the investment made by the average
property owner subject to the same normal charges such that it would be
inequitable to charge the applicant on the same basis; and
5. The amount of the credit does not exceed the cost savings to the utility from
the facilities and management practices maintained by the applicant.
(b) If the credit is based on sub. (3)(b) or (c):
8-26
1. That the absence of drainage from the property or a portion thereof into the
facilities of the Utility results in financial savings to the Utility.
2. Adequate assurances are provided that the area of the property for which the
credit is given will not be altered in such a way as to allow drainage into the
facilities operated by the Utility.
3. The drainage from the property is managed in a way which complies with all
Village ordinances and does not cause a nuisance condition.
4. The amount of the credit does not exceed the cost savings to the utility
determined under subpar. 1.
(6) The Village Board may revoke the credit in any case where the
circumstances forming the basis for the credit have materially changed. The Village Board
shall provide at least 30 days advance written notice of any proposed credit revocation.
(7) A denial or revocation of any credit may be appealed under §8.89.
8.87 CUSTOMER CLASSIFICATIONS.
(1) For purposes of imposing the ERU charges, all lots and parcels within the
Village shall be classified into the following five (5) customer classes:
(a) Residential –Single Family, including Farmstead Home Sites
(b) Residential – Duplex
(c) Residential – Multifamily, including condominiums
(d) Non-residential
(e) Undeveloped
(2) The Community Development Director shall prepare a list of properties within
the Village and assign a customer classification to each lot or parcel.
(3) ERU’s shall be calculated for each property classification as follows:
(a) Residential – Single Family: 1 ERU.
(b) Residential – Duplex: 2 ERU.
(c) Residential – Multifamily: For multifamily residential properties, the initial ERU
value shall be .7 times the number of dwelling units. Within 2 years of the adoption of this
subchapter, the Director shall be responsible for determining actual impervious area and
calculating ERU values in the same manner as ERU values are calculated for nonresidential
properties under paragraph (d).
8-27
(d) For non-residential properties greater than 3 acres, the Director shall be
responsible for determining the impervious area from available information, including, but
not limited to, data supplied by the Village Assessor, the property owner, tenant or
developer, aerial photography, or by actual on site measurement. The Director may require
additional information from the property owner as necessary to make the determination.
The ERU value for a nonresidential property shall be determined by dividing its impervious
area by the number of square feet per ERU and rounding the quotient to the next higher .1
ERU. The billing amount shall be updated by the Director as necessary based on changes
to the amount of impervious area on the property.
(e) For non-residential parcels less than 3 acres the Director shall determine the
initial ERU value by multiplying the total area of the parcel by the permitted density of
development factor pursuant to the Zoning Code and dividing the product by the number of
square feet per ERU. The property owner may seek an adjustment of the ERU
determination by providing appropriate information demonstrating the propriety of a different
calculation. Within 2 years of the adoption of this subchapter, the Director shall be
responsible for determining actual impervious area and calculating ERU values as per the
provisions in paragraph (d).
(f) Undeveloped Properties: 0 ERU.
8.88 BILLING AND PENALTIES.
(1) Stormwater Utility charges will be billed periodically with the billing dates
corresponding to the billing dates for water and sanitary sewer service. All charges shall be
due and payable twenty (20) days after the date of billing.
(2) Billings for Stormwater Utility charges shall be mailed to the designated water
utility bill recipient. The owner of the property shall be liable for all stormwater utility charges
in the event payment is not made as required in this subchapter. The owner of any property
served which is occupied by tenants shall have the right to examine collection records of the
Village to determine whether such charges for such property have been paid at the office of
the Utility Billing Clerk during normal business hours.
(3) Any Stormwater Utility charges remaining unpaid more than twenty (20) days
from the date of billing shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to a late payment
charge equal to three percent (3%) of the delinquent charges in addition to all other charges.
All delinquent charges shall be collected as provided in Wis. Stats. §§66.0821(4) and
66.0809.
[Subsection Am. 06-29, Eff. 7-17-06]
8.89 APPEALS.
[Am. 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
(1) Any stormwater utility charge, determination of ERUs, or ERU credits for any
individual property may be appealed by filing a written appeal with the Village Clerk not later
than thirty (30) days after the date the payment is due. The appeal shall specify all bases for
the appeal and the amount of the stormwater charge the appellant asserts is appropriate.
Any appeal not filed within the time permitted by this section shall be deemed waived. As a
8-28
condition to maintaining an appeal, the appellant shall pay all charges billed under protest
prior to filing the appeal.
(2) The Village Board shall review the appeal and determine whether the
challenged determination is fair and reasonable and consistent with the provisions of this
subchapter, and whether a refund is due the customer. The Village Board shall provide the
appellant with written notice by regular mail at least 10 days prior to the meeting at which
the appeal will be reviewed, and an opportunity to present evidence and be heard on the
appeal at such meeting. The Village Board shall provide the appellant with its decision in
writing within 15 days after the date of the decision.
(3) If the Village Board determines that the decision appealed from should be
reversed or modified, it shall determine whether a refund is due the customer. Any refund
ordered shall be applied as a credit against the customer’s next stormwater billing if the
refund will not exceed the customer’s next quarterly stormwater billing, and otherwise will be
refunded by the Finance Director.
8.90 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT AND CHARGES.
(1) In addition to any other method for collection of the charges established
pursuant to this subchapter for Stormwater Utility costs, the Village Board may order that the
charges be levied against the property as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0627.
The mailing of an invoice reflecting the charges due to the owner shall be notice to the
owner that failure to pay the charges when due may result in such charges being placed
upon the tax roll.
(2) In addition to any other method of charging for Stormwater Utility expenses,
the Village Board may by resolution levy special assessments on property in a limited and
determinable area for special benefits conferred upon property by any public improvements
pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0703. The failure to pay such special assessments shall result in
a lien on the property and shall be enforced pursuant to Wis. Stat. §66.0703(13).
8.91 SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this subchapter is found to be invalid or
unenforceable for any reason, such determination shall not affect the validity or application
of, the remaining provisions. A determination of invalidity or unenforceability of any provision
as applied to any specific property or circumstance shall not affect the validity and
application of such provisions to any other property or circumstances.
9-1
CHAPTER 9
LICENSES AND PERMITS
9.01 Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages ......................................... 9-1
9.015 Licensing and Regulation of Adult Oriented Businesses ................................. 9-9
[Cr. 05-14, Eff. 4-21-05]
9.02 Cigarette Retailer License ................................................................................. 9-24
9.03 Amusement Device License ............................................................................. 9-24
9.04 Closing Out Sales .............................................................................................. 9-25
9.05 Regulation and Licensing of Direct Sellers and Solicitors ............................. 9-25
9.055 Special Event Vendor Licenses ........................................................................ 9-33
9.06 Junk Dealers ...................................................................................................... 9-35
9.07 Licensing of Animals ........................................................................................ 9-36
9.08 Regulation and Licensing of Bicycles ............................................................. 9-43
9.09 Penalty ............................................................................................................... 9-45
9.10 Payment Of Outstanding Obligations .............................................................. 9-45
9.01 INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGES.
(1) STATE STATUTES ADOPTED.
[Am. 16-11, Eff. 04-19-16]
(a) Except as modified by the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of Ch. 125,
Wis. Stats., relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages, are
hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference, except that the penalties for
violations shall be as set forth in this chapter.
[Renumbered 16-11, Eff. 04-19-16]
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no permit or license shall be
required for the sale of fermented malt beverages on behalf of the Village in any Village
park, provided that the fermented malt beverages are sold by officers or employees of the
Village.
[Par. (b) cr. 16-11, Eff. 04-19-16]
(2) LICENSES.
(a) When Required. No person, except as provided in sub. (1) of this section, shall
distribute, vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail or wholesale, deal or traffic in, or, for the
purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any intoxicating liquor or fermented
malt beverage, or cause the same to be done without having a valid license or permit as
provided in this section or in Chapter 125, Wis. Stats., nor without complying with all the
provisions of this section and all statutes, ordinances and regulations of the State and
Village applicable hereto.
[Repl. & Recr. 94-7, Eff. 02-21-94]
(b) Separate License Required for Each Place of Sale. Except as provided in
§125.26(2m) or §125.51(3)(bm), Wis. Stats., governing hotel rooms, a separate license shall
be required for each stand, place, room or enclosure or for each suite of rooms or
enclosures which are in direct connection or communication where intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale; and no license shall be issued
to any person for the purpose of selling or offering for sale any intoxicating liquor or
9-2
fermented malt beverage in any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment. The term
"dwelling house" as used in this section shall not include a hotel or licensed bed and
breakfast establishment.
(3) LICENSE FEES. There shall be the following classes and denominations of
licenses which, when issued by the Village Administrator under the authority of the Village
Board after payment of the fee hereinafter specified, shall permit the holder to sell, deal or
traffic in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages as provided in §§125.17, 125.18,
125.25, 125.26, 125.28(1) and (2), 125.51 (2), (3) or (10), Wis. Stats.
(a) "Class A" Intoxicating Liquor License. A "Class "A" license authorizes the retail
sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption off the premises where sold in original packages
or containers. The annual license fee shall be [$500.00].
(b) Class "A" Fermented Malt Beverage License. A Class "A" license authorizes the
retail sale of fermented malt beverages for consumption off the premises where sold in
original packages and containers. The annual license fee shall be $152.50 Class "A" liquor
licensed premises or $300.00 for all other premises.
(c)1. "Class B" Intoxicating Liquor Retailer's License. A "Class B" license authorizes
the retail sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises where sold by the glass
and not in the original package or container, the sale of wine in the original packages or
container for off-premises consumption and, pursuant to §125.51(3)(b), Wis. Stats., the sale
of intoxicating liquor in the original package or container in multiples not exceeding 4 liters at
any one time to be consumed off the premises where sold. A "Class B" license issued to a
winery authorizes only the sale of wine either by the glass for on-premises consumption or
in the original package or container for off-premises consumption. A "Class B" license may
be issued only to the holder of a Class “B" fermented malt beverage unless the applicant is
a winery as provided in §125.51(3)(am), Wis. Stats. The annual fee shall be $500.00.
[Am. 99-17, Eff. 4-23-99]
2. In addition to the annual fee, the fee for initial issuance of a reserve Class “B”
license, as defined in §125.51(4)(a)4, Wis. Stats., shall be $10,000.00.
[Am. 99-27, Eff. 5-17-99]
(d) Class "B" Fermented Malt Beverage License. A Class "B" license authorizes the
retail sale of fermented malt beverages to be consumed either on the premises where sold
or off the premises. The annual fee shall be $100.00.
(e) Class "B" Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer's License For Brewers. Class "B"
Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer's Licenses for Brewers shall be issued pursuant to
§125.31(1), Wis. Stats.
(f) Operators’ Licenses. 1. An operator’s License authorizes the holder to sell
alcohol beverages from a licensed premises without the immediate supervision of the
licensee or other person otherwise required by §125.68(2), Wis. Stats., or sub. (10) of this
section. The annual license fee shall be $35.00, which shall include a $5.00 fee for police
background checks. The $5.00 fee for the background check shall be paid upon filing of a
completed operator license application form. The balance of the fee shall be due at the time
of license issuance or renewal.
[Am. 96-30, Eff. 07-01-96; Am. 98-25, Eff. 11-5-98; Am. 03-05, Eff. 6-1-03; Am. 03-33, Eff. 9-15-2003]
9-3
2. Temporary Operators’ Licenses. A temporary operator’s license may be
issued to an operator employed by, or donating his or her services to, a
nonprofit corporation. No person shall hold more than one temporary
operator’s license in any year. A license issued under this subparagraph
shall be valid for a period of not more than 14 days and the approved
effective period shall be stated on the license. The fee for a temporary
operator’s license shall be $10, including a $5.00 fee for a police
background check which shall be paid at the time of application. The
balance of the fee shall be due at the time of license issuance. A temporary
operator’s license may not be renewed.
[Cr. 03-33, Eff. 9-15-2003]
(g) Wholesaler's Fermented Malt Beverage License. A Wholesaler's Fermented
Malt Beverage License authorizes the sale of fermented malt beverages only in the original
packages or containers to retailers or wholesalers for ultimate consumption off the
wholesaler's premises. The annual license fee shall be $25.00.
(h) Temporary Class "B" Fermented Malt Beverage License. Temporary Class "B"
licenses may be issued to bona fide clubs, to county or local fair associations or agricultural
societies to churches, lodges or societies which have been in existence for at least six (6)
months prior to the date of application and to posts of veterans' organizations authorizing
the sale of fermented malt beverages at a particular picnic or similar gathering at a meeting
of the post, or during a fair conducted by the fair association or agricultural society. License
fees shall be $10.00 for each event and shall be valid for not more than 3 consecutive days.
(i) ”Class C” Wine License. A “Class C” license authorizes the retail sale of wine by
the glass or in an opened original container for consumption on the premises where sold. A
“Class C” license may be issued to a person qualified under sub. (6) for a restaurant in
which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50% of gross receipts and which
does not have a barroom or for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts
for less than 50% of gross receipts and which has a barroom in which wine is the only
intoxicating liquor sold. As used in this subsection “barroom” means a room that is primarily
used for the sale or consumption of alcohol beverages. A “Class C” license shall particularly
describe the premises for which it is issued and may not be issued to a foreign corporation,
a foreign limited liability company or a person acting as agent for or in the employ of
another. The annual fee for a “Class C” license shall be $100.
[Repl. & Recr. 03-33, Eff. 9-15-2003]
(j) Semi-annual License. Semi-annual "Class A", "Class B" and "Class "B" licenses
may be issued pursuant to secs. 125.26(5) and 125.51(9), Wis. Stats. Such licenses are not
renewable during the calendar year in which issued. License fees shall be one-half the
annual fee for the same class of license.
(k) Provisional Operator’s License. A provisional operator’s license shall be issued
by the Village Administrator, upon request, to any person qualified under sec. 9.01(6)(e) of
this Code. License fees for provisional operators’ licenses shall be $15.00 and shall be paid
along with any fee for publication, as set forth in sec. 9.01(5) of this Code. A provisional
operator’s license expires sixty (60) days after its issuance, or sooner if a license under
§125.17(1), Wis. Stats. is issued to the holder or if the license is revoked, and authorizes
only the activities that the operator’s license applied for would authorize. Section 9.01(4) of
this Code does not apply to provisional operators’ licenses.
[Am. 00-55, Eff. 10-16-00]
9-4
(l) Provisional Retail License. A provisional retail license shall be issued by the
Village Administrator, upon request, to any person qualified under sec. 9.01 (6)(f) of this
Code. License fees for provisional retail licenses shall be $15.00 and shall be paid along
with any fee for publication, as set forth in sec. 9.01(5) of this Code. A provisional retail
license expires sixty (60) days after its issuance, or sooner if a Class “A”, Class “B”, “Class
A” or “Class B” license is issued to the holder or if the license is revoked, and authorizes
only the activities that the type of retail license applied for would authorize. Section 9.01(4)
of this Code does not apply to provisional retail license.
[Am. 00-55, Eff. 10-16-00]
(4) LICENSE PERIOD. All licenses issued under this section shall expire on June
30 next following the date of issuance. Fees for licenses provided in sub. (3)(a)-(e) issued
after July 1 in any year shall be prorated based on the number of months, and any fraction
thereof, remaining until their expiration. No other license fees shall be prorated.
[Repl. & Recr. 94-7, Eff. 02-21-94]
(5) ISSUANCE AND LICENSE FEES.
(a) General. License fees required under this section shall be paid by the applicant
when the applicant is notified by the Village Administrator of the granting of a license. No
license applied for and granted shall be issued until the appropriate license fee is received
by the Village Administrator. Licenses shall be granted by the Public Safety Committee.
[Repl. & Recr. 03-17, Eff. 04-10-03]
(b) Any person aggrieved by a decision made by the Public Safety Committee under
this section may appeal to the Village Board in writing. Upon receipt of an appeal, the
Village Clerk shall schedule the matter for consideration at a regular Village Board meeting.
The Village Board shall review the decision of the Committee de novo and may affirm,
reverse or modify the decision and may grant any license authorized by this section.
[Am. 03-17, Eff. 04-10-03]
(6) QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS. (a) Natural Persons.
Licenses related to alcohol beverages, issued to natural persons under this section, may be
issued only to persons who:
[Repl. & Recr. 94-7, Eff. 02-21-94]
1. Subject to secs. 111.321, 111.322, 111.335 and 125.12(1)(b), Wis. Stats. do
not have an arrest or conviction record.
2. Have been residents of this state continuously for at least one year prior to
the date of filing the application for license.
3. Are of legal drinking age except that a person 18 years of age or older may
be issued an operator's license.
4. Have submitted proof under §77.61(11), Wis. Stats., that such person holds
a seller's permit or has been advised that the Department of Revenue will
issue a seller's permit to that person, unless such applicant is exempt under
§125.04(5)(d)3, Wis. Stats.
9-5
(b) Criminal Offenders. No license or permit related to alcohol beverages may,
subject to §§111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, Wis. Stats, be issued under this section to any
natural person who has habitually been a law offender or has been convicted of a felony
unless the person has been duly pardoned.
(c) Corporations. No license or permit may be issued to any corporation unless the
agent of the corporation appointed under §125.04(6), Wis. Stats., and the officers and
directors of the corporation meet the qualifications of pars. (a) and (b) above, except that
par. (a)2 does not apply to officers and directors who are not the designated agent.
(d) Operator's Licenses. Paragraphs (a)2 and (a)4 of this subsection do not apply to
applicants for operator's licenses.
(e) Provisional Operators’ License Standards. A person is qualified to obtain a
provisional operator’s license if that person has submitted an application to the Village Clerk
for an operator’s license which states that the applicant meets the requirements for an
operator’s license under §§125.04(5) and 125.17(6)(a), Wis. Stats. and section 9.01(6) of
this Code. If the applicant is otherwise qualified, but has not successfully completed a
training course, as required for an operator’s license under §125.17(6)(a), Wis. Stats., the
person is qualified for a provisional operator’s license if enrolled in a qualified training course
at the time of application, but the provisional operator’s license shall be revoked if the
applicant fails to successfully complete the training course in which her or she is enrolled. A
provisional operator’s license may not be issued to any person who has been denied a
license by the Village under §125.17(1), Wis. Stats. The Village Administrator may revoke a
provisional operator’s license if he or she discovers that the holder of the license made a
false statement on the application.
[Am. 00-55, Eff. 10-16-00]
(f) Provisional Retail License Standards. A person is qualified to obtain a provisional
retail license if that person has submitted an application to the Village Clerk for a Class “A”,
Class “B”, “Class A” or “Class B” license which states that the applicant meets the
requirements for a retail license under §125.51, Wis. Stats. and sec. 9.01(6) of this Code. A
provisional retail “Class B” license may not be issued if the Village’s quota under §125.51(4),
Wis. Stats. prohibits issuance of a “Class B” license. The Village Administrator may revoke
a provisional retail license if he or she discovers that the holder of the license made a false
statement on the application.
[Am. 00-55, Eff. 10-16-00]
(7) LICENSE CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS. In addition to the requirements
imposed by provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference in sub. (1) of this
section, the following conditions and restrictions shall apply to the issuance of licenses or
permits pursuant to this section:
[Repl. & Recr. 94-7, Eff. 02-21-94]
(a) Effect of Revocation of License. No license shall be issued for any premises if a
license covering such premises has been revoked within 6 months prior to application. No
license shall be issued to any person who has had a license issued pursuant to this section
revoked within 12 months prior to application.
(b) Inspection of Application and Premises. The Village Administrator shall notify
the Chief of Police of all license and permit applications and these officials shall inspect, or
cause to be inspected, each application and premises to determine whether the applicant
9-6
and the premises sought to be licensed comply with the regulations, ordinances and laws
applicable thereto and the applicant's fitness for the trust to be imposed. The Chief of Police
shall furnish to the Village Board, in writing, the information derived from such investigation.
No license or permit provided for in this section shall be issued without the approval of the
Village Board.
(c) Health and Sanitation. No license shall be issued for any premises which does
not conform to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the Wisconsin Department of
Commerce and the State Board of Health and to all such ordinances and regulations
adopted by the Village.
(d) [Repealed 00-20, Eff. 6-5-00]
(e) Cessation of Operation. Where the holder of a Class "B" license ceases to
operate or do business while same is validly in force and effect, the licensee, or his heirs,
may, at the discretion of the Village Board, continue to hold said license for its unexpired
term and shall also be eligible to apply for and receive one normal one-year renewal thereof;
it being the intent and purpose of this paragraph to allow the licensee, or his or her heirs, to
consummate bona fide rental or sale of the business assets involved.
(f) Review Prior to Approval. No license or permit shall be issued to any person or
officer or director of a corporation unless the application therefor shall first have been
reviewed and a recommendation received from the Police Department. The foregoing
prerequisite shall apply to both original and renewal applications.
(g) Wearing Apparel. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of premises
holding a Class “A,” “Class A,” Class “B,” or “Class B," or “Class C” license to allow any
person to expose to public view on the licensed premises any specified anatomical area as
defined in §9.015(1)(pp), or to employ any device which is intended to give the appearance
of or simulate such specified anatomical areas.
[Repealed & recreated 05-14, Eff. 4-21-05]
(h) Orderly Conduct Required. Each licensed premises shall at all times be
conducted in an orderly manner and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be
allowed any time on any licensed premises. "No owner or operator of premises holding a
Class “A,” “Class A,” Class “B,” or “Class B," or “Class C” license shall allow any person on
the licensed premises to publicly display or perform any specified sexual activities as
defined in §9.015(1)(qq)."
[Am. 05-14, Eff. 4-21-05]
(i) Violation by Agents or Employees. A violation of paragraph (g) or (h) of this
subsection by an agent or employee of a licensee shall constitute a violation of the licensee.
(8) CLOSING HOURS.
(a) "Class B" or Class "B" Premises. No premises for which a retail "Class B" or
Class "B" liquor or fermented malt beverage license has been issued shall remain open for
the sale of liquor or beer between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., subject to the following
exceptions:
[Repl. & Recr. 94-7, Eff. 02-21-94]
9-7
1. On Saturday and Sunday the closing hours shall be from 2:30 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.;
2. On January 1, no closed hours are required;
3. A hotel or restaurant whose principal business is the furnishing of food or
lodging to patrons, bowling centers, indoor horseshoe-pitching facilities,
curling clubs, golf courses and gold clubhouses may remain open for regular
business but may not sell alcohol beverages during the hours otherwise
limited by this section;
(b) Presence On Premises After Closing. It shall be unlawful for any person to
remain in any licensed premises after closing except that any licensee, permittee, employee,
salesperson, employees of licensed wholesalers and service personnel are exempt from this
prohibition while performing job-related activities.
(c) Premises to Be Lighted. During closing hours, the premises shall be illuminated
sufficiently and windows uncovered as to enable the premises to be observed by a police
officer from without.
(9) HOURS OF SALE FOR PACKAGED GOODS.
[Repl. & Recr. 94-7, Eff. 02-21-94]
(a) No person shall sell, give, purchase or carry out from a licensed premises under
this section any fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor in an original, unopened
package, container or bottle for consumption away from such premises between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day. A winery operating under a “Class B” license
may not sell intoxicating liquor between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the
following day.
[Am. 00-73, Eff. 12-22-00; Am. 07-01, Eff. 01-04-07; Am. 07-01, Eff. 01-05-07; Am. 18-22, Eff. 10-26-18]
(b) During all hours when sales are prohibited under par. (a), all intoxicating liquor
and fermented malt beverages located on "Class A" or Class "A" licensed premises shall be
securely locked within a room, cooler, locker, building or other enclosure such that no
person other than those described in sub. 10(a) may gain access thereto.
(10) SUPERVISION BY LICENSEE.
(a) Presence of Licensee or Permit Holder Required. Except as provided in pars.
(b) and (c), no premises operating under a license or permit permitting the sale of
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages shall be open for business at any time
unless there is upon the premises either the licensee or permittee, the agent named in the
license or permit held by a corporation, or some person holding a valid operator's license
who is responsible for the acts of all persons selling or serving any intoxicating liquor to
consumers. For purposes of this subsection, any member of the licensee's or permittee's
immediate family who has attained the age of 18 shall be considered a holder of an
operator's license.
[Repl. & Recr. 94-7, Eff. 02-21-94]
(b) Exception - Class "A" Establishments During Prohibited Beer Sale Hours.
Notwithstanding the requirements of par. (a), premises operating under a Class "A"
Fermented Malt Beverage License may remain open for the conduct of regular business
9-8
without the presence of a person described in par. (a) during the hours when sales of
fermented malt beverages are prohibited by sub. (8).
(c) Exception - Alcohol-Free Functions. The provisions of par. (a) shall not apply to
any "Class B" or Class "B" licensed premises during times specified in advance with notice
to the Police Department during which no alcohol beverages are consumed, sold or given
away, provided that all alcohol beverages are stored in a locked portion of the premises.
(d) Sales by Unlicensed Person. No person may serve or sell any intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverages in or from any licensed or permitted premises unless he or she
is:
1. the licensee or permittee;
2. the agent named in a license or permit held by a corporation;
3. a member of the immediate family of the licensee or permittee and is at
least 18 years of age;
4. the holder of a valid operator's license; or
5. at least 18 years of age and is acting under the direct supervision of person
described in subpars. 1-4.
(e) Definition - Immediate family. For purposes of this section, a person is deemed
to be a member of the immediate family of the licensee only if he or she regularly resides in
the same household of the named licensee. An agent named in the license issued to a
corporation shall not be deemed a licensee for purposes of this paragraph.
(11) SEARCH OF LICENSED PREMISES. It shall be a condition of any license
issued hereunder that the licensed premises may be entered and inspected at any
reasonable hour by any police officer of the Village without any warrant and the application
for a license hereunder shall be deemed a consent to this provision. Any refusal to permit
such inspection shall automatically operate as a revocation of any license issued hereunder
and shall be deemed a violation of this section.
[Repl. & Recr. 94-7, Eff. 02-21-94]
(12) POSTING LICENSES. Licenses or permits issued under this section shall be
posted and displayed as provided in §125.04(10), Wis. Stats., and any licensee or permittee
who shall fail to post his license or permit as therein required shall be deemed to be
operating without a license.
[Repl. & Recr. 94-7, Eff. 02-21-94]
(13) REVOCATION, SUSPENSION AND REFUSAL TO RENEW LICENSES.
[Repl. & Recr. 94-7, Eff. 02-21-94]
(a) Procedure. Except as hereinafter provided, the provisions of §125.12(2) and (3),
Wis. Stats., shall be applicable to proceedings for the revocation, suspension and refusal to
renew all licenses granted under this section.
(b) Repossession of License. Whenever a license under this section shall be
revoked or suspended pursuant to this subsection, it shall be the duty of the Village
9-9
Administrator to notify the licensee of such suspension or revocation and to notify the Chief
of Police, who shall take physical possession of the license wherever it may be found and
file it in the Village Administrator's office.
9.015 LICENSING AND REGULATION OF ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
[Cr. 05-14, Eff. 4-21-05]
(1) DEFINITIONS. As used in this section:
(a) "Adult Bath House" means an establishment or business which provides the
service of baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy, that is not
operated by a medical practitioner or a professional physical therapist licensed by the State
of Wisconsin and which establishment provides to its customers an opportunity for engaging
in specified sexual activities as defined in this section.
(b) "Adult Body Painting Studio" means an establishment or business wherein
customers are afforded an opportunity to paint images on a body which is wholly or partially
nude.
(c) "Adult Bookstore" means an establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock and trade in books, magazines, and other periodicals which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein. The term
includes an establishment having as its stock in trade, for sale, rent, trade, lease, inspection
or viewing books, films, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, computers or
computer programs in any format, motion pictures, magazines or other periodicals which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating
to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and in conjunction therewith have
facilities for the presentation of adult entertainment, including adult-oriented videotapes,
films, motion pictures or other offered entertainment for observation by customers therein.
The term includes a commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with “specified sexual activities.”
(d) "Adult Cabaret" means a nightclub, dance hall, bar, restaurant, or similar
commercial establishment that regularly features:
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or
2. Live performances that are characterized by “specified sexual activities”; or
3. Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic or
computer reproductions or depictions that are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities” or “nudity”.
(e) "Adult Entertainment" means any exhibition of any motion pictures, live
performance, display or dance of any type, wherein a significant or substantial portion of
such performance is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on any actual or
simulated performance of specified sexual activities, the exhibition and viewing of specified
anatomical areas, or the removal of articles of clothing to reveal specified anatomical areas.
9-10
(f) "Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater" means an enclosed building with a capacity
for less than fifty (50) customers, including establishments that have coin operated video or
motion picture booths, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas as defined herein for observation by customers therein.
(g) "Adult Motel" means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which:
1. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides
customers with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
2. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10)
hours; or
3. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a
period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
(h) "Adult Motion Picture Theater" means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty
(50) or more persons at which a significant or substantial portion of the material presented is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by customers
therein.
(i) "Adult Motion Picture Theater (Outdoor)" means a parcel of land from which
individuals may view a motion picture presented out of doors which presents material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas for observation by customers.
(j) "Adult Novelty Shop" means an establishment or business having as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock and trade in novelty or similar items which are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas or for simulation of the foregoing.
(k)1. "Adult Oriented Establishment" means an establishment which includes, but is
not limited to, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, outdoor adult motion picture
theaters, adult mini-motion theaters, adult theaters, adult bath houses, adult body painting
studios, adult motels, adult novelty shops or adult cabarets, sexual encounter centers,
escort agencies, establishments featuring live sexually explicit performances, and any
premises to which public customers or members are invited or admitted and which are so
physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls
separate from the common area of the premises for the purposes of viewing adult oriented
motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the
public, a customer or a member, whether or not such adult entertainment is held, conducted,
operated or maintained for profit, direct or indirect. An adult oriented establishment further
includes, without being limited to, any adult entertainment studio or any premises that is
physically arranged and used as such whether advertised or represented as an adult
9-11
entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio,
modeling studio or any other term of like import.
2. Adult Oriented Establishment shall not include:
a. theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, and dinner theaters where
live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of serious artistic,
social or political merit are offered on a regular basis; and in which the
predominant business or attraction is not the offering of entertainment
which is intended for the sexual interests or titillation of customers; and
where the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on or the
advertising or promotion of nude or semi-nude performances; or
b. any public or private school, as defined in Chapter 115, Wis. Stats., when
instructing pupils as part of its curriculum.
(L) "Adult Theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment that regularly features persons who appear, in person, in a state of nudity
and/or semi-nudity, and/or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
(m) "Allow" shall mean to affirmatively authorize or grant permission, or to fail to take
all reasonable steps to prevent, specified conduct or activities.
(n) "Booth, Room or Cubicle" means any enclosure that is specifically offered to the
public or members of an adult oriented establishment for hire or for a fee as part of a
business operated on the premises which offers as part of its business the entertainment to
be viewed within the enclosure, including any such enclosures offered without a fee but in
which the entertainment is dispensed for a fee. "Booth, room, or cubicle" does not include
such enclosures that are private offices used by the owners, managers or persons
employed on the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, which enclosures
are not held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or for the
purpose of viewing entertainment for a fee, and are not open to any persons other than
employees, nor rooms in hotels, motels or other similar establishments licensed by the State
of Wisconsin pursuant to Chapter 50, Wis. Stats.
(o) "Female Breast" means a portion of the human female mammary gland including
the nipple and the areola.
(p) Buttocks. The area at the rear of the human body (sometimes referred to as the
gluteus maximus) which lies between two (2) imaginary straight lines running parallel to the
ground when a person is standing, the top such line being one-half (1/2) inch below the top
of the vertical cleavage of the nates (i.e., the prominence formed by the muscles running
from the back of the hip to the back of the leg) and the bottom such line being one-half (1/2)
inch above the lowest point of the curvature of the fleshy protuberance (sometimes referred
to as the gluten fold), and between two (2) imaginary straight lines, one on each side of the
body (the “outside line”), which outside lines are perpendicular to the ground and pass
through the outermost point(s) at which each nate meets the outer side of each leg, except
that portion of the above-described area which is left or right of an imaginary vertical line
through the anus by a distance of at least 1/6 of the width of the entire buttocks area.
9-12
(r) "Church" means any building, whether or not situated within the Village, in which
persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is intended primarily for
purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious
belief.
(s) "Customer" means any person who:
1. Is allowed to enter an adult oriented establishment in return for the payment
of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; or
2. Enters an adult oriented business and purchases, rents or otherwise
partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services
offered therein; or
3. Is a member of and on the premises of an adult oriented establishment
operating as a private club.
(t) "Community" when used to modify the term "standards" means the State of
Wisconsin.
(u) "Day Care Center" means a facility licensed by the State of Wisconsin pursuant
to §48.65, Wis. Stats., whether situated within the Village or not.
(v) "Employee" means any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at, or render any services directly or indirectly related to, the operation of an adult
oriented establishment.
(w) "Entertainer" any person who provides entertainment within an adult oriented
establishment, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or
not entertainment is provided as an employee or independent contractor, including:
1. Any person who appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity in a sexually
oriented business; or
2. Any person who engages in live performances that are characterized by
“specified sexual activities”.
(x) "Escort" means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model
lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
(y) "Escort Agency" means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip,
or other consideration.
(z) "Harmful to Minors" means that quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, of nudity, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, which
taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex, which taken as a whole portrays
sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, and which taken as a whole does not have
9-13
serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. Whether a work appeals to the prurient
interest and whether it depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, and
whether it has serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value are to be determined by
applying contemporary community standards in the adult community as a whole with respect
to what is suitable material for minors.
(aa) "Knowingly" means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief
or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
1. The character and content of any material described herein which is
reasonably suspect under this section; and
2. The age of a minor, provided, however, that an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
(bb) "Knowledge of Minor’s Age" means:
1. Knowledge or information that the person is a minor; or
2. Reason to know, or a belief or grounds for belief, which warrants further
inspection or inquiry of the age of the minor.
(cc) "Massage" means any process or procedure consisting of rubbing, stroking,
kneading or tapping, by physical or mechanical means, upon the external parts or tissues of
the body of another for consideration.
(dd) "Massage Establishment" means a place of business wherein private massage
is practiced, used or made available as a principal use of the premises other than by
persons licensed or certified by the Medical Examining Board, Board of Nursing,
Chiropractic Examining Board, Massage Therapy and Bodywork Council or a similar
regulatory agency of another state.
(ee) "Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(ff) "Nude" or "Nudity" means showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of the female breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of covered
male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
(gg) "Operator" except when used to modify the term "license" means any person
operating, conducting, maintaining or owning any adult oriented establishment or massage
establishment.
(hh) "Premises" means the real property upon which the adult oriented business is
located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to,
the adult oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking
garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or
operator of the business.
9-14
(ii) "Residential" means pertaining to the use of land, whether or not situated within
the Village, for purposes such as homes, townhouses, duplexes, condominiums, apartments
and mobile homes, which contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy and which
are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein. Premises which are
designed primarily for living, sleeping, working and eating therein shall be deemed to be
residential in character unless actually occupied and used exclusively for other purposes.
Hotels, motels, boarding houses, nursing homes and hospitals shall not be considered to be
residential.
(jj) "Sadomasochistic Abuse" means flagellation or torture of a person by another, or
the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained by another for
sexual gratification.
(kk) "School" means a building, whether or not situated within the Village, where
persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education, together with
playgrounds, stadium and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The
term is limited to:
1. Public and private schools used for primary or secondary education in which
any regular kindergarten or grades one (1) through twelve (12) classes are
taught; and
2. Special educational facilities in which students who have physical or learning
disabilities receive specialized education in lieu of attending regular classes
in kindergarten or any of grades one (1) through twelve (12).
(ll) "Semi-nude" or "Semi-Nudity" means the exposure of a bare female breast with
less than one- fourth (1/4) of the breast surface area, contiguous to and containing the
areola, completely and opaquely covered.
(mm) "Sexual Conduct" means the commission of any of the following: sexual
intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, human excretion, masturbation, sadism,
masochism, fellatio, cunnilingus, lewd exhibition of human genitals, or petting of a sexual
nature.
(nn) "Sexual Encounter Center" means a business or commercial enterprise that, as
one if its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
1. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the
opposite sex; or
2. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex
when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
(oo) "Sexual intercourse" means physical sexual contact between individuals that
involves the genitalia of at least one (1) person including, but not limited to, heterosexual
intercourse, sodomy, fellatio, or cunnilingus.
9-15
(pp) "Specified Anatomical Areas" means less than completely and opaquely
covered:
1. Human genitals or pubic region;
2. Buttock; or
3. Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
4. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
(qq) "Specified Sexual Activities" mean:
1. Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio, cunnilingus;
3. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or
female breasts, whether covered or uncovered.
4. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
forth in (1) through (3) above.
(rr) "Substantial" as used in various definitions, shall mean fifty percent (50%) or
more of a business’ stock in trade, display space, floor space or retail sales in any one (1)
month during the license year.
(2) PUBLIC INDECENCY PROHIBITED. (a) No person shall, within the Village of
DeForest municipal limits, knowingly or intentionally, in a public place, do any of the
following:
1. Engage in specified sexual activities;
2. Display any specified anatomical areas; or
3. Appear in a state of nudity.
(3) EXPOSING MINORS TO HARMFUL MATERIALS.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person for monetary or other consideration, to
knowingly exhibit to a minor, or to knowingly facilitate a minor's access to premises whereon
there is exhibited, a motion picture, show or other presentation which in whole or in part
depicts nudity, or specified sexual activities and which is harmful to minors.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or loan for monetary
consideration to a minor:
9-16
1. Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or similar
visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body
which depicts specified anatomical areas or shows specified sexual
activities and which is harmful to minors.
2. Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however produced, or sound
recording which contains any material enumerated in sub. (b)1 hereof, or
explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of specified
sexual activities and which, taken as a whole is harmful to minors.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to admit a minor to any premises
whereon there is exhibited nudity or specified sexual activities which is harmful to minors
unless such minor is accompanied by his/her parent or legal guardian.
(4) ADULT ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.
(a) License Required. No adult oriented establishment shall be operated or
maintained within the corporate limits of the Village of DeForest without first obtaining a
license to operate from the Village Clerk. A separate license shall be obtained for each
premises upon which an adult oriented establishment is operated.
(c) Application. Applications for an annual adult entertainment license shall be made
to the Village Clerk on a form approved by the Clerk. Each application shall include the
following information:
1. The name, including all aliases, address and date of birth of applicant and
all persons or entities having an ownership interest in the business to be
conducted under the license;
2. Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
3. All residential addresses used by the applicant for the past ten (10) years;
4. The business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for ten (10) years
immediately preceding the date of application;
5. The exact nature of the adult entertainment to be conducted on the
premises;
6. Whether the applicant previously operated an adult oriented establishment
in this or any other state, county or municipality, the trade name of the
business, and the name of each municipality or other unit of government
which issued any license or permit for the operation of that establishment.
7. Whether any license or permit issued to the applicant has ever been
revoked, suspended, limited or surrendered pursuant to a consent decree or
settlement agreement or otherwise as a condition to avoid prosecution, and
a full explanation of the reasons therefor.
9-17
8. All convictions of, and pending charges against, the applicant and all others
with any ownership interest in the business, for violations or alleged
violations of criminal and traffic laws, administrative regulations, and county
or municipal ordinances, including the circumstances of the violation or
alleged violation, the governmental entity which prosecuted the matter, the
disposition of the charge and the date of the disposition.
9. Two (2) portrait photographs of at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches of
the applicant.
10. The address of the adult oriented establishment to be operated by the
applicant under the license.
11. Proof of right to occupy the premises to be operated under the license,
whether by ownership, lease or otherwise.
12. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation, the date and
State of incorporation, and the name and address of the registered agent of
the corporation.
The failure or refusal of the applicant to provide any information required for the application,
or the applicant’s refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for
examination under oath regarding said application, or refusal to submit to or cooperate with
any investigation relating to the application, shall be grounds for denial thereof.
(c) Action on applications. The Clerk shall provide a copy of the application to the
Chief of Police. The Chief shall conduct an investigation into the matters asserted in the
application and submit a report and recommendations to the Village Board. A public hearing
shall be held before the Village Board on the application, preceded by publication of a Class
II notice. The Board may take any testimony regarding the granting or denial of such license.
The Board shall approve, approve with modifications or conditions or reject the application.
The reasons for the action taken shall be specified in the minutes of the Village Board. If the
application is denied, conditioned or modified by the Board, the Board shall specify the
findings made that support of its determination in accordance with par. (d).
(d) Standards for approval of applications. An application for an adult oriented
establishment shall be granted by the Village Board if all of the following standards are
satisfied:
1. Individual applicants.
a. The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
b. Subject to Chapter 111, Wis. Stats., the applicant shall not have been
convicted of, or have charges pending alleging the commission of, a
felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution or other crime
of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within ten (10) years immediately
preceding the date of the application;
9-18
c. The applicant shall not have been convicted of a violation of this section
within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application,
nor have had a license or permit for the operation of an adult oriented
establishment revoked, suspended or surrendered in lieu of revocation
or suspension within the previous 5 years;
2. Corporate or Partnership applicants. The provisions of subpar. 1 shall apply
to all partners in the partnership and all officers and directors of a
corporation.
3. The use of the licensed premises as proposed shall be allowed under the
Zoning Code.
4. The applicant must have the legal right to occupy the licensed premises and
conduct the proposed business on the premises.
5. The premises must be in full compliance with Village ordinances regulating
buildings and property maintenance.
6. The applicant shall be a resident of the State of Wisconsin, or have
appointed an agent within the State of Wisconsin who is authorized to
accept legal process on behalf of the applicant.
7. The issuance of the license will not violate the limitation on the number of
licenses permitted under par. (i) hereof nor the separation requirements of
sub. (10).
8. All of the information required on the application has been provided and
appears to be true and complete.
(f) License Term. A license granted under this subsection shall expire on June 30th
of each year and each license shall be subject to revocation as hereinafter provided.
(g) Form of License. The Village Clerk shall be responsible for issuing all licenses
under this subsection upon approval of the Village Board. All such licenses shall specify the
nature of the license, the name and address of the holder, a description of the premises
covered by the license and the dates during which it is applicable, as well as any conditions
that may be imposed by the Village. All such licenses shall be open to public inspection and
posted in public view on the premises for which issued.
(h) Fee. All applications for licenses or renewals under this subsection shall be
accompanied by a fee of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). If for any reason the license is
denied, one-half (1/2) of the license fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is
granted, the entire fee will be retained by the Village.
(i) Number of Licenses Limited. No more than three (3) annual adult entertainment
licenses under this subsection allowing live adult entertainment shall be issued and in effect
for all premises within the Village at any time, and no more than one (1) license shall be
issued to any individual, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation or to two or
9-19
more partnerships, corporations or limited liability companies who have any common
ownership.
(j) Renewal. The holder of an annual license granted under this subsection shall
submit an application for renewal at least sixty (60) days before the expiration of the license.
The failure to comply with this application schedule shall mean that the license shall lapse
and any new application shall be reviewed as a new application. A timely application for
renewal shall be approved by the Village Board unless the Board finds grounds for nonrenewal
as provided in sub. (5).
(k) Transfer of license. No license granted under the provisions of this subsection
shall be transferable to any other person or premises. All license applications shall be
original or for a renewal.
(L) Display of License. An adult oriented establishment license shall he displayed in
a conspicuous public place in the adult oriented establishment.
(5) LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR NON-RENEWAL.
(a) General. Any license granted pursuant to this section may be revoked,
suspended or not be renewed by the Village Board for any of the following reasons:
1. The applicant has made any false or misleading statement on the
application for the license.
2. The licensee has been convicted of violating any provision of this section,
except for violations of the Zoning, Property Maintenance or Building Codes.
3. The licensee has been convicted of any two separate violations of Zoning,
Property Maintenance or Building Codes which occur in the current license
year.
4. Subject to §§111.321, 111.322, 111.335 and 125.12(1)(b), Wis. Stats., the
license holder or an employee or performer hired by the license holder, has
been convicted of a criminal offense occurring on the licensed premises.
5. The licensed premises have habitually been the source of violations of
Village Ordinances or state or federal criminal laws by the license holder,
employees, contractors of the license holder or customers of the business.
6. The licensee is no longer eligible to hold the license.
(b) Notice of Hearing. No license shall be revoked, suspended, or not renewed by
the Village Board except upon due notice and hearing to determine whether grounds for
such action exist. Such hearing shall be held before the Public Safety Committee. Notice of
such hearing shall be in writing and shall state the grounds of the complaint against the
licensee. The notice shall be served upon the licensee at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
date of the hearing and shall state the time and place thereof.
9-20
(c) Hearing. The licensee shall be entitled to be heard, to be represented by counsel,
to cross- examine witnesses, to present witnesses on his or her own behalf under subpoena
by the Village Board if such is required, and the hearing may be stenographically recorded
at the licensee’s option and expense. At the conclusion of such hearing, the Public Safety
Committee shall prepare findings of fact and conclusions of law and make a
recommendation as to what, if any, action the Village Board should take with respect to the
license. The record of the hearing shall be forwarded to the Board with the recommendation.
The Committee shall provide the complainant and licensee with a copy of the report.
(d) Board Action. The Village Board shall make a final determination whether to
revoke, suspend or not renew a license at a duly noticed public meeting. The license holder
may submit written arguments to the Board at any time prior to the hearing, and the Board
shall consider such arguments in making its decision. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no new
evidence not presented to the Committee shall be considered by the Board. The Village
Board shall include in its minutes the reasons for the action taken. The Clerk shall notify the
license holder of the Board's determination in writing, including the reasons cited by the
Board in its decision.
(6) REGISTRATION OF EMPLOYEES.
(a) All operators, employees, and independent contractors working in any adult
oriented establishment hereunder shall, prior to beginning employment or contracted duties,
register with the Village Clerk. Such registration shall include the following:
1. Name, address, birth date, any aliases used, telephone numbers, date of
employment and name of employer; and
2. A current photograph at least 2" x 2" in dimensions.
(c) All registrations hereunder are valid for a period of one (1) year.
(d) The registration fee of Fifteen Dollars ($15.00) shall be paid per registration,
which shall be paid to the Village to cover costs of investigation and administration.
(7) PHYSICAL LAYOUTS OF ADULT ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS.
(a) Booths, Rooms and Cubicles. Any adult oriented establishment having available
for customers, customers or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of
any motion picture, videotape, compact disc or live performance in which a significant or
substantial portion of the material presented is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Access. Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from
aisles and public areas of the adult oriented establishment and shall be
unobstructed by any door, lock or other device physically restricting access
thereto.
2. Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall be constructed such that:
9-21
a. it is separated from adjacent booths, rooms, cubicles and any non-public
areas by a wall;
b. it has at least one (1) side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that
there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same.
c. all walls are constructed of solid building materials without any openings,
extended from the floor to a height of not less than six (6) feet, and be
light colored, non-absorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable.
d. the floor is light colored, non-absorbent, smooth textured and easily
cleanable.
e. the lighting level within each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use, is
maintained at a minimum of ten (10) foot candles as measured at the
floor.
3. Occupants. Only one (1) individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at
any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of specified sexual
activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No person
shall alter, damage or deface any portion of any such booth, room or cubicle
in such a manner that it no longer complies with the provisions of this
Section.
(8) RESPONSIBILITIES OF LICENSEES.
(a) Employee Registry. Every licensee under this section shall maintain a register of
all employees, showing the name and aliases used by the employee, home address, birth
date, gender, telephone numbers, Social Security Number, and date of employment and
termination. The register shall be maintained on the premises at all times throughout the
license period. The licensee shall make the register available immediately for inspection by
law enforcement officers upon demand.
(b) Vicarious liability. Every act or omission by an employee or independent
contractor retained by or on behalf of the licensee to work in or on the licensed premises
constituting a violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed the act or omission
of the operator.
(c) Minors. No licensee shall allow any minor to loiter in or around the licensed
premises or to view sexually-explicit live adult entertainment or materials containing
depictions of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. No minor shall be
allowed to enter or be on the premises of an adult oriented establishment at any time the
adult oriented establishment is open for business
(d) Enforcement. Each adult oriented establishment shall have an attendant
stationed at each public entrance to the premises at all times during regular business hours.
The attendant shall be responsible for preventing any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years from entering the premises. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was
under the age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished proof that
the person was at least eighteen years old in the form of one of the following:
9-22
1. A valid operator’s, commercial operator’s, or chauffeurs driver’s license; or
2. A personal identification card issued by the State of Wisconsin.
(e) Customer compliance. The licensee shall ensure compliance by its customers
with the provisions of this section.
(f) Public information. The licensee shall ensure there is conspicuously displayed at
a place near the main entrance of the establishment, any information, brochures, or
pamphlets supplied by the Village containing public information relating to sexually
transmitted diseases.
(g) Posting of regulations. The licensee of every adult oriented establishment that
provides booths, rooms or cubicles regulated under sub. (7) shall ensure that the regulations
on occupancy set forth in sub. (7)(a)3 are posted on signs, with lettering at least one (1)
inch high, in conspicuous areas of the establishment and in each of the booths, rooms or
cubicles.
(h) Hours of operation. No adult oriented establishment regulated by this section
may remain open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., except on Saturday and
Sunday, when the closing hours shall be between 2:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. No person other
than the licensee or an employee of the licensee may remain on the premises during closed
hours, except that persons actively engaged in making deliveries of supplies or equipment,
cleaning, maintaining, or repairing any portion of the premises, or conducting other
reasonably necessary business relating to the management of the premises or the
administration of the business conducted thereon may be present on the premises after 6:00
a.m. on any day.
(n) Sanitary conditions. The licensee shall maintain the premises in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times.
(9) REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO PREMISES LICENSED FOR LIVE
PERFORMANCES. In addition to the provision of sub. (8), the provisions of this section
shall apply to all adult oriented establishments licensed for live performances featuring the
display of specified anatomical areas.
1. No person shall be allowed to have any physical contact with any
entertainer or employee on the premises at any time while the entertainer or
employee is displaying any specified anatomical area.
2. All performances shall occur on a stage or table that is elevated at least
eighteen (18) inches above the immediately adjacent floor level and that is
located not be less than five (5) feet from any area occupied by any
customer.
3. No customer shall be allowed within five (5) feet of any entertainer whose
performance includes the display of specified anatomical areas while the
entertainer is performing or is displaying any specified anatomical areas.
9-23
4. The premises shall be adequately illuminated so as to permit safe ingress
and egress from the premises.
5. Excessive noise emanating from the premises shall be prohibited and good
order shall be maintained on the premises at all times when such premises
are open for business. The licensee shall assure that the police department
is promptly notified of any activity on the premises which violates any
applicable state law or this Code, including, but not limited to, excessive
noise, public indecency, the use or delivery of controlled substances,
unlawful sexual contact, fighting, assaults, batteries, property damage or
other disorderly conduct, the presence of minors on the premises, or
violation of any rules established by the license holder in order to comply
with this section.
6. The license holder shall insure that building capacity limits as set by the Fire
Department and/or Building code are complied with at all times.
7. The license holder shall comply with all applicable State Statutes and
regulations and all Village ordinances.
8. The license holder and employees on the licensed premises shall obey all
reasonable orders and directions of any law enforcement officer.
9. No license holder, personally or through an agent or employee, shall
advertise, allow or produce nude entertainment or performances or other
forms of nudity on the premises.
10. The license holder shall not allow any person to publicly perform specified
sexual activities on the licensed premises.
11. The licensee shall not allow any performer or employee to use simulated
sexual organs during dances or performances.
12. No alcohol or fermented malt beverages shall be consumed on the premises
and no person shall be allowed to remain on the premises during any
performance if that person is intoxicated or under the influence of controlled
substances.
(10) SEPARATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS FROM OTHER USES.
(a) No license for an adult oriented establishment shall be issued, and no such use
shall be established, within one thousand (1,000) feet of any area zoned for residential use,
or of any church, school, nursing home, public park, or day care center. No license shall be
issued for an adult oriented establishment on premises located within one thousand five
hundred (1,500) feet of any other establishment licensed under this section or within five
hundred (500) feet of any premises operated under a "Class B" or Class "B" alcohol
beverage or fermented malt beverage license.
(b) All minimum separation distances provided in this subsection shall be measured
in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the property line of
9-24
the adult oriented establishment to the nearest property line of another adult oriented
establishment, school, church, nursing home, public park, day care center, residential
district, or business holding an alcohol beverage license.
(11) PENALTY. In addition to any other penalty allowed by law, including any
licensing action allowed under this section, whoever violates any of the provisions of this
subsection shall forfeit not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00), and not more
than Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, together with all applicable
assessments and court costs.
9.02 CIGARETTE RETAILER LICENSE. No person shall sell cigarettes in the
Village without first obtaining a license from the Village Administrator. The provisions of
§134.65, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and made a part of this section by reference. The
license fee shall be $100.00 per year. Licenses issued under this section shall be valid from
the date of issuance and shall expire on the following June 30th.
[Am. 03-08, Eff. 2-6-03]
9.03 AMUSEMENT DEVICE LICENSE.
(1) DEFINITIONS. The following terms as used in this section shall be construed as
follows:
(a) Amusement Device. Any machine operated by coin or token, commonly referred
to as pinball machine, marble machine, shooting gallery, etc., and music machine or juke
box, shuffle board, Keeno, pool tables and any and all other devices when set up and
operated in any established place of business for profit, the operation of which involves a
skill feature.
(b) Gambling Device. Any instrument, device or thing used for gambling or playing
any game of chance for money or any other thing of value.
(2) GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED. No person shall set up for operation,
operate, lease or distribute for the purpose of operation, any gambling device.
(3) LICENSE REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or provide any
amusement device or for any person to maintain or permit the maintenance of any such
amusement device on premises owned or under the control of any such person without first
obtaining a license for each such device from the Village Administrator. The applicant shall
provide any information required to identify the device licensed. The license fee shall be $5
per year and the license shall be valid until the next succeeding July 1. The license, when
issued, shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the device so licensed. Nothing
herein shall be construed to authorize the licensing of slot machines or gambling devices.
9.04 CLOSING OUT SALES.
(1) LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall conduct a closing out sale of
merchandise without having first obtained a license from the Village Administrator.
(2) LICENSE FEES.
(a) For a period not exceeding 15 days - $25.
9-25
(b) For a period not exceeding 30 days - $50.
(c) For a period not exceeding 60 days - $75.
(d) In addition to the fees set forth in pars. (a), (b) and (c), a fee of $1.00 per $1,000
of inventory to be sold.
(3) NEW INVENTORY PROHIBITED. The licensee shall sell no merchandise
during the closing out sale which was not in his inventory on the date of his application for
license was submitted.
9.05 REGULATION AND LICENSING OF DIRECT SELLERS AND
SOLICITORS.
[Repl. & Recr. 06-33, Eff. 10-5-06]
(1) GENERAL. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in direct sales,
solicitations or canvassing within the Village in violation of this section.
(2) DEFINITIONS. In this section:
(a) “Call” means to appear in person upon premises occupied by another with
the intent to announce one’s presence to a person within a building on the premises by
knocking on a door or other part of the building, ringing a door bell, shouting or other similar
means.
(b) “Canvasser” shall mean a person who engages in canvassing within the
Village.
(c) “Canvassing” shall mean the act of traveling from door to door, or place to
place, within the Village for the purpose of promoting, supporting, opposing, or otherwise
conveying to other person any position on, or information related to, any matter of religious,
political, social or other interest or any candidate for political office and who, in connection
with such activities does not solicit the present transfer of money or other thing of value or
the sale of goods or services.
(d) "Charitable organization" means any of the following:
1. An organization that is described in section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue
code and that is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of the internal
revenue code.
2. A person who is or purports to be established for a charitable purpose.
(e) "Charitable purpose" means any of the following:
1. A purpose described in section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code.
2. A benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, scientific, patriotic, social
welfare or advocacy, public health, environmental conservation, civic or other
eleemosynary objective.
[Am. 03-16, Eff. 4-10-03; Am. 06-33, Eff. 10-5-06]
9-26
(f) “Direct Sale” shall mean the sale of goods or services, the taking of orders for
the later delivery of goods or services or any other activity intended to promote the sale of
any goods or services, by direct, in-person communication, at any location in the Village
other than the permanent business place or residence of the seller. Direct sales include
door-to-door sales, sales made from vehicles or sales from any other temporary location not
intended to be continuously occupied for business purposes for a period of at least one
year. The offering of any trial, demonstration, sample, cost estimate, or other promotion of a
product or service available for sale, whether or not a charge is made therefor, shall be
deemed a direct sale under this section. Direct sales do not include sales made through
communications by mail, telephone, email, the internet or other means which do not involve
direct face-to-face contact between the seller and prospective customer. For purposes of
this section, the acceptance of a “donation” in exchange for goods, or an order for goods,
shall be deemed a direct sale if the primary purpose of the transaction is commercial profit.
[Am. 08-15, Eff. 5-16-08]
(g) “Direct Seller” shall mean any person, other than a solicitor, conducting or
attempting to conduct direct sales within the Village limits.
[Renumbered and Am. 08-15, Eff. 5-16-08]
(h) “Goods” includes personal property of any kind and shall include goods
provided incidental to services offered or sold.
[Renumbered 08-15, Eff. 5-16-08]
(i) [Repealed 08-15, Eff. 5-16-08]
(j) “Person” shall mean an individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership or other entity.
(k) “Soliciting” shall mean the practice of traveling from door to door, or place to
place, within the Village for the purpose of requesting the donation of money or other things
of value, whether or not in connection with canvassing or other activities, provided, however,
that the solicitation of funds to be sent directly to an organization by the donor or through
other means not involving the direct transfer of monetary value to the a canvasser shall not
be considered soliciting. “Soliciting” does not include the solicitation of items of nominal
value as part of holiday customs such as “trick-or-treating” at times sanctioned by the
Village.
(l) “Solicitor” shall mean any person engaged in soliciting within the Village.
(3) EXEMPTIONS. The following shall be exempt from the permitting
requirements of this section:
(a) Any person delivering any lawful product or service to regular customers on
established routes.
[Am. 08-15, Eff. 5-16-08]
(b) Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods.
(c) Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown unless
such sales are made door-to-door.
9-27
(d) Any person who has an established place of business where the goods being
sold are offered for sale on a regular basis if the buyer has initiated contact with, and
specifically authorized a home visit by, said person or his or her employees or agents.
[Am. 08-15, Eff. 5-16-08]
(e) Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had,
a prior business transaction such as a prior sale or credit arrangement on other than a onetime
basis with the prospective customer.
(f) Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and
any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
(g) Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in
direct sales or solicitations for or on behalf of such organization, provided that the direct
seller or solicitor is registered with the Village Clerk as provided in sub. (5).
(h) Any person engaged in canvassing but who is not engaged in any solicitation
of sales or funds.
(i) Any person while operating under the authority of a special event vendor
license issued under §9.055.
(4) PERMITTING OF DIRECT SELLERS.
(f) Permit Required. No person shall engage in direct sales within the Village
without holding a valid permit from the Village Clerk.
(b) Application Requirements. Applicants for direct sellers’ permits shall
complete and return to the Clerk an application form provided by the Clerk containing the
following information:
1. The applicant’s name, permanent residence address, telephone number
and any temporary address at which the applicant is currently residing;
2. The name, address and telephone number of the person or entity the
applicant represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise or services
the applicant proposes to sell;
3. The temporary address from which the direct seller intends to operate, or a
description of the methods to be used to contact potential customers (e.g.
door-to-door);
4. A general description of the goods or services to be offered or sold;
[Am. 08-15, Eff. 5-16-08]
5. The proposed method of delivery of any goods sold;
6. The make, model, state of registration and license number of any vehicle to
be used in the conduct of direct sales;
9-28
7. The most recent municipalities, not to exceed three (3), in which the
applicant conducted direct sales;
8. The address and telephone number at which the applicant can be contacted
for at least the seven (7) days after completing his or her direct sales
activities in the Village;
9. A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a violation of a
municipal ordinance relating to the regulation of direct sellers or solicitors, or
of any criminal offense within the previous five (5) years.
10. A statement as to whether any charges are pending for violation of any
municipal ordinance regulating direct sellers or solicitors and the details of
the charges.
(c) Additional Application Requirements. Applicants shall present to the Village
Clerk for examination and copying:
1. A driver’s license or some proof of identity as may be reasonably required
by the Clerk.
2. A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of weights
and measurers where the applicant’s business requires use of weighing and
measuring devices approved by state authorities.
3. A state health officer’s certificate where the applicant’s business involves
the handling of food or clothing, and is required to be certified under state
law; such certificate to state that applicant is apparently free from any
contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days prior to the
date the application for license is being made.
[Am. 03-11, Eff. 4-10-03; Am. 06-30, Eff. 10-5-06]
(d) Application Fee. At the time of application, a non-refundable investigation fee
of $20.00 shall be paid to the Village Clerk to cover the cost of processing said registration.
Applicants whose direct sales activities will be conducted on behalf of a nonprofit religious or
a charitable organization are exempt from paying said fee.
(e) Investigation of Applications.
1. Upon receipt of each application, the Village Clerk shall immediately refer it
to the Chief of Police who shall promptly make an investigation of the
statements made in such application.
2. The Clerk shall issue a permit authorizing the direct sales described in the
application as soon as practicable following receipt of a report from the
Chief of Police, but no later than 48 hours after receipt of the application,
unless the Clerk determines one or more of the following:
a. The application is incomplete, or information required by sub. (4)(b)
has not been provided;
9-29
b. Any information contained in the application, or any information
provided pursuant to sub. (4)(c) is false, materially misleading or
otherwise untrue.
c. The applicant, or the entity on whose behalf the applicant intends to
solicit direct sales, has been found guilty of violating a criminal law
involving fraud or an intentional violation of the personal security of
another person or the property of another person, or which otherwise
directly relates to the fitness of the applicant to conduct direct sales,
within the previous five (5) years;
d. The applicant, or the entity on whose behalf the applicant intends to
solicit direct sales has been found guilty of violating any municipal
ordinance relating to the regulation of direct sellers within the previous
five (5) years.
e. Charges are currently pending against the applicant for a violation of a
municipal ordinance regulating direct sales, and there is probable
cause to believe that the applicant committed the violation.
(f) Effect of Permit. A permit issued under this subsection shall be valid for the
calendar year in which it is issued, subject to revocation as provided in sub. (9)(b) below.
(g) Display of Permit Cards. The Village Clerk shall issue a permit card to each
permittee under this subsection containing sufficient information to identify the permittee and
showing that a valid permit has been issued to such person allowing direct sales within the
Village. A permit card issued under this paragraph shall be worn and prominently displayed
on the permittee at all times while engaging in direct sales. As used in this paragraph,
“prominently displayed” shall mean attached to a lanyard worn around the neck or affixed to
the outermost clothing of the permittee, and plainly visible to any person facing the
permittee. The clerk may require one or more uniform methods of display of permit cards
provided that any required fasteners shall be provided, upon request, to each permittee at
their actual cost to the Village.
[Cr. 08-15, Eff. 5-16-08]
(5) REGISTRATION OF CHARITABLE SELLERS AND SOLICITORS.
(a) No person, other than a direct seller holding a valid permit under sub. (4),
shall engage in direct sales on behalf of a charitable organization, and no solicitor shall
engage in solicitations within the Village, without first being registered with the Village Clerk
under this subsection.
(b) The Village Clerk shall register all charitable direct sellers and solicitors upon
receipt of all of the following information:
1. proof that the charitable organization is registered under §440.42, Wis.
Stats. or is exempt from the registration requirements of said section;
2. verification of the name, address and telephone numbers of the individual
conducting direct sales or solicitations; and
9-30
3. proof from the charitable organization that the individual is authorized to
conduct direct sales or solicitations on its behalf, specifying whether direct
sales, solicitations or both are authorized.
(6) REGULATION OF DIRECT SALES, SOLICITATION AND CANVASSING
PRACTICES.
[Title Am. 08-15, Eff. 5-16-08]
(a) Prohibited Practices
1. Except as provided in par. 3, no person engaging in direct sales, solicitations
or canvassing within the Village, whether or not subject to the permitting or
registration requirements of this section, shall:
[Am. 08-15, Eff. 5-16-08]
a. Call at any dwelling or place used for temporary human lodging between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., except by appointment.
b. Call at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed prohibiting
such calls as provided in sub. (7) unless expressly authorized in
advance by the owner or occupant of such dwelling or place or
exempted under sub. (8).
[Am. 08-15, Eff. 5-16-08]
c. Call at any door, other than the front or other main entrance door, of any
dwelling place unless expressly directed to the another door by the
owner or occupant of such dwelling or other place;
d. Remain on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner,
occupant or other person having authority over such premises.
e. Impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and
vehicles. Where sales, solicitations or canvasses are made from
vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
f. Allow rubbish or litter resulting from his or her activities to accumulate in
or around the area in which he or she is conducting direct sales,
solicitations or canvassing.
g. Use an unfair or deceptive act or practice.
h. State or imply that a contribution being solicited is for or on behalf of a
charitable organization, or use any emblem, device or printed matter
belonging to or associated with a charitable organization, without first
being authorized in writing to do so by the charitable organization.
i. Use a name, symbol or statement so closely related or similar to that
used by another charitable organization that the use of the name,
symbol or statement would tend to confuse or mislead a person being
solicited.
9-31
j. Represent or lead anyone in any manner to believe that the person on
whose behalf a solicitation or direct sale is being conducted is a
charitable organization or that the proceeds of the solicitation or direct
sale will be used for charitable purposes if that is not the fact.
k. Lead anyone in any manner to believe that another person sponsors,
endorses or approves a solicitation direct sale if the other person has
not sponsored, endorsed or approved the solicitation or direct sale.
l. State or imply that the fact of registration by a charitable organization
with the State of Wisconsin, or the issuance by the Village of a permit for
direct sales under this section, constitutes an endorsement or approval
by the state or the Village.
m. Misrepresent directly or by implication the amount or percentage of a
contribution that a charitable organization will receive.
2. No direct seller shall misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading
statements concerning the quality, quantity, or character of any goods or
services offered for sale, the purpose of his or her visit, his or her identity, or
the identity of the of the organization he or she represents.
3. Subparagraphs a – c shall not apply to canvassers, solicitors or direct
sellers who are relatives, friends or neighbors of an occupant of the
premises called upon, where the circumstances of the relationship fairly
imply consent to contacts in the manner otherwise prohibited by those
subparagraphs.
(b) Disclosure Requirements.
1. After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a
prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his name, the
name of his company or organization he is affiliated with, if any, and the
identity of goods or services he offers to sell.
2. If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods, he or
she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written
statement containing the terms of the agreement, the amount paid in
advance, whether full, partial or no advance payment is made; the name,
address, and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or performance
date; and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms
thereof.
(7) SIGNS PROHIBITING SALES, SOLICITATION OR CANVASSING CALLS.
Any property owner may prohibit any direct seller, solicitor or canvasser from calling at his or
her property by posting a sign prohibiting such calls as provided in this subsection. Signs
shall be clearly legible and affixed to the principal building on the premises in a conspicuous
location on or within three (3) feet from the front or other main entrance thereto. Such signs
not exceeding thirty-six (36) square inches and containing no message other than the
prohibition of calls by direct sellers, solicitors and/or canvassers shall be deemed residential
signs exempt from any permitting requirement under §15.08(1)(b)20 and permitted under
9-32
§15.08(7)(a) of this Code. Such signs shall be effective for purposes of this section as
follows:
(a) Signs containing the words “no peddlers,” no “sales,” “no sellers” or similar
words shall apply to persons engaging in direct sales;
(b) Signs containing the words “no solicitors” shall apply to persons engaging in
soliciting;
(c) Signs containing the words “no canvassers” shall apply to persons engaging
in canvassing.
(d) Any sign may contain any combination of the terms authorized by pars (a)-(c)
and shall apply to direct sellers, solicitors and canvassers according to their terms.
(8) EXEMPTION LIST. Any owner or occupant of property within the Village
may authorize any direct seller, canvasser and/or solicitor to call upon the premises
occupied by such person by completing a form for that purpose prepared by the Village
Clerk. The Village Clerk shall prepare and maintain an exemption list identifying those
properties in the Village whose owners or occupants have granted limited exceptions to the
prohibition contained in sub. (6)(a)1b of this section. Direct sellers, canvassers or solicitors
may be authorized by individual name, organization name or general description. Upon
issuance of a direct seller’s permit under subs (4) or (9)(a), upon receipt of the required
registration information under sub. (5)(b), or upon request by any party, the Clerk shall
provide a list of addresses for which an exemption has been granted to any person under
this subsection.
(9) DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE AND APPEAL.
(a) Appeal of Permit Denial. Any decision by the Village Clerk to deny a permit
application to a direct seller may be appealed to the Village Board by filing a written request
with the Clerk. The Clerk shall schedule the appeal on the agenda for the next Village Board
meeting, or the following meeting if the final agenda has been posted prior to receipt of the
appeal, and forward the application and all written materials on which the Clerk’s decision
was based to the Board. The Clerk shall notify the applicant of the hearing date as soon as
practicable either verbally or by mail, but not less than 72 hours before the appeal will be
heard. The Board shall review the decision of the Clerk de novo.
[Renum. 03-16, Eff. 4-10-03; Am. 06-30, Eff. 10-5-06]
(b) Permit Revocation. Any permit issued under this section may be revoked by
the Village Board after notice and hearing if the applicant made any material omission or
materially inaccurate statement in the application for a license, made any fraudulent, false,
deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct
sales, violated any provision in this section or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or
statutory violation which is directly related to the applicant’s fitness to engage in direct
selling.
[Am. 03-16, Eff. 4-10-03; Am. 06-30, Eff. 10-5-06]
(c) Notice of Revocation Hearing. Written notice of a hearing on the revocation
of any permit issued under this section shall be mailed to the seller at the permanent
address shown on the registration at least 7 days, or shall be served personally on the
9-33
registrant at least 72 hours, prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain
the time and place of the hearing and a statement of the facts upon which the hearing will be
based.
[Am. 03-16, Eff. 4-10-03; Am. 06-30, Eff. 10-5-06]
(10) PENALTY.
(a) Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall forfeit not less
than $25 nor more than $200 for each violation plus costs of prosecution. Each violation
shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) In addition to the forfeiture provided in par. (a), restitution may be awarded to
a resident in an amount up to the amount of any contract entered into by the resident with a
person convicted under par. (a).
(11) RECORDS. The Chief of Police shall report to the Village Clerk all
convictions for violations of this section and the Clerk shall note any such violation on the
record of the person convicted.
[Subsec. Am. 06-30, Eff. 10-5-06]
9.055 SPECIAL EVENT VENDOR LICENSES.
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. (a) Except as provided in par. (b), no person or
organization shall display, sell, or offer to sell, on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public
grounds within the Village, any goods, wares, foodstuffs or anything of value or service of
any kind except pursuant to a special event vending permit issued under this section.
(b) This section shall not apply to any of the following:
1. A direct seller holding a permit issued under §9.05;
2. A person or organization conducting sales on public lands immediately
adjacent to a properly zoned business establishment operated by
such person or organization in compliance with a permit issued under
§7.03(2)(b);
3. A person or organization selling concessions from established concession
facilities in public parks pursuant to a permit issued under §16.02;
4. Sales by approved vendors at any Village-sponsored event; or
5. Sales of fermented malt beverages pursuant to a temporary class "B"
license issued under §9.01(3)(h).
(c) A special event vending permit shall authorize the holders to conduct business
only at the times and in the locations enumerated in the permit and subject to the
regulations of this section. Where the vending is to occur in connection with a village- or
area-wide promotion of community trade or a festival sponsored or coordinated by an
organization, the sponsoring organization may obtain a single special event vending permit
covering all vendors participating in the event.
9-34
(2) ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
(a) Applications for special event vending permits shall be filed with the Village Clerk
on a form approved by the Village Administrator. Licenses shall be signed by the Village
Clerk upon authorization by the Village Board and shall be conspicuously displayed at the
place where sales are being made. The permit shall set forth the exact dates and location of
the activities authorized thereby and shall be valid only during the dates and at the location
specified. Where a sponsoring organization is the applicant, the applicant shall provide the
Village Clerk with a complete list of participants at the time of making application, and the
names of all approved participants shall be included in the permit issued by the Clerk.
(b) Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the Village Clerk shall review
application for completeness. The Clerk shall notify the applicant of any deficiency in the
application within three (3) days after the application is filed. The Clerk shall forward all
completed applications to the Village Board for review and approval.
(c) The Village Board shall review the application and either approve, conditionally
approve or deny the permit. A permit may be denied or conditioned for any of the following
reasons:
1. The application contains inaccurate, misleading or incomplete information;
2. The applicant or a participant proposed for permitting by the applicant has,
within the previous 3 years, violated the provisions of this section, §7.03 or
§9.05 or has been guilty of a violation of state consumer protection laws in
connection with prior sales of goods or service and has failed to make full
restitution thereon;
3. The activity or event proposed for permitting might reasonably be expected
to cause or contribute to significant traffic problems or disruption to the
provision of normal governmental services within the Village;
4. The activity or event proposed for permitting will impose an unreasonable
burden on Village protective services or other resources;
5. The proposed activity poses an unreasonable risk to the public health or
safety.
(3) CONDITIONS OF PERMITS. In addition to any other specific conditions
imposed by the Village Board at the time of issuance of a permit under this section, all
permittees shall fully comply with the following regulations:
(a) Liability Insurance. Every permittee shall have in force at all times during the
permit period, liability insurance insuring the permittee, all participants in an event
authorized by the permit and the Village, its officers and employees against any and all
liability for death or injury to person or property caused by any activity authorized by the
permit with policy limits of not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit. The policy shall
provide that it may not be canceled, non-renewed, amended or otherwise altered except
upon thirty (30) days written notice to the Village. A certificate evidencing the required
insurance shall be submitted to the Village Administrator not later than seven days before
the start of the permitted event. The requirement for liability insurance may be waived by the
9-35
Village Board if the Board determines that the event presents no foreseeable risk of injury to
persons or property.
(b) Cooperation with Law Enforcement Officials. To protect the public health and
safety, the permittee shall coordinate with the Chief of Police the location of all events under
the permit. Proposed street and sidewalk encroachments, booth locations and special
parking provisions shall be submitted to the Chief for review and approval not less than
seven days before the start of the event. Approval of street and sidewalk encroachments by
the Chief under this paragraph shall satisfy the permit requirements of §7.03(2)(b) and such
encroachments shall be subject to the provisions of §66.0425, Wis. Stats.
(c) Clean-up. The permittee shall be fully responsible for all necessary clean-up
associated with the licensed event. In the event that any debris, litter, refuse or waste
material of any kind remains on the permitted site upon expiration of the permit other than in
approved refuse containers, the permittee shall reimburse the Village for all costs incurred in
restoring the site to a clean and sanitary condition.
(d) Compliance With Other Regulations. The permittee shall comply with all
applicable state and county regulations governing health and sanitation for food handling
establishments, if applicable, and any other applicable Village regulations. The permittee
shall be jointly and severally liable for any violations of such regulations by any person or
organization operating under the authority of the permit with the permittee's consent.
(4) PENALTY.
(a) Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section or of any permit
issued under this section shall forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $200 for each violation
plus costs of prosecution. Each violation and each day of a continuing violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
[Cr. 05-01, Eff. 01-20-05]
9.06 JUNK DEALERS.
(1) LICENSE REQUIRED. No person within the Village shall keep, conduct or
maintain any building, structure, yard or place for keeping, storing or piling in commercial
quantities, whether temporarily, irregularly or continually, or for the buying or selling at retail
or wholesale or dealing in any old, used or second hand materials of any kind, including
cloth, rags, clothing, paper, rubbish, bottles, rubber, iron, brass, copper or other metal,
furniture, used motor vehicles or the parts thereof, or other article which from its worn
condition renders it practically useless for the purpose for which it was made and which is
commonly classed as junk, whether with a fixed place of business or as an itinerant peddler,
without first having obtained and paid a license as hereinafter provided. One carrying on the
aforesaid business shall be referred to herein as "junk dealer."
(2) EXCEPTION. No license shall be required for the storage of wrecked motor
vehicles stored within service garages and filling stations or on any service garage or filling
station site provided that only 3 wrecked vehicles may be stored on said premises at any
one time for a period not exceeding 14 calendar days.
(3) APPLICATION. Application for such license shall be made in duplicate and filed
with the Village Administrator and shall be accompanied by the license fee. Such application
shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and, in case of a firm, the name and
9-36
residences of the members of the firm, and shall describe in detail any lot or parcel upon
which the business is to be conducted, and the business operation.
(4) LICENSE FEE. The license fee shall be $50 per year or any fraction thereof,
said year to commence on July 1 and end on June 30.
(5) INSPECTION REQUIRED. The Village Administrator shall report such
application to the Chief of Police and the Building Inspector, who shall inspect or cause to
be inspected such premises to determine whether it complies with all laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations. Said premises and all structures thereon shall be so situated and
constructed that the business of junk dealer may be carried on in a sanitary manner, shall
contain no fire hazards, and shall be arranged so that thorough inspection may be made at
any time by the proper health, fire, building and police authorities.
(6) REFERRAL TO PLAN COMMISSION. The application shall first be submitted to
the Plan Commission for a hearing to determine the suitability of the site for the business
proposed thereon. The Plan Commission may recommend conditions for granting the
license.
(7) REFERRAL TO VILLAGE BOARD. The application, together with the
recommendation of the Plan Commission, shall be referred to the Village Board which may
grant, grant with conditions, or deny the license.
(8) REVOCATION. Upon complaint being made in writing by any 3 residents or any
official of the Village to the Village Board that any licensee hereunder has violated any of the
provisions of this section, the Village Board shall summon such licensee to appear before it
at the time specified in the summons, which shall be not less than 3 days after the date of
the service thereof, to show cause why his license shall not be revoked or suspended. The
Village Board shall thereupon proceed to hear the matter and if it finds that the allegations of
said complaint are true, may revoke or suspend the license of such person. The provisions
hereunder shall not be effective unless the licensee has received notice from the Building
Inspector that a complaint has been filed with the Village Board as to the operation of his
premises and such licensee has been given a reasonable time to correct the condition
complained of or to otherwise satisfy such complaint.
9.07 LICENSING AND REGULATION OF ANIMALS.
(1) AUTHORITY. This section is adopted under the authority granted by §§29.604,
61.34(5) and 95.21 and Chapters 174 and 951 , Wis. Stats. and amendments thereto.
(2) DEFINITIONS. In this section the following terms have the following meanings,
unless the context or subject matter otherwise require:
(a) Animal. Mammals (including dogs and cats), reptiles, fishes, amphibians,
arachnids, insects and birds.
(b) At large. To be off the premises of the owner and not under the physical control
of some person either by leash or by confinement in a cage or other enclosure sufficient to
prevent the animal from initiating uninvited contact with any person.
[Am. 13-11, Eff. 6-28-13]
9-37
(c) Cat. Feline, regardless of age or sex.
(d) Dog. Canine, regardless of age or sex.
(e) Experimental Animal. An animal used for scientific or educational purposes by
public or private schools or businesses, including, but not limited to, mice, rats, primates,
birds and frogs.
(f) Family. One (1) or more persons residing at one address.
(g) Live Box Type Traps. Traps which capture and hold an animal in an alive and
unharmed condition.
(h) Neutered. As used herein to describe a dog shall mean having non-functioning
reproductive organs due to surgery.
[Am. 12-29, Eff. 11-7-12]
(i) Officer. Is a Village of DeForest Police Officer or Dane County Humane Officer.
(j) Owner. Any person owning or keeping an animal. The occupant of any premises
on which an animal remains or to which it customarily returns daily for a period of ten (10)
days is presumed to be harboring or keeping the animal within the meaning of this section.
(k) Service Animal. Is any animal specially trained to provide assistance to an
individual with a disability. Service animals include, but are not limited to, guide dogs, signal
dogs and helper monkeys.
(3) REGULATION OF DOGS, CATS, AND CHICKENS.
[Am. 15-43, Eff. 09-25-15]
(a) REGULATION OF RABIES
1. Rabies Vaccination Required. Every dog or cat shall be vaccinated against
rabies by a veterinarian within thirty (30) days after it reaches four (4) months
of age and revaccinated within one (1) year after the initial vaccination. Every
dog or cat brought into the Village after it has reached four (4) months of age,
shall be vaccinated against rabies within thirty (30) days after arrival in the
Village unless it has been vaccinated as evidenced by a current certificate of
rabies vaccination. Every dog or cat shall be revaccinated against rabies by
a veterinarian prior to the immunization expiration date stated on the
certificate of vaccination or, if no date is specified, within three (3) years after
the previous vaccination. The certificate of vaccination shall meet the
requirement of §95.21(2), Wis. Stats.
2. Rabies Control. All provisions of the §95.21, Wis. Stats. relating to rabies
control, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
(b) DOG LICENSES.
1. Annual Licenses Required. The owner of any dog more than five (5) months
of age on January 1 of any year, or which becomes five (5) months of age
9-38
within the license year, shall annually, or on or before the date it becomes
five (5) months of age, pay a dog license fee and obtain a license therefor.
2. Fees. The annual fee for dog licenses shall be Eleven Dollars ($11.00) for
spayed females or neutered males. The fee for unspayed or unneutered
animals shall be Eighteen Dollars ($18.00). The annual fee shall be reduced
by one-half (1/2) if the animal became five (5) months of age after July 1st
during that license year. The license year shall commence January 1 and end
December 31.
[Am. 08-40, Eff. 10-23-08]
3. Late Fees. The Village Clerk shall assess and collect a late fee of Five
Dollars ($5.00) from every owner of a dog five (5) months of age or over if the
owner failed to obtain a license prior to April 1 of each year, or within thirty
(30) days of acquiring ownership of a licensable dog or if the owner failed to
obtain a license on or before the dog reached licensable age. Said late fee
shall be charged in addition to the required license fee.
4. License Tag Issued. Upon payment of the required license fee, and upon
presentation of evidence of current immunization against rabies, as required
by sub. (3), the Village Clerk shall complete and issue to the owner a license
for each dog containing all information required by State Law. The Village
Clerk shall also deliver to the owner, at the time of issuance of the license, a
tag of durable material bearing the same serial number as the license, the
name of the county in which issued and the license year.
5. Tags to be Securely Attached to Dog. The owner shall securely attach the tag
to a collar and the collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog for
which the license is issued at all times, except when the animal is securely
confined indoors.
6. Unlicensed Dog. Any Officer shall seize and impound any dog for which a
license is required, which is found without such tag attached. A dog found
without a tag shall be presumptive evidence the dog is unlicensed.
7. Replacement Tag. In the event a tag is lost, or is damaged so as to become
unreadable, the owner shall obtain a replacement tag from the Village Clerk.
The fee for a replacement tag shall be $1.00.
8. Dogs Trained as a Service Animal. Notwithstanding the foregoing, every dog
specifically trained as a Service Animal is exempt from the dog license fee,
and every person owning such a dog shall receive annually a free dog license
from the Village Clerk upon application.
9. All provisions of §174.053, Wis. Stats. relating to animal licensing, are hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
(c) [Repealed 12-29, Eff. 11-7-12]
(d) RESTRICTION ON KEEPING DOGS, CATS AND CHICKENS.
[Am. 15-43, Eff. 09-25-15]
9-39
1. Restrictions. It shall be unlawful, for any person within the Village of DeForest
to own or keep any dog or cat which:
a. Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway.
b. Habitually is at-large within the limits of the Village of DeForest.
c. Habitually barks, howls, meows, or cries to the annoyance of any person
or persons.
d. Habitually kills, wounds or harasses any wild or domestic animal.
e. Is known by such person to be infected with rabies or to have been bitten
by an animal known to have been infected with rabies unless the animal
is being kept in quarantine in accordance with the requirements of
§95.21, Wis. Stats.
f. Is unlicensed if a license is required by this section.
[Am. 12-29, Eff. 11-7-12]
2. Vicious Dogs. No vicious dog shall be allowed off the premises of its owner
unless muzzled and on a leash in charge of the owner or a member of the
owner's immediate family over sixteen (16) years of age. For purposes of
enforcing this section, a dog shall be deemed as being of a vicious
disposition if, within any twelve (12) month period it bites two (2) or more
persons or inflicts serious injury to one (1) person in unprovoked
circumstances off the owner's premises. Any vicious dog which is found off
the premises of its owner other than as hereinabove provided may be seized
by any person and, upon delivery to the proper authorities, may, upon
establishment to the satisfaction of a court of competent jurisdiction of the
vicious character of said dog, by testimony under oath reduced to writing, be
killed by the police authorities.
3. Bell to be Securely Attached to Cat. There shall be attached to the collar of
any cat a bell which shall be capable of being heard for at least a distance of
fifteen (15) feet when worn by said cat. The bell shall be attached to the collar
in such a way as to prevent the cat from carrying the bell in its mouth.
4. Limitation on Number of Household Dogs, Cats and Chickens.
a. Purposes. The keeping of a large number of dogs, cats, or chickens on
one property within the Village detracts from and is detrimental to
healthful and comfortable life in such areas. The keeping of a large
number of dogs, cats or chickens, is therefore, declared a public
nuisance.
b. Number Limited. No more than four (4) dogs and/or cats, in aggregate,
and not more than six (6) chickens (hens only) may be kept in one
household without prior written approval of the Village Administrator,
except a litter of offspring from one (1) female dog, cat or other pet, or a
portion of a litter, may be kept for not more than sixteen (16) weeks from
birth.
9-40
[Am. 15-43, Eff. 09-25-15]
(e) Finding of Public Nuisance. All violations of the provisions of this subsection are
declared to be a public nuisance.
(4) OWNER’S LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE CAUSED BY ANIMALS:
(a) No owner or person having custody of an animal shall allow such animal to go
upon any parkway or private lands or premises without the permission of the owner of such
premises and injure any lawn, flower bed, plant, shrub, tree or other animal, in any manner
whatsoever.
[Am. 13-11, Eff. 6-28-13]
(b). The provisions of §174.02, Wis. Stats. relating to the owner's liability for damage
caused by dogs, together with the penalties therein set forth, are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference, and shall apply, for purposes of this section, to cats and
other domestic pets.
(5) ANIMAL FECES.
(a) Person Walking Animals Required to Remove Fecal Matter. No owner or person
in charge of any animal shall permit fecal matter of said animal to be deposited on any
street, alley, public park, public walkway, trail or other public property, or on any private
property of another, unless such matter is immediately removed therefrom by said owner or
person in charge. No person shall walk an animal beyond the limits of his/her own property
without carrying or having in his/her possession an item suitable for picking up and removing
fecal matter. No person shall dispose of fecal matter on any public property or private
property of another.
[Am. 13-11, Eff. 6-28-13]
(b) Accumulation of Fecal Matter Prohibited on Private Yards. The owner or person
in charge of the animals must also prevent accumulation of animal waste on her/his own
property by regularly patrolling and properly disposing of the fecal matter. All violations of
this paragraph are declared to be a public nuisance.
[Am. 15-43, Eff. 09-25-15]
(6) CRIMES AGAINST ANIMALS. The provisions of Chapter 951, Wis. Stats. are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
(7) PROHIBITED AND PROTECTED ANIMALS.
(a) Protected Animals. The provisions of §29.604, Wis. Stats. are hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
(b) Dangerous, Poisonous or Wild Animals: Prohibition on Keeping. It shall be
unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in her/his possession or under her/his
control within the Village of DeForest any dangerous, poisonous or wild animal, including,
but not limited to, the following animals:
1. All poisonous animals including rear-fang snakes, and all poisonous insects
or arachnids.
9-41
2. Large Reptiles, including all alligators, crocodiles, constrictor snakes over 6
feet in length, Komodo Dragons.
3. Other large animals, including all apes, bears, bison, elephants,
rhinoceroses, hippopotami.
4. Large Cats, including all cheetahs, jaguars, leopards, pumas (including
mountain cats, panthers and bobcats), lynxes, lions and tigers.
5. All Coyotes, hyenas, foxes, wolves, and all wolf-hybrids.
6. Bats, raccoons and skunks.
7. All Deer, including all members of the deer family, such as elk, antelope and
moose.
8. Prairie dogs and Gambian rats.
9. All cats and dogs which have not been issued a certificate of vaccination
against rabies; not including dogs and cats meeting the exception described
under 9.07(3)(a)(1), supra.
10. All sharks, eels, rays, piranhas, barracudas, sea bass, rabbitfish, scorpion
fish, zebra fish, siganus fish, stonefish, tang fish, surgeonfish, toadfish,
weever fish, Portuguese man-of-war, octopi, cone shells, terebra shells, and
all fish with toxic flesh, including puffer and trigger fish.
11. All monkeys.
This prohibition does not include any service animal, including helper
monkeys.
(c) Other Animals Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep
maintain or have in her/his possession or under her/his control within the Village of DeForest
any of the following animals:
1. Except in an A-1 Agricultural District and an A-B Agricultural Business
District, bees, cattle, sheep, goats, roosters, other fowl (except chicken hens),
ponies, horses, pigs, llamas, oxen, donkeys, mules or any other livestock or
experimental animals, or any animals of a species under the jurisdiction of
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and/or the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service;
[Am. 15-43, Eff. 09-25-15]
2. Animals raised for fur-bearing purposes;
(d) Diseased Animals Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep,
maintain or have in her/his possession or under her/his control within the Village of DeForest
any animal carrying an infectious disease. The provisions of this paragraph do not apply
where the diseased animal is in the custody of a licensed veterinarian for purposes of
treating the disease, or where the owner or keeper of the diseased animal is keeping the
9-42
animal in accordance with all prescribed instructions from a veterinarian who is treating the
animal for the disease.
(e) Exceptions. The provisions of pars. (a) through (c) of this subsection do not
apply where the animal is in the custody of a veterinarian for treatment or where the animal
is in the custody of a public or private educational institution.
(f) Finding of Public Nuisance. The keeping of any dangerous, prohibited or
diseased animal in violation of the provisions of this subsection is declared to be a public
nuisance.
(8) KEEPING OF ANIMALS
(a) Sanitary Requirements. All structures, pens, buildings, coops or yards wherein
animals or fowl are kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free of
rodents, vermin and objectionable odors.
(b) Animals Excluded from Food Handling Establishments. No person shall take or
permit to remain any dog, cat or other live animals on or upon any premises where food is
sold, offered for sale or processed for consumption by the general public, except that
service animals for disabled persons are permitted.
(c) Commercial Raising of Animals. The commercial raising of animals is prohibited
except in those areas zoned as A-1 Agricultural District or A-B Agricultural Business District.
(d) Animals not to Run at Large. No owner or person having in her/his possession
or under her/his control any animal shall allow the same to run at large within the Village.
The owner of any animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall keep his/her animal tied,
electronically collared, or enclosed in a proper enclosure so as not to allow said animal to
interfere with passing public or neighbors. Any chicken enclosure (i.e. coop and fence) is
considered a detached accessory building and is subject to applicable setbacks and other
provisions in Chapter 15 of the Village Code. This paragraph shall not apply to dogs
accompanied by a person while using a designated Village dog park in accordance with the
rules and regulations governing such use.
[Am. 13-11, Eff. 6-28-13; Am. 15-43, Eff. 09-25-15]
(e) Finding of Public Nuisance. All violations of the provisions of this subsection are
declared to be public nuisances.
[Am. 13-11, Eff. 6-28-13]
(9) TRAPPING OF ANIMALS.
(a) Trapping Restricted to Live Box-Type Traps. It shall be unlawful for any person
to set, place or tend any trap, including, but not limited to, traps commonly known as leg
traps, pan-type traps or other traps, designed to kill, catch, wound, or molest any animal,
except by use of live box-type traps only. Any animal caught in live box traps shall be
promptly released to an Officer or to the wild in another location, as appropriate. It shall be
unlawful to confine animals caught in live box traps until they become ill or die.
(b) Trapping within Homes or other Buildings. This subsection shall not apply to
trapping within the confines of homes or other buildings, except that it shall be unlawful for
any person to intentionally lure, or otherwise allow a wild or domestic animal into a building
or home for the purpose of trapping it in any way other than by a live box type trap.
9-43
(10) VEHICLE ACCIDENTS. The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident
resulting in injury to or death of an animal which appears to be a pet shall promptly notify a
Village of DeForest Police Officer and owner of said animal, if known.
(11) IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS.
(a) Humane Control Agency. The Village of DeForest may contract with or enter
into an agreement with such person, persons, organizations or corporations, both public or
private, to provide for the operation of an animal shelter, impoundment of stray animals,
confinement of certain animals, disposition of impoundment animals and for assisting in the
administration of rabies vaccination programs.
(b) Impounding of Animals. In addition to any penalty provided herein for a violation
of this section, any officer may impound any dog, cat or other animal which is found in
violation of secs. 9.07(3), (7) or (8).
(c) Village of DeForest Not Liable for Impounding Animals. The Village of DeForest
and/or its animal control agency shall not be liable for the death of any animal which has
been impounded or disposed of pursuant to this section.
(12) PENALTIES.
(a) Forfeitures. Any person who violates subs. (3) – (11) of this section shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than Twenty Five Dollars ($25.00) and not more than One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00 for the first violation and not less than Seventy Five Dollars
($75.00) and not more than Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for subsequent
violations.
(b) Village Officers are empowered and expressly directed to enforce all provisions
of this section.
[Repl. & Recr. 91-28, Eff. 11-18-91; Repl. & Recr. 07-06, Eff. 02-23-07]
9.08 REGULATION AND LICENSING OF BICYCLES.
(1) REGISTRATION REQUIRED. No resident shall operate a bicycle upon any
street or public way within the Village unless the bicycle shall first have been registered by
the owner and properly licensed as hereinafter provided.
(2) DEFINITION. "Bicycle" shall mean every device propelled by the feet acting
upon pedals and having wheels, any 2 of which are not less than 14 inches in diameter.
(3) REGISTRATION. Registration shall be made by filing an application with the
Police Department, or agency designated by the Police Department, setting forth the name
and address of the owner, together with a complete description of the bicycle, and paying
the registration and license fee hereinafter provided. Each registration shall be serially
numbered and kept on file in the office of the Police Department. The Police Department
shall keep a record of the date of issuance of each license, to whom issued, and the number
thereof. Upon such registration, the Police Department shall issue a license which shall be
affixed to the bicycle in a place determined by the Police Department. Such license plate
shall remain so fixed to the bicycle unless removed by order of a court.
9-44
(4) LICENSE FEE. The license fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be $3 for the
period of time the bicycle is owned by the registered owner. All such license fees shall be
paid over to the Village Administrator.
(5) LICENSE RENEWAL. All bicycle registrations shall be renewed whenever the
original license becomes illegible or is destroyed. The license fee for renewal shall be $2.
Upon such registration a new license shall be furnished the bicycle owner or operator.
(6) LOST LICENSE. In case of theft, loss, mutilation or defacing of said license, a
new license shall be issued by said Department for a fee of $2. No person shall willfully
remove, deface or destroy any such license.
(7) MUTILATION OF SERIAL NUMBER. No person shall willfully or maliciously
remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the serial number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant
to this section or any license.
(8) TRANSFER OR CANCELLATION. Within 10 days after any bicycle registered
hereunder shall have changed ownership or be dismantled and taken out of use, the person
in whose name the bicycle has been registered shall report such information to the Police
Department. In case of change of ownership, the registration shall thereupon be canceled
and a new license issued to the new owner upon proper application and payment by him of
the registration fee provided in sub. (4) above.
(9) INSPECTION OF BICYCLES. Every bicycle in the Village shall be inspected
and examined at the Police Department or any other location so designated by the Chief of
Police for a serial number. If such bicycle has no serial number, a serial number shall be
stamped on the frame of such bicycle by any qualified mechanic of a bicycle store or shop
so designated by the Chief of Police.
(10) PARENTAL VIOLATION. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or
person having legal custody of a child under the age of 18 years to have such child fail to
have his bicycle registered as hereinbefore provided or to allow such child under 18 years of
age to violate any of the provisions of this section after such parent, guardian or person
having legal custody of such child has been warned as hereinafter provided.
(11) WARNING. The first time a child is detained by a law enforcement officer for
violation of any of the provisions of this section, his parent, guardian or person having such
legal custody shall be advised as to the provisions of this section and further advised that
any violation of this section occurring thereafter by this child or any other child under his
care or custody shall result in a penalty being imposed as hereinafter provided.
(12) PENALTIES. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section
other than the provisions providing for warning of a parent, guardian or person having legal
custody of a child under 18 years of age shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than
$10 together with the cost of prosecution, and in default of payment of the forfeiture and
costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail for not exceeding 10 days. Any
minor 14 years of age or over may be prosecuted for any violation of this section pursuant to
§ 938.17, Wis. Stats.
Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a child under 18 years of age
and who has been warned in the manner provided in sub. (11) above and who thereafter
violates any of the provisions of this section shall forfeit not less than $10 nor more than
9-45
$200 together with the cost of prosecution and in default of the payment of forfeiture and
cost of prosecution, he shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs
of prosecution are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
9.09 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in sec. 20.04 of this Code, in addition to the specific
penalties provided in this chapter. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day on which a violation of this chapter occurs or continues.
9.10 PAYMENT OF OUTSTANDING OBLIGATIONS.
(1) No license required under secs. 9.01, 9.02, 9.03, 9.04, 9.05, and 9.06, of this
Code may be issued until the Village Finance Director has certified that all required
payments by the applicant for the license have been made.
[Cr. 00-20, Eff. 6-5-00]
(2) Required payments include all personal property taxes, special assessments,
including any fees and interest, and all forfeitures, fines, or judgments resulting from
conviction for violation of any Village of DeForest Ordinances, and all other judgments,
including any fees and interest, which are due and owing to the Village of DeForest from any
applicant for a license to the Village of DeForest under Chapter 9 of the DeForest Municipal
Code, secs. 9.01, 9.02, 9.03, 9.04, 9.05, and 9.06. If a license is being transferred from one
person or entity to another, required payments applying to the transferee include all of the
above-specified obligations due and owing to the Village of DeForest by the transferee of
the license, as well as all of the above-specified obligations due and owing to the Village of
DeForest by the transferor of the license. A required payment does not include a forfeiture
which is under appeal.
[Cr. 00-20, Eff. 6-5-00]
(3) If the Village Finance Director determines that any of the required payments
have not been made, the Village Finance Director shall inform the Village Clerk of that
determination. The Village Clerk shall notify the applicant for the specified licenses what
required payment is outstanding or delinquent and the amount thereof.
[Cr. 00-20, Eff. 6-5-00]
(4) If the applicant believes the Village Finance Director’s determination of required
payments is in error, the applicant may obtain review of the correctness of the determination
before the Administrative Review Appeals Board by paying to the Village of DeForest the
amount claimed due and owing and filing a notice of appeal to the Administrative Review
Appeals Board. The notice of appeal shall state the basis for the appeal and shall specify
the alleged error in the Village Finance Director’s determination. The review by the Appeals
Board does not include review of the validity or amount of the outstanding or delinquent
obligation, only the existence of the outstanding or delinquent obligation and the correctness
of the amount in the Village Finance Director’s certification.
[Cr. 00-20, Eff. 6-5-00]
(5) As soon as is practicable after receipt of a notice of appeal, the Appeals Board
shall hold a hearing, at which time the person seeking review shall present evidence to
substantiate the alleged error. The person seeking review may call witnesses, may crossexamine
witnesses, and may be represented by legal counsel. After holding the hearing, the
Appeals Board shall, by majority vote, make findings of fact and conclusion and shall correct
9-46
any established errors in the Village Finance Director’s determination and shall inform the
Village Clerk of the Appeals Board’s findings and conclusions.
[Cr. 00-20, Eff. 6-5-00]
(6) Any amount shown to be erroneously required paid shall be refunded promptly,
together with interest at a rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum from the date the amount
was paid to the Village of DeForest to the date of the refund.
[Cr. 00-20, Eff.6-5-00]
10-1
CHAPTER 10
ORDERLY CONDUCT
10.01 Offenses Against State Laws Subject to Forfeiture ...................................... 10-1
10.02 Offenses Endangering Public Safety ............................................................. 10-3
10.03 Offenses Endangering Public Peace and Good Order .................................. 10-4
10.04 Offenses Endangering Public Morals and Decency .................................... 10-15
10.05 Offenses Endangering Public and Private Property ................................... 10-15
10.06 Curfew ............................................................................................................ 10-16
10.07 Enforcement of Violations of this Code ....................................................... 10-17
10.08 [Repealed 15-12, Eff. 03-13-15] .................................................................................... 10-18
10.09 Penalty ........................................................................................................... 10-18
10.20 [Repealed 16-46, Eff. 11-24-16] .................................................................................... 10-18
10.21 [Repealed 16-46, Eff. 11-24-16] .................................................................................... 10-18
10.22 [Repealed 16-46, Eff. 11-24-16] .................................................................................... 10-18
10.225 [Repealed 16-46, Eff. 11-24-16] .................................................................................... 10-18
10.23 [Repealed 16-46, Eff. 11-24-16] .................................................................................... 10-18
10.24 Penalty For Possession of Drug Paraphernalia By A Juvenile .................. 10-18
10.25 Disposition of Juvenile Adjudged to Have Violated An Ordinance ............ 10-19
10.26 Dispositional Orders ..................................................................................... 10-20
10.27 Sanctions for Violation of Order ................................................................... 10-20
10.28 Parental Responsibility for Repeat Offenses .............................................. 10-21
[Cr. 16-42, Eff. 11-11-16]
10.01 OFFENSES AGAINST STATE LAWS SUBJECT TO FORFEITURE. The
following statutes following the prefix 10 defining offenses against the peace and good order
of the State are adopted by referenced to define offenses against the peace and good order
of the municipality provided the penalty for commission of such offenses hereunder shall be
limited to a forfeiture imposed under sec. 20.04 of this Code.
10.939.22 Words and Phrases Defined
10.940.19(1) Battery
10.940.20 Battery: Special Circumstances
10.941.01 Negligent Operation of a Vehicle
10.941.10 Negligent Handling of Burning Material
10.941.12 Interfering With Fire Fighting
10.941.13 False Alarms
10.941.20 Endangering Safety by Use of Dangerous Weapon
10.941.23 Carrying Concealed Weapon
10.941.237 Carrying Handgun where Alcohol Beverages are Sold and Consumed.
10.941.35 Emergency Telephone Calls
10.941.36 Fraudulent Tapping of Electric Wires or Gas or Water Meters or Pipes
10.942.10 Use of a Drone
10.943.01(1) Damage to Property
10.943.06 Molotov Cocktails
10.943.07 Criminal Damage to Railroads
10.943.11 Entry into Locked Vehicle
10.943.125 Entry into Locked Coin Box
10.943.13 Trespass to Land
10-2
10.943.14 Criminal Trespass to Dwellings
10.943.20 Theft
10.943.21 Fraud on Hotel or Restaurant Keeper or Taxicab Operator
10.943.23 Operating Vehicle Without Owner's Consent
10.943.24 Issue of Worthless Check
10.943.34 Receiving Stolen Property
10.943.37 Alteration of Property Identification Marks
10.943.41 Financial Transaction Card Crimes
10.943.45 Theft of Telecommunications Service
10.943.50 Retail Theft
10.944.20 Lewd and Lascivious Behavior
10.944.21 Obscene Material or Performance
10.944.23 Making Lewd, Obscene or Indecent Drawings
10.944.30 Prostitution
10.944.31 Patronizing Prostitutes
10.944.33 Pandering
10.944.34 Keeping Place of Prostitution
10.945.01 Definitions [Relating to Gambling]
10.945.02 Gambling
10.945.03 Commercial Gambling
10.945.04 Permitting Premises to be Used for Commercial Gambling
10.946.40 Refusing to Aid Officer
10.946.41 Resisting or Obstructing Officer
10.946.42 Escape
10.946.44 Assisting or Permitting Escape
10.946.46 Encouraging Violation of Probation, Extended Supervision or Parole
10.946.49 Bail Jumping
10.946.65 Obstructing Justice
10.946.69 Falsely Assuming to Act as a Public Officer or Employee or a Utility
Employee
10.946.70 Impersonating Peace Officers
10.946.72 Tampering with Public Records and Notices
10.946.73 Penalty for Violating Laws Governing State or County Institutions
10.946.75 Denial of Right of Counsel
10.947.01 Disorderly Conduct
10.947.012 Unlawful Use of Telephone
10.047.0125 Unlawful Use of Computerized Communication Systems
10.947.013 Harassment.
10.947.015 Bomb Scares
10.947.06 Unlawful Assemblies and Their Suppression
10.948.51 Hazing
10.948.60(2)(a) Possession of Dangerous Weapon by Person Under 18.
10.948.63 Receiving Property From a Child
10.951.02 Mistreating Animals
10.951.03 Dognapping and Catnapping
10.951.04 Leading Animal From Motor Vehicle
10.951.05 Transportation of Animals
10.951.06 Use of Poisonous and Controlled Substances
10.951.07 Use of Certain Devices Prohibited
10.951.08 Instigating Fights Between Animals
10.951.09 Shooting at Caged or Staked Animals
10-3
10.951.10 Sale of Baby Rabbits, Chicks and Other Fowl
10.951.11 Artificially Colored Animals; Sale
10.951.13 Providing Proper Food and Drink to Confined Animals
10.951.14 Providing Proper Shelter
10.951.15 Abandoning Animals
[Am. 11-33, Eff. 10-28-11; Am. 14-25, Eff. 7-25-14; Am. 15-19, Eff. 05-01-15; Am. 16-42, Eff. 11-11-16]
10.02 OFFENSES ENDANGERING PUBLIC SAFETY.
[Am. 14-01, Eff. 1-17-14; Repealed and Replaced 17-06, Eff. 03-17-17]
(1) FIREARMS AND OTHER DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
(a) Discharging Firearms and Other Weapons Prohibited. Except as provided in
pars. (b) – (d) or in subs. (2) and (3), no person, except a city, village, county, state or
federal law enforcement officer or U.S. armed forces or military personnel acting in such
capacity, shall fire or discharge any firearm, spring or air gun, bow, crossbow, blowgun, punt
gun, electric weapon or other weapon within the Village.
(b) Hunting with Bows or Crossbows. Notwithstanding par. (a), the discharge of a
bolt or arrow from a bow or cross-bow is permitted for hunting of wild animals in accordance
with all applicable state regulations, except that no person shall:
1. hunt within 100 yards of a building used for human occupancy that is located
on lands not owned by such person, unless the owner of the land on which
the building is located has given such person permission to hunt within a
specified distance of the building.
2. discharge an arrow or bolt other than toward the ground.
3. hunt on any land owned by, or leased to, the Village.
(c) Shooting Ranges. Paragraph (a) shall not be construed to prevent the
maintenance and use of duly supervised rifle, pistol or archery ranges or shooting galleries if
expressly permitted by the Zoning Code or exempted from zoning regulations by
§895.527(4) or (5), Wis. Stats.
(d) Privileged Use of Firearms. Paragraph (a) shall not be construed to prohibit the
discharge of a firearm in circumstances where the use of such weapon is authorized under
§66.0409(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
(2) URBAN WILDLIFE CONTROL. Any of the regulations contained in
subsections (1)(a) or (b) may be waived by the Village Board as they apply to any person
while engaged in a program authorized by the Board to control populations of deer or other
wildlife within the Village. No such waiver shall be effective unless reflected in the minutes
of the Board or otherwise set forth in writing by the Village Board or its designee.
(3) MEMORIAL CEREMONIES. The prohibition contained in subsection (1)(a)
may be waived by the Chief of Police with respect to the discharge of firearms by a military
or quasi-military honor guard or similar group as a customary part of a memorial service
honoring current or former military, law enforcement, emergency services or other personnel
for the service rendered for the protection of the public. A waiver granted under this
subsection shall not allow the discharge of any firearm loaded other than with a blank
10-4
cartridge or shell that does not propel any solid object other than a paper or plastic wad and
gunpowder residue.
(4) OPEN CISTERNS, WELLS, OR OTHER DANGEROUS EXCAVATIONS
PROHIBITED. No person shall cause, permit or maintain on any premises owned or
occupied by such person any open cisterns, cesspools, wells, excavations or other
dangerous openings. All such places shall be filled, securely covered or fenced in such
manner as to prevent injury to any person and any cover shall be of a design, size and
weight that the same cannot be removed by small children.
(5) ABANDONED OR UNATTACHED REFRIGERATORS, ETC., PROHIBITED. No
person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other secured
structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure owned
or controlled by such person, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended
or discarded refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or
other locking device without first removing said door or lid, snap lock or other locking device
from said refrigerator or container unless such container is displayed for sale on the
premises of the owner and is securely locked or fastened.
10.03 OFFENSES ENDANGERING PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER.
(1) DEFECATION AND URINATION IN PUBLIC PROHIBITED. No person shall
defecate or urinate upon any sidewalk, street, alley, public parking lot, park, playground,
cemetery or other public area, except in designed sanitary facility, or upon private property
in open view of the public.
[Am. 12-07, Eff. 5-11-12]
(2) DISORDERLY CONDUCT WITH MOTOR VEHICLE.
(a) No person shall, on public or private property located within the Village, by or
through the use of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile or mini-bike, under
circumstances which tend to cause or provoke a disturbance or annoy one or more person,
engage in violent abusive, unreasonably load or otherwise disorderly conduct, including but
not limited to the unnecessary, deliberate or intentional spinning of wheels, squealing of
tires, revving of the engine, blowing the horn, causing the engine to backfire, or causing the
vehicle while commencing to move or in motion to raise one or more of its wheels off the
ground.
(b) Any person who shall violate this subsection shall, upon conviction, be subject to
a forfeiture as provided in sec. 20.04 of this Code.
(3) LOITERING OR PROWLING PROHIBITED. No person shall loiter or prowl in a
place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals, under circumstances
that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the
circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is
the fact that the actor takes flight upon himself under the circumstances which leads the
officer to believe a crime has been or will be committed, or manifestly endeavors to conceal
himself or any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances makes it
impracticable, a police or peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this
section, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be
warranted by requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No
10-5
person shall be convicted of an offense under this subsection if the police or peace officer
did not comply with the preceding sentence or if it appears at trial that the explanation given
by the actor was true, and if believed by the police or peace officer at the time, would have
dispelled the alarm.
(4) LOITERING IN SCHOOL OR IN SCHOOL AREAS PROHIBITED.
(a) No person not in official attendance or on official school business shall enter into,
congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or play in any school building parking lot or in or
about any playground area adjacent thereto within the Village between 7:30 A.M. and
4:30 P.M. on official school days.
(b) All entrances to the school buildings shall be posted with a notice stating "Entry
Into School Building by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited." All school grounds shall be
posted with a notice stating "Entry Upon School Grounds by Unauthorized Persons
Prohibited."
(5) OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED. No person shall
stand, sit, loaf or loiter or engage in any sport or exercise on any public street, sidewalk,
bridge or public ground within the Village in such a manner as to prevent or obstruct the free
passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon or to prevent or hinder free ingress or
egress to or from any place of business or amusement, church, public hall or meeting place.
(6) ALCOHOL BEVERAGE REGULATIONS.
(a) The following state statutes are adopted and made part of this municipal code:
1. §125.07(1)(a), Wis. Stats. (Dispensing Alcohol Beverages to Underage
Persons).
2. §125.07(3)(a), Wis. Stats. (Underage Person Presence at Place of Sale).
3. §125.07(4)(a), (b), (bg) and (bm), Wis. Stats. (Underage Persons Violations).
4. §125.085 (3)(b), Wis. Stats. (Proof of Age).
5. §125.09(2), Wis. Stats. (Alcohol on School Grounds).
Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated
herein by reference are intended to be made part of this code. The descriptions in
parentheses above are for reference only and do not limit any portion of the adopted state
statutes.
(b) The following penalties shall apply for violations of par. (a) above:
1. For violations of §125.07(1)(a), Wis. Stats., a forfeiture of not more than $500
for first and second violations. If the person has committed 2 or more
previous violations within 30 months of the violation, a forfeiture of not more
than $1,000. In addition, a court shall suspend any license or permit issued
under sec. 9.01 of this Code as required under §125.07(1)(b) 3, Wis. Stats.
2. For violations of §125.07(3)(a), Wis. Stats., a forfeiture and penalties as
provided under §125.07(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
3. For violations of §125.07(4)(a), a forfeiture and penalties as provided under
§125.07(4)(bs), Wis. Stats.
10-6
4. For violations of §125.07(4)(b), a forfeiture and penalties as provided under
§125.07(4)(c), Wis. Stats.
5. For violations of §125.085 (3)(b), Wis. Stats., a forfeiture and penalties as
provided under§125.085 (3)(bd), Wis. Stats.
6. For violations of §125.09(2), Wis. Stats., a forfeiture and penalties as
provided under §125.09(2)(d), Wis. Stats.
(c) Defense of Sellers. In determining whether or not a licensee or permittee has
violated §125.07(1)(a) or 3(a), Wis. Stats., as adopted in this municipal code, all relevant
circumstances surrounding the presence of the underage person or the procuring, selling,
dispensing or giving away of alcohol beverages may be considered, including any
circumstances under 1-4 below. In addition, proof of all of the following facts by a seller of
alcohol beverages to an underage person is a defense to any prosecution for a violation of
this section.
1. That the purchaser falsely represented that he or she had attained the legal
drinking age.
2. That the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary and
prudent person would believe that the purchaser had attained the legal
drinking age.
3. That the sale was made in good faith and in reliance on the representation
and appearance of the purchaser in the belief that the purchaser had
attained the legal drinking age.
4. That the underage person supported the representation under 1., above
with documentation that he or she had attained the legal drinking age.
(d) Book Kept by Licensee. Every retail alcohol beverage licensee or permittee may
keep a book for the purposes of paragraph (c) above. The licensee or permittee or his or
her employee may require any of the following persons to sign the book:
1. A person who has shown documentary proof that he or she has attained the
legal drinking age, if the person’s age is in question.
2. A person who alleges that he or she is the underage person’s parent,
guardian or spouse and that he or she has attained the legal drinking age, if
the licensee or permittee or his or her employee suspects that he or she is
not the underage person’s parent, guardian or spouse or that he or she has
not attained the legal drinking age.
The book may show the date of the purchase of alcohol beverages, the identification
used to establish that a person is an underage person’s parent, guardian or spouse and has
attained the legal drinking age, the address of the purchaser and the purchaser’s signature.
(e) Drinking in Public Places.
1. Regulations. Except as provided in subpar. 2. of this paragraph below, the
drinking of any alcohol beverages or the carrying of any open container which contains an
alcohol beverage, is prohibited in the following places:
10-7
a. On private property without the owner's consent.
b. On any street, roadway, alley, parking lot or sidewalk in the Village.
c. On any public property in the Village.
2. Exceptions. The prohibition relating to the drinking of fermented malt
beverages on any street, public place or other public area within the Village, as provided in
subpar. 1. above, shall not apply to the following.
a. Any organization which has been issued a Class "B" fermented malt
beverage picnic license pursuant to sec. 9.01 of this Code.
b. Persons using the Village parks, except that no drinking of fermented
malt beverages is permitted in a Village park between the hours of 11:00
P.M. and 10:00 A.M.
3. Penalty. Any person who violates sub (e) 1.,above, shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a forfeiture as provided in sec. 20.04 of this Code.
[Am. 93-12, Eff. 4-9-93; Am. 16-46, Eff. 11-24-16]
(7) DRUG PROHIBITIONS.
(a) Definitions. As used in this subsection:
1. "Marijuana" means all parts of the plant cannabis sativa L., whether growing or
not, the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the
plant, its seeds or resin.
2. "Drug paraphernalia" shall mean any item defined by §961.571, Wis. Stats.
3. “Synthetic marijuana” means a controlled substance specified in
§961.14(4)(tb) to (ty), Wis. Stats.
(b) Possession Prohibited.
1. Marijuana. Except as provided in paragraph (d) hereof, it shall be unlawful for
any person to possess marijuana. Pursuant to §66.0107(1)(bm), Wis. Stats.,
prosecution for a violation of this paragraph shall be limited to those violations
which involve possession of not more than 25 grams of a prohibited
substance by a person who has not previously been convicted in this state for
possession of marijuana.
2. Drug Paraphernalia. Except as provided in paragraph (d) hereof, no person
may use, or possess with the primary intent to use, drug paraphernalia to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
10-8
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of Chapter 961 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
3. Synthetic Marijuana. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess synthetic
marijuana. Pursuant to §66.0107(1)(bn), Wis. Stats., prosecution for a
violation of this paragraph shall be limited to those violations committed by a
person who has not previously been convicted in this state for possession of
a controlled substance.
(c) Penalties. Any adult convicted of a violation of this subsection shall be assessed
a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00.
(d) Exception. Subparagraphs (b) 1. and 2. of this subsection shall not apply to a
person who has obtained or possesses marijuana directly from or pursuant to a valid
prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of his or her professional
practice. The burden of proof to prove such exception shall be on the person claiming it. As
used in this paragraph, "practitioner" shall mean those persons defined by §961.01(19), Wis.
Stats.
[Am. 93-24, Eff. 6-11-93; Am. 11-34; Eff. 11-25-11]
(7m) PURCHASE OR POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCT BY MINORS
PROHIBITED.
[Cr. 92-33, Eff. 11-2-92; Am. 14-24, Eff. 7-25-14]
(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) and (c), no person under the age of 18
years may do any of the following:
1. Purchase, attempt to purchase, or possess any cigarette, nicotine product, or
tobacco product.
2. Falsely represent his or her age for the purpose of receiving any cigarette,
nicotine product, or tobacco product.
[Am. 14-24, Eff. 7-25-14]
(b) A person under the age of 18 years may purchase or possess cigarettes,
nicotine products, or tobacco products for the sole purpose of resale in the course of
employment during his or her working hours if employed by a retailer.
[Am. 14-24, Eff. 7-25-14]
(c) A person under 18 years of age, but not under 15 years of age, may purchase,
attempt to purchase or possess cigarettes, nicotine products, or tobacco products in the
course of his or her participation in an investigation under §254.916, Wis. Stats., that is
conducted in accordance with §254.916 (3), Wis. Stats.
[Cr. 14-24, Eff. 7-25-14]
(d) A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette, nicotine product, or tobacco
product that has been sold to and is in the possession of a person under 18 years of age.
[Renumbered and am. 14-24, Eff. 7-25-14]
(e) The definitions contained in §254.911, Wis. Stats., shall apply to this subsection.
[Renumbered and am. 14-24, Eff. 7-25-14]
10-9
(f) Whoever is convicted of violating this section is subject to a maximum forfeiture
of: $25.00 if the person has not been convicted of a violation occurring in the preceding
twelve months; $40.00 if the person has been convicted of one violation occurring in the
preceding twelve months; or $50.00 if the person has been convicted of two or more
violations occurring in the preceding twelve months.
[Par. (e) Cr. 95-6, Eff. 3-20-95; Renumbered 14-24, Eff. 7-25-14]
(7n) RESTRICTIONS ON SALE OR GIFT OF CIGARETTES, NICOTINE
PRODUCTS, OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
[Am. 14-24, Eff. 7-25-14]
(a) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the definitions found in §134.66(1),
Wis. Stats., shall apply.
(b) Restrictions.
1. No retailer, manufacturer, distributor, jobber, subjobber, or his or her
employee or agent may sell or give cigarettes, nicotine products, or tobacco
products to any person under the age of 18, except as provided in sub.
10.03(7m)(b) of this Code.
[Am. 14-24, Eff. 7-25-14]
2. No retailer may sell cigarettes in a form other than as a package or
container on which a stamp is affixed under §139.32(1), Wis. Stats.
3. Every retailer shall post a sign in areas within his or her premises where
cigarettes or tobacco products are sold to consumers stating that the sale of
any cigarette or tobacco product to a person under the age of 18 is unlawful
under this section and sec. 10.03(7m) of this Code.
(c) Vending Machine Restrictions.
1. Every vending machine operator shall attach a notice in a conspicuous
place on the front of his or her vending machines stating that the purchase
of any cigarette or tobacco product by a person under the age of 18 is
unlawful under Sec. 10.03(7m) of this Code and that the purchaser is
subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $25.
2. No retailer may keep a vending machine in any public place that is open to
persons under the age of 18 unless all of the following apply:
a. The vending machine is in a place where it is ordinarily in the immediate
vicinity, plain view and control of an employee.
b. The vending machine is in a place where it is inaccessible to the public
when the premises are closed.
3. The person who ultimately controls, governs or directs the activities within
the premises where the vending machine is located shall ensure that an
employee of the retailer remains in the immediate vicinity, plain view and
control of the vending machine whenever the premises are open.
10-10
4. Notwithstanding sub. (c)2 above, no retailer may place or keep a vending
machine within 500 feet of a school.
(d) Defenses.
1. Proof of all the following facts by a retailer, manufacturer, distributor, jobber,
subjobber, or their employee or agent who sells cigarettes, nicotine
products, or tobacco products to a person under the age of 18 is a defense
to any prosecution for a violation of sub. (b)1 above:
[Am. 14-24, Eff. 7-25-14]
a. That the purchaser falsely represented that she or he had attained the
age of 18 and presented an identification card,
b. That the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary and
prudent person would believe that the purchaser had attained the age of
18, and
c. That the sale was made in good faith, in reasonable reliance on the
identification card and appearance of the purchaser and in the belief that
the purchaser had attained the age of 18.
2. A vending machine operator is not liable under sub. (b)1 for the purchase of
cigarettes or tobacco products from his or her vending machine by a person
under the age of 18 if the vending machine operator was unaware of the
purchase.
(e) Penalties.
1. Whoever violates subsections (b)1-2 or (c)2-4 is subject to a forfeiture of:
a. Not more than $500 if the person had not committed a previous violation
within 12 months of the violation; or
b. Not less than $200 nor more than $500 if the person has committed a
previous violation within 12 months of the violation.
2. A court shall suspend any license or permit issued under §134.65, Wis.
Stats., or sec. 9.02 of this Code, to a person for:
a. Not more than 3 days, if the court finds that the person committed a
violation within 12 months after committing one previous violation;
b. Not less than 3 days nor more than 10 days, if the court finds that the
person committed a violation within 12 months after committing 2 other
violations; or
c. Not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days, if the court finds that the
person committed a violation within 12 months after committing 3 or more
other violations.
10-11
3. The court shall promptly mail notice of a suspension under sub. (e)2 to the
Alcohol and Tobacco Enforcement Section of the Department of Revenue.
4. Whoever violates sub. (b)3 or (c)1 shall forfeit not more than $25.
[Am. 94-30, Eff. 07-05-94]
(7p) RESTRICTIONS ON E-CIGARETTES.
[Cr. 2019-10, Eff. 6-28-19]
(a) As used in this subsection, “e-cigarette” means any electronic delivery product
composed of a mouthpiece, heating element, battery and/or electronic circuits that provides
a vapor of liquid to the user, or relies on vaporization of any liquid or solid to then be inhaled
by the user. This term includes such devices whether they are manufactured as ecigarettes,
electronic cigarettes, personal vaporizers, e-cigars, e-pipes or under any other
product name. The term does not include asthma inhalers or other medical devices
prescribed by a medical provider.
(b) Possession of E-Cigarettes by Minors Prohibited.
Except as provided in paragraph (d), no person under the age of 18 years may do
any of the following:
1. Purchase, attempt to purchase, or possess any e-cigarette.
2. Falsely represent his or her age for the purpose of receiving any e-cigarette.
(c) Sale or Transfer of E-Cigarettes to Minors Prohibited.
Except as provided in paragraph (d), no person or retailer may sell, give or transfer
any e-cigarette to any person under the age of 18 years.
(d) A person under the age of 18 years may possess e-cigarettes for the sole
purpose of resale in the course of employment during his or her working hours.
(e) Penalties.
1. Whoever is convicted of violating paragraph (b) of this subsection is subject
to a forfeiture of:
a. Not more than $25.00 if the person has not been convicted of a
violation occurring in the preceding 12 months; or
b. Not more than $40.00 if the person has been convicted of one
violation occurring in the preceding 12 months; or
c. Not more than $50.00 if the person has been convicted of two or
more violations occurring in the preceding 12 months.
2. Whoever is convicted of violating paragraph (c) of this subsection is subject
to a forfeiture of:
10-12
a. Not more than $500 if the person has not committed a previous
violation with 12 months of the violation; or
b. Not less than $200 nor more than $500 if the person has
committed a previous violation within 12 months of the violation.
(8) LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED.
(a) Loud and Unreasonable Noise Prohibited. No person shall use within the Village
any equipment for the production or amplification of sound so as to unreasonably cause
such sound to be transmitted into a public street, alley, or public place unless a permit has
been granted, which states the time and place of the event, by the Chief of Police. It shall
be unlawful for any person to use or operate, or to cause to be used or operated any
mechanical device, machine, apparatus or instrument for production or amplification of the
human voice or any sound or noise in any public or private place in such manner that the
peace and good order of the neighborhood are unreasonably disturbed or annoyed.
[Cr. 95-22, Eff. 05-15-95]
(b) Types of Loud and Unreasonable Noises. The following acts are declared to be
loud, disturbing and unreasonable noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
1. Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on
any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in
the Village for longer than three (3) seconds in any period of one (1) minute
or less, except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonable loud
or harsh sound by means of any signaling device and the sounding of any
plainly audible device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
2. Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to
be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of
sound in a loud and unreasonable manner. The operation of any set,
instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner as to be plainly audible beyond the physical
confines of the building, apartment or vehicle in which it is located shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
3. Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting
to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or
device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the
public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting
attention of the public to any building or structure. Announcements over
loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer in person and without the
aid of any mechanical device.
4. Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which causes frequent or
long continued unreasonable noise.
10-13
5. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any internal
combustion engine or motor boat except through a muffler or other device
which will effectively prevent unnecessary loud or explosive noises
therefrom.
6. Construction Activities. The operation of any construction equipment,
including but not necessarily limited to bulldozers, backhoes, pneumatic
hammers, pile drivers, or similar equipment attended by loud or unusual
noise other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Sunday; provided, however, that the Director of Public Services shall have
the authority, upon determining that the loss or inconvenience caused by
such restriction would be extraordinary and of such nature to warrant special
consideration, to grant permission for a specified period within which such
work and operation may take place during other than the hours specified.
[Repl. & Recr. 95-51, Eff. 11-10-95; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
7. Schools and churches. The creation of any excessive noise on any street
adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church while in use, which
unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that institution. No
person, while on public or private grounds adjacent to any building, or while
within any building in which a school or any class thereof is in session, shall
willfully make or assist in the making of any noise or diversion which
disturbs or tends to unreasonably disturb the peace or good order and
operation of such school session or class thereof.
[Cr. 95-22, Eff. 05-15-95]
8. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
a. Any vehicle of the Village while engaged in necessary public business.
b. Excavations or repairs of public construction by or on the behalf of any
government entity or public utility when the public welfare renders it
impracticable to perform such work during the hours specified for such
work.
c. The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public
addresses which are noncommercial in nature.
[Am. 95-51, Eff. 11-10-95]
(c) Permits for Amplifying Devices.
[Cr. 95-22, Eff. 05-15-95]
1. Permit Required. The use of loudspeakers or amplifying devices in a public
place of the Village is prohibited unless the party desiring to use such
loudspeaker or amplifying device first obtains a permit from the Chief of
Police, except a permit for the use of such equipment in Village parks shall
be obtained from the Director of Public Services pursuant to sec.
16.01(3)(d).
[Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
10-14
2. Grounds or Reasons for Denial or Allowance. The Chief of Police shall
have the authority to revoke such permit when he believes such
loudspeaker or amplifying device is becoming a nuisance because of the
volume, the method in which it is being used or the location in which it is
being operated.
(9) INTERFERENCE WITH RADIO AND TELEVISION RECEPTION. No person
shall operate or cause to be operated, any machine, device, apparatus or instrument of any
kind whatsoever within the Village which shall cause reasonably preventable electrical
interference with radio or television reception within said municipal limits. However, x-ray
pictures, examination or electrical treatments under direct instructions of any duly registered
physician, chiropractor or dentist may be made at any time if the machine or apparatus used
therefor is properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably preventable
interference and is not negligently operated.
(10) LOUDSPEAKERS REGULATED.
(a) Prohibited. No person shall operate on any street or alley or in any park or other
public place in the Village any loudspeaker or other mechanical device for amplifying sound
or any mechanical device for reproduction sound, or shall create any excessive noise or
disturbance by voice or instrument of any kind.
(b) Exceptions. The provisions of par. (a) shall not apply to patriotic observance of
Memorial Day, Flag Day, the Fourth of July or Veterans' Day held in public places in the
Village by the American Legion or other similar patriotic organizations, or to the annual
celebration of the Christmas season held in the month of December by a nonsectarian
association or group of persons, provided that no advertising for private purposes is done on
any such occasion.
(11) [Repl. 07-06, Eff. 02-23-07]
(12) [Repl. 07-06, Eff. 02-23-07]
(13) STORAGE OF JUNK, ETC., REGULATED. No person shall store junked or
discarded property, including automobiles, automobile parts, trailers or trailer parts, trucks,
tractors, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery or machinery parts,
wood, bricks, cement blocks or other unsightly debris which substantially depreciates
property values in the neighborhood except in an enclosure which houses such property
from public view, or upon license issued by the Village Board. The Building Inspector or the
Chief of Police may require, by written order, any premises violating this subsection to be
put in compliance within the time specified in such order, and if the order is not complied
with, may have the premises put in compliance and the cost thereof assessed as a special
tax against the property.
(14) ANNOYING TELEPHONE CALLS PROHIBITED. No person shall, within the
Village, make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with the intention to
annoy another.
10-15
10.04 OFFENSES ENDANGERING PUBLIC MORALS AND DECENCY.
(1) GAMBLING, LOTTERIES, FRAUDULENT DEVICES AND PRACTICES
PROHIBITED. All forms of gambling, lotteries and fraudulent devices and practices are
prohibited within the Village. Any peace officer or policeman of the Village is hereby
authorized to seize anything devised solely for gambling or found in actual use for gambling
within the Village and to dispose thereof after a judicial determination that said device was
used solely for gambling or found in actual use for gambling.
(2) INDECENT CONDUCT AND LANGUAGE PROHIBITED. No person shall use
any indecent, vile, profane or obscene language or conduct himself in any indecent, loud,
lascivious or obscene manner within the Village.
10.05 OFFENSES ENDANGERING PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
(1) DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
(a) No person shall willfully injure or intentionally deface, destroy or unlawfully
remove, take or meddle with any property of any kind or nature belonging to the Village or
its departments or to any private person without the consent of the owner or proper
authority.
(b) Pursuant to §895.035, Wis. Stats., the parents of an unemancipated minor shall
be liable for the damage of property caused by the willful, malicious or wanton act of such
child; such liability shall not exceed $1,000.00.
(2) LITTERING PROHIBITED. No person shall place, throw, deposit or leave any
glass, rubbish, waste or filth upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or other
property of the Village or upon any private property not owned by him or into any body of
water or navigable waterway within the Village. No person shall leave any brochure, leaflet,
handbill, magazine, catalog, paper or other material, whether or not it contains any printed
matter or other communication:
(a) unattended on public or private property of another in a manner that will allow
the material to be carried by wind or otherwise result in litter;
(b) on any lawn, sidewalk, driveway, terrace, curb or other part of any private
property except on a porch, in or affixed to the door of a structure, in a receptacle designed
or intended for delivery of such materials or in the possession of a person lawfully on the
property; or
(c) on or in any porch, door or receptacle if there is clearly posted by any person
in charge of the premises on or within 12” of such porch, door or receptacle, a notice clearly
prohibiting the placing of such materials thereon or therein. Such notice may prohibit
specified types of materials or may affirmatively authorize the placing of only specified
materials. Unless otherwise specified by the notice, the prohibition shall be deemed to
apply to the placement of materials either in or on the porch, door or receptacle. A notice
posted in accordance with this paragraph shall not apply to the placement of any material in
a mailbox or other receptacle intended for deliveries of mail, by any employee of the U.S.
Postal Service acting within the scope of such employment.
[Am. 08-02, Eff. 1-21-08]
10-16
(3) UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF PROPERTY. No person shall take and carry away
the property of another without the owner's consent. This offense shall include, but not be
limited to, the operation of a vehicle, whether or not motorized, without the owner's consent.
10.06 CURFEW.
(1) CURFEW ESTABLISHED.
(a) Except as provided in sub. (2), it is unlawful for any person under the age of
sixteen (16) years, or any person under the age of eighteen (18) years whose Wisconsin
driver's license has been revoked or suspended, whether on foot or in or upon any
conveyance be it driven or parked, to be upon or within the bounds of any street, highway,
road, sidewalk, curb, gutter, parking lot, alley, vacant lot, park, playground, yard, or place of
amusement or entertainment, whether public or private, without the permission of the owner
or lawful occupant thereof, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Any person who
violates this subsection will be subject to penalties in accordance with sec. 20.04.
[Am. 05-03, Eff. 1-6-05]
(b) Except as provided in sub. (2), it is unlawful for any person who is sixteen (16) or
seventeen (17) years of age, whether on foot or in or upon any conveyance be it driven or
parked, to be upon or within the bounds of any street, highway, road, sidewalk, curb, gutter,
parking lot, alley, vacant lot, park, playground, yard, or place of amusement or
entertainment, whether public or private, without the permission of the owner or occupant
thereof, between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(c) Except as provided in sub. (2), or if the person is home schooled, it is unlawful
for any person who is less than 18 years of age and who is both subject to compulsory
school attendance and currently expelled or suspended from school, to be upon or within
the bounds of any street, highway, road, sidewalk, curb, gutter, parking lot, alley, vacant lot,
park, playground, yard, or place of amusement or entertainment, whether public or private,
except the person’s own residence, during times in which public school is in session.
[Par. (c) Cr. 12-04, Eff. 3-2-12]
(2) EXCEPTIONS. The prohibitions in subsection (1) of this section shall not apply
to a minor who is:
(a) accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having legal
custody of such minor;
(b) pursuing the duties of his or her employment, including direct travel between the
minor's home and place of employment;
(c) traveling directly between his or her home and a school-sponsored or churchsponsored
activity; or
(d) participating in, going to, or returning from, an activity involving the exercise of
their rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or any
equivalent rights under the Wisconsin Constitution, including freedom of speech, the free
exercise of religion, and the right of assembly.
10-17
(3) Unless flight by the child or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a law
enforcement officer shall, prior to issuing a citation for an offense under this section, afford
the child an opportunity to explain his or her reasons for being present in the public place. A
law enforcement officer shall not issue a citation for an offense under this section unless the
officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred, and that none of the exceptions
provided in this section apply.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit a child to unnecessarily loiter
about the streets, alleys or public places or be in a parked motor vehicle on the public
streets during the established curfew hours.
(5) RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS.
(a) It is unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult person having legal custody
of a minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to permit, or by ineffective control to allow,
such minor to violate sub. (1)(a) of this section. Any person who violates this subsection will
be subject to penalties in accordance with sec. 20.04.
(b) No person shall be liable under this subsection for a violation committed by a
minor if that person has notified that police department that his or her child is out after
curfew and has requested assistance in locating the child before they are found by police
violating this section.
(c) No person shall be liable under this subsection for a violation committed by a
minor during any period when physical placement of such minor has been assigned
exclusively to some other person by judgment or order of a court.
10.07 ENFORCEMENT OF VIOLATIONS OF THIS CODE.
(1) Except as otherwise provided by law, any action to collect a forfeiture or penalty
for a violation of this Code may be commenced by the issuance of a citation pursuant to
secs. 66.0113 and 800.02, Wis. Stats.
[Am. 92-43, Eff. 12-21-92]
(2) FORM OF CITATION. The form of the citation to be used shall be the Wisconsin
Uniform Municipal Citation.
(3) SCHEDULE OF DEPOSITS.
(a) Establishment of Deposit Schedule. A schedule of cash deposits is established
for use with citations issued for violations of Village ordinances and is set forth in sec. 20.08
of this Code.
[Am. 15-12, Eff. 03-13-15]
(b) Payment. Deposits shall be made in cash, money order or certified checks to
the Municipal Court or the Chief of Police, who shall provide a receipt therefor.
(4) ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS. Citations for violations of this chapter may be issued
as authorized by sec. 1.10 of this Code.
[Am. 92-43, Eff. 12-21-92; Am. 13-07, Eff. 4-3-13; Am. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
10-18
(5) MISCELLANEOUS PROCEDURES. (a) §66.0113(3), Wis. Stats., relating to
violators' options and procedure on default, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference.
[Am. 92-43, Eff. 12-21-92]
(6) NONEXCLUSIVITY.
(a) Other Ordinances. The adoption of this section does not preclude the Village
Board from adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any other law
or ordinance relating to the same or other matter.
(b) Other Remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the
Village or any authorized officer from proceeding under any other section of this Code or law
or by any other enforcement method to enforce any section of this Code, Village regulation
or order.
10.08 [Am. 94-5, Eff. 2-7-94; Am. 06-20, Eff. 6-8-06; Am. 14-14, Eff. 03-18-14; Repealed 15-12, Eff.
03-13-15]
10.09 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in sec. 20.04 of this Code in addition to the specific
penalties provided in this chapter.
10.20 [Cr. 96-44, Eff. 11-22-96; Repealed 16-46, Eff. 11-24-16]
10.21 [Cr. 96-44, Eff. 11-22-96; Repealed 16-46, Eff. 11-24-16]
10.22 [Cr. 96-44, Eff. 11-22-96; Repealed 16-46, Eff. 11-24-16]
10.225 [Cr. 14-28, Eff. 9-12-14; Repealed 16-46, Eff. 11-24-16]
10.23 [Cr. 96-44, Eff. 11-22-96; Repealed 16-46, Eff. 11-24-16]
10.24 PENALTY FOR POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA BY A
JUVENILE.
(1) If the municipal court finds a juvenile committed a violation of sec. 10.03(7)(b)(2)
of the DeForest Municipal Code, the court shall suspend or revoke the juvenile's operating
privilege, as defined in §340.01(40), Wis. Stats., for not less than 6 months nor more than 5
years and, in addition, shall order one of the following penalties:
(a) For a first violation, a forfeiture of not more than $50.00 or the juvenile's
participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under
§938.34(5g) or both.
(b) For a violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, a forfeiture of
not more than $100.00 or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other
community service work under §938.34(5g), Wis. Stats., or both.
10-19
(c) For a violation committed within 12 months of 2 or more previous violations, a
forfeiture of not more than $500.00 or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work
program or other community service work under §938.34(5g), Wis. Stats., or both.
10.25 DISPOSITION OF JUVENILE ADJUDGED TO HAVE VIOLATED AN
ORDINANCE. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, if the municipal court finds that
the juvenile violated an ordinance, the court shall enter an order making one or more of the
following dispositions:
(1) Counsel the juvenile or the parent or guardian.
(2) Impose a forfeiture not to exceed the maximum forfeiture that may be imposed
on an adult for committing that violation or, if the violation is only applicable to a juvenile,
$50.00. Any such order shall include a finding that the juvenile alone is financially able to
pay and shall allow up to 12 months for the payment. If a juvenile fails to pay the forfeiture,
the court may suspend any fishing or hunting license issued under Chapter 29, Wis. Stats.,
or suspend the juvenile's operating privilege as defined in §340.01(40), Wis. Stats., for not
less than 30 days nor more than 5 years.
(3) Order the juvenile to be placed in a teen court program, pursuant to section
26.04(1)(f) of the DeForest Municipal Code.
(4) Order the juvenile to participate in a supervised work program or other
community service work under §938.34(5g), Wis. Stats.
(5) If the violation has resulted in damage to the property of another, or in actual
physical injury to another excluding pain and suffering, the court may order the juvenile to
make repairs of the damage to property or reasonable restitution for the damage or injury if
the court, after taking into consideration the well-being and needs of the victim, considers it
beneficial to the well-being and behavior of the juvenile. Any such order requiring payment
for repairs or restitution shall include a finding that the juvenile alone is financially able to
pay and may allow up to the date of the expiration of the order for the payment.
(6) If the violation is related to unsafe use of a boat, order the juvenile to attend a
safety course under §30.74(1), Wis. Stats.
(7) If the violation is of Chapter 29, Wis. Stats., suspension of the fishing or hunting
license or licenses of the juvenile issued under that chapter for not more than one year or
until the juvenile is 18 years of age, whichever occurs first.
(8) If the violation is related to the unsafe use of firearms, order the juvenile to attend
a course under the hunter education and firearm safety program under §29.591, Wis. Stats.
(9) If the violation is one related to the use of snowmobiles, order the juvenile to
attend a safety course under §350.055, Wis. Stats.
(10) If the violation is one related to the use of all-terrain vehicles, order the juvenile
to enroll and participate in an all-terrain vehicle safety course.
10-20
(11) If the violation is related to the use or abuse of alcohol beverages or controlled
substances, order the juvenile to do any of the following:
(a) Submit to an alcohol and other drug assessment that conforms to the criteria
specified under §938.547(4), Wis. Stats., and that is conducted by an approved treatment
facility.
(b) Participate in an outpatient alcohol and other drug abuse treatment program if an
assessment conducted under par. (a) recommends treatment.
(c) Participate in a court-approved pupil assistance program provided by the
juvenile's school board or in a court-approved alcohol or other drug abuse education
program. The juvenile's participation in a court-approved pupil assistance program under
this paragraph is subject to the approval of the juvenile's school board.
[Cr. 96-44, Eff. 11-22-96]
10.26 DISPOSITIONAL ORDERS. After ordering a penalty under secs. 10.20
through 10.24, the municipal court, with the agreement of the juvenile, may enter an
additional order staying the execution of the penalty order and suspending or modifying the
penalty imposed. The order under this paragraph shall require the juvenile to do any of the
following:
(1) Submit to an alcohol and other drug abuse assessment that conforms to the
criteria specified under §938.547(4), Wis. Stats., and that is conducted by an approved
treatment facility.
(2) Participate in an outpatient alcohol or other drug abuse treatment program at an
approved treatment facility, if an alcohol or other drug abuse assessment conducted under
subsection (1) recommends treatment.
(3) Participate in a court-approved pupil assistance program provided by the
juvenile's school board or in a court-approved alcohol or other drug abuse education
program. The juvenile's participation in a court-approved pupil assistance program under
this subsection is subject to the approval of the juvenile's school board.
(4) Participate in a teen court program pursuant to sec. 26.04(1)(f) of this Code.
[Cr. 96-44, Eff. 11-22-96]
10.27 SANCTIONS FOR VIOLATION OF ORDER. If a juvenile who has violated a
municipal ordinance violates a condition of a dispositional order imposed by the municipal
court, the court may impose the following sanctions:
(1) Suspension of or limitation on the use of the juvenile's operating privilege, as
defined under §340.01(40), Wis. Stats., or of any approval issued under Chapter 29, Wis.
Stats., for a period of not more than 3 years.
(2) Order the juvenile detained in the juvenile's home or current residence for a
period of not more than 30 days under rules of supervision specified in the order.
10-21
(3) Order the juvenile to perform not more than 25 hours of uncompensated
participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under
§938.34(5g), Wis. Stats.
(4) Petition the juvenile court to impose on the juvenile any of the following
sanctions:
(a) Placement of the juvenile in a secure detention facility or juvenile portion of the
county jail for not more than 10 days and the provision of educational services consistent
with his or her current course of study during the period of placement.
(b) Detention in the juvenile's home or current residence to be monitored by an
electronic monitoring system for a period of not more than 30 days.
[Cr. 96-44, Eff. 11-22-96]
10.28 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPEAT OFFENSES.
[Cr. 16-42, Eff. 11-11-16]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any custodial parent or guardian of any unemancipated
person under eighteen (18) years of age to allow or permit such person to act
in a manner that would constitute a violation of any of the following state laws adopted under
section 10.01 more than once within any ninety (90) day period:
10.947.01 Disorderly Conduct
10.947.012 Unlawful Use of a Telephone
10.947.0125 Unlawful Use of Computerized Communication System
10.947.013 Harassment
10.048.51 Hazing
(2) There is a rebuttable presumption that a custodial parent or guardian of any
unemancipated person under eighteen (18) years of age permitted a violation contrary to the
previous paragraph, if, prior to the violation, law enforcement provided the parent or
guardian notice of previous conduct by the same un-emancipated person that would
constitute a violation of any of the offenses listed in the previous paragraph within the prior
ninety (90) days.
[Cr. 16-42, Eff. 11-11-16]
11-1
CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC NUISANCES
11.01 Public Nuisances Prohibited .......................................................................... 11-1
11.02 Public Nuisance Defined ................................................................................. 11-1
11.03 Public Nuisance Affecting Health ................................................................... 11-1
11.035 Illicit Discharges .............................................................................................. 11-2
11.04 Public Nuisance Offending Morals and Decency .......................................... 11-5
11.05 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety .............................................. 11-6
11.06 Dutch Elm Disease Control ............................................................................. 11-7
11.07 [Repealed 10-06, Eff. 2-1-10] ..................................................................................... 11-9
11.08 Abatement of Public Nuisances ..................................................................... 11-9
11.09 Cost of Abatement ......................................................................................... 11-10
11.10 Junked Automobiles, Etc. ............................................................................. 11-10
11.11 Penalty ........................................................................................................... 11-12
11.01 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED. No person shall erect, contrive, cause,
continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the Village.
11.02 PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED.
(1) A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which
shall continue for such length of time as to:
(a) Substantially annoy, injury or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of
the public.
(b) In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property.
(c) Greatly offend the public morals or decency.
(d) Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render
dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public
way or the use or public property.
[Am. 93-39, Eff. 10-8-93]
(2) Notwithstanding any contrary provision in this Code, this Chapter shall not apply
to prairie burning operations conducted in accordance with the provisions of sec. 16.03
hereof.
[Am. 93-39, Eff. 10-8-93]
11.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH. The following acts, omissions,
places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances,
but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming
within the definitions of sec. 11.02 above:
(1) ADULTERATED FOOD. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome
food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public.
11-2
(2) UNBURIED CARCASSES. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for
human consumption or foods which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary
manner within 24 hours after death.
(3) BREEDING PLACES FOR VERMIN, ETC. Accumulation of decayed animal or
vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or
any material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other
vermin may breed.
(4) STAGNANT WATER. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other
insects can multiply.
(5) GARBAGE CANS AND PLASTIC BAGS. Garbage cans and plastic bags which
are not flytight.
(6) ANIMALS. All animals running at large.
(7) SMOKE AND FUMES. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids,
fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the Village limits or within one mile therefrom
in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to
threaten or cause substantial injury to property.
(8) NOXIOUS WEEDS. All noxious weeds, as set forth under sec. 12.07 of this
Code, and all other rank growth of vegetation, including, but not limited to, grass exceeding
twelve inches (12”) in height.
[Am. 16-15, Eff. 6-17-16]
(9) WATER POLLUTION. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake,
canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances.
(10) NOXIOUS ODORS, ETC. Any use of property, substances or things within the
Village emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable
odors, gases, effluvia or stenches repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons
which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of
persons within the Village.
(11) STREET POLLUTION. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or
unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or
public place within the Village.
11.035 ILLICIT DISCHARGES.
(1) PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the Village of DeForest and protect waters of the state
through the regulation of illicit discharges to the Village's storm water conveyance system as
required by federal and state law. This section establishes methods for controlling the
discharge of pollutants into the Village's storm water conveyance system in order to comply
with the requirements of the Clean Water Act, §283.33, Wis. Stats., and the Wisconsin
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System municipal storm water discharge permit program
under Ch. NR 216, Wis. Adm. Code. The objectives of this section are:
11-3
(a) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Village's storm water conveyance
system associated with discharges from any user of the system.
(b) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the Village's storm water
conveyance system.
(c) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this section.
(2) DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
(a) "Director" means the Director of Public Services of the Village.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(b) “Illicit connection” means any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows the discharge of waste products to the Village's storm water
conveyance system and any connections to the municipal storm water conveyance system
from indoor drains and sinks.
(c) “Illicit discharge” means any discharge to the Village's storm water
conveyance system that is not composed entirely of storm water except discharges pursuant
to a Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or other discharges expressly
authorized by the Director.
(d) “Non-storm water discharge” means any discharge to the Village's storm
water conveyance system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
(e) “Storm water conveyance system” means any part of the Village's system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which is designed or used for collecting or
conveying storm water except that the term shall not apply to a combined sewer conveying
both sanitary wastewater and storm water.
(f) “Storm water” means surface runoff and drainage of rainfall and snow or ice
melt.
(g) “Waters of the state” means those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake
Superior within the boundaries of Wisconsin, all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds,
wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, water courses, drainage systems and other surface
water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within the state or under its
jurisdiction, except those waters which are entirely confined and retained completely upon
the property of a person.
(3) APPLICABILITY. This section shall apply to all discharges to the storm water
conveyance system and to all activities that can reasonably be expected to result in a
discharge thereto.
(4) ADMINISTRATION. The Director shall be responsible for administering and
enforcing this section. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Director may be
delegated in writing by the Director to any officer or employee of the Village or contractor
11-4
retained by the Village to exercise such powers.
(5) SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this section are hereby declared to be
severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this section or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect any other provisions or application of this section.
(6) PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
(a) Illicit Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
storm water conveyance system or waters of the state any materials, including, but not
limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, that have the potential to cause or
contribute to a present or future violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
storm water. This paragraph shall not apply to any of the following non-storm water
discharges or flows if done in a non-polluting manner:
[Am. 06-22, Eff. 6-8-06]
1. hydrant flushing,
2. lawn, tree or landscaping irrigation,
3. agricultural irrigation,
4. diverted stream flows,
5. uncontaminated groundwater infiltration,
6. uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
7. discharges from potable water sources,
8. foundation drains,
9. air conditioning condensation,
10. individual residential car washing,
11. flows from riparian habitats and wetlands,
12. dechlorinated swimming pool water,
13. residual water from street cleaning,
14. fire fighting.
(b) Responsibilities of Property Owners and Occupants. Every owner and occupant
of land shall exercise reasonable care to prevent the unnecessary deposit into the
stormwater conveyance system of leaves, grass clippings, yard waste and other plant
materials which have the potential to cause an increase the nutrient load in the waters of the
state. Any person whose activities result in the deposit of such materials into a street, gutter,
or onto any surface reasonably likely to drain into any such facilities, shall promptly remove
and contain such materials to prevent their further migration into the stormwater conveyance
system.
[Cr. 06-22, Eff. 6-8-06]
(c) Illicit Connections. No person shall construct, make, use, maintain or allow to
remain on property under his or her control, any illicit connections to the storm water
conveyance system, whether or not such connection was lawful at the time it was made.
[Renumbered 06-22, Eff. 6-8-06]
(7) ACCESS TO FACILITIES. The Director shall be permitted to enter and inspect
all land, buildings, structures or facilities subject to regulation under this section, as often as
may be necessary to determine compliance with this section. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to any
11-5
person authorized by the Director to enforce this section.
(8) NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as
soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information regarding any known or suspected
release of materials which are resulting, or which may result in, illicit discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm water conveyance system, or waters of the state,
said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup
of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall
immediately notify the appropriate emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said
person shall notify the Director in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Director within three business days of the initial notice.
(9) ENFORCEMENT.
(a) An person violating this section shall forfeit not less than $25 nor more than $500.
Each day a violation continues shall be a separate offense.
(b) Citations for violations of this chapter may be issued as authorized by sec. 1.10 of
this Code.
[Am. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
(c) Every violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
Compliance with this section may be enforced by injunctional order at the suit of the Village.
(d) The property owner shall take immediate action to remedy the violation upon
receipt of a written compliance order from the Director or a citation. In the event the property
owner fails to correct the violation, the Director may take any abatement actions reasonably
necessary to prevent damage to the waters of the state. The costs incurred by the Village,
plus interest and legal costs, shall be billed to the record owner of the property, and if not
paid when due, shall be entered on the tax roll and collected as a special charge pursuant to
Wis. Stats. §66.0627.
[Cr. 03-40, Eff. 10-09-2003]
11.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES OFFENDING MORALS AND DECENCY. The
following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to
be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be
construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within
the definition of sec. 11.02 of this chapter:
(1) DISORDERLY HOUSES. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill
fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of
prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling.
(2) GAMBLING DEVICES. All gambling devices and slot machines.
(3) UNLICENSED SALE OF LIQUOR AND BEER. All places where intoxicating
liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled,
manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by this Code.
11-6
(4) CONTINUOUS VIOLATION OF VILLAGE ORDINANCES. Any place or
premises within the Village where Village ordinances or state laws relating to public health,
safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally
violated.
11.05 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY. The following
acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances
affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other
nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the definition of sec. 11.02 of this
chapter:
(1) SIGNS, BILLBOARDS, ETC. All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar
structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public,
so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety.
(2) ILLEGAL BUILDINGS. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of
the provisions of this Code relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and
structures within the Village.
(3) UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC SIGNS. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings
or devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing
which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or
signal or which because of its color, location, brilliance or manner of operation interferes
with the effectiveness of any device, sign or signal.
(4) OBSTRUCTION OF INTERSECTIONS. All trees, hedges, billboards or other
obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways
from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian
crosswalk.
(5) TREE LIMBS. All limbs of trees which project over and less than 10 feet above
any public sidewalk or less than 10 feet above a street or other public place.
(6) DANGEROUS TREES. All trees which are a menace to public safety or are the
cause of substantial annoyance to the general public.
(7) FIREWORKS. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of
the State of Wisconsin and §5.26 of this Code.
(8) DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out
of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use.
(9) WIRES OVER STREETS. All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which
are strung less than 18 feet above the surface thereof.
(10) NOISY ANIMALS OR FOWL. The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl
which by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other noises
shall greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood or any considerable number of persons within
the Village.
(11) OBSTRUCTIONS OF STREETS: EXCAVATIONS. All obstructions of streets,
alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as
11-7
permitted by this Code or which, although made in accordance with this Code, are kept or
maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been
accomplished, or do not conform to the permit.
(12) UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY. Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property
abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which
causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or
sidewalks.
(13) [Repealed 18-05, Eff. 2-15-18]
(14) REFRIGERATORS. All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the
doors and other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for
opening from the inside.
(15) OPEN PITS, BASEMENTS, ETC. All open and unguarded pits, wells,
excavations or unused basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(16) FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS VIOLATIONS. Repeated or continuous violations of
this Code or the laws of the State of Wisconsin relating to the storage of flammable liquids.
11.06 DUTCH ELM DISEASE CONTROL.
(1) PUBLIC NUISANCES DECLARED. The following are hereby declared to be
public nuisances wherever they may be found within the Village.
(a) Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected with the Dutch Elm
disease fungus (Seratocystis ulmi [Buisman] Moreau) which harbors any of the elm bark
beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or Hylurgopinus refipes (Marsh.).
(b) Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or
other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with
an effective elm bark beetle destroying insecticide.
(2) NUISANCES PROHIBITED. No person shall permit any public nuisance as
defined in sub. (1) above to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him within the
Village.
(3) INSPECTION.
(a) Authorized Village employees or agents shall inspect or cause to be inspected all
premises and places within the Village at least twice each year to determine whether any
public nuisance as defined in sub. (1) above exists thereon, and shall also inspect or cause
to be inspected any elm tree reported or suspected to be infected with the Dutch Elm
disease fungus or any elm bark-bearing material reported or suspected to be infected with
the elm bark beetle.
(b) Authorized Village employees or agents may enter upon private premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of carrying out any of the provisions of this section.
11-8
(4) ABATEMENT OF DUTCH ELM DISEASE NUISANCES.
(a) Whenever any authorized Village employee or agent shall find, with reasonable
certainty on examination or inspection, that any public nuisance, as defined in this section,
exists within the Village, said employee or agent shall cause it to be sprayed, removed,
burned or otherwise abated in such manner as to destroy or prevent as fully as possible the
spread of Dutch Elm disease fungus or the insect pests or vectors known to carry such
disease.
(b) Before abating any such nuisance on private premises or in any terrace strip
between the lot line and the curb, the employee or agent shall proceed as follows:
1. If he shall determine that danger to other elm trees from said nuisance is not
imminent because of elm dormancy, he shall make a written report of his
findings to the Village Board who shall proceed as provided in §27.09(4),
Wis. Stats.
2. If he shall determine that danger to other elm trees within the Village is
imminent, he shall notify the owner of abutting owner of the property on
which such nuisance is found in writing, if he can be found, otherwise by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village that the
nuisance must be abated as directed in the notice within a specified time,
which shall not be less than 10 days from the date of such notice unless he
shall find that immediate action is necessary to prevent spread of infection.
If the owner fails to comply with the notice within the time limited, the
employee or agent shall cause the abatement thereof.
(c) No damages shall be awarded to the owner for destruction of any elm tree, elm
wood or elm material or any part thereof, pursuant to this section.
(5) SPRAYING OF ELM TREES. (a) Whenever the authorized employee or agent
shall determine that any elm tree or elm material within or near the Village is infected with
Dutch Elm disease fungus, he may cause to be sprayed all high value elm trees within a
1,000 foot radius thereof with an effective elm bark beetle-destroying concentrate, provided
such spraying shall be performed prior to July 15 of after October 15 of any year.
(b) Before causing the spraying of any elm tree on private property in accordance
with this section, said employee or agent shall notify the owner as provided in sub. (4)(b)2.
above.
(6) ASSESSMENT OF COSTS OF ABATEMENT AND SPRAYING.
(a) The entire cost of abating any public nuisance as defined in sub. (1) above or of
spraying any elm tree in accordance with subs. (4) or (5) above may be charged to and
assessed against the parcel or lot abutting on the street, alley, boulevard or parkway upon
or in which such tree is located or the parcel or lot upon which such tree stands in
accordance with §66.0627(4), Wis. Stats. The cost of abating any nuisance or spraying any
elm tree or part thereof which is located in or upon any park or public grounds shall be borne
by the Village.
(b) The Village employee or agent shall keep strict account of the costs of work
done under this section and shall report monthly to the Village Administrator all work done
11-9
for which assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description of the land,
lots, parts of lots or parcels of land and the amounts chargeable to each. The Village
Administrator shall include in his report to the Village Board the aggregate amounts
chargeable to each lot or parcel so reported, and such amounts shall be levied and
assessed against such parcels or lots in the same manner as other special taxes.
(7) SELLING AND TRANSPORTING OF ELM WOOD PROHIBITED. No person
shall sell or transport within the Village any bark bearing elm wood or material without first
securing the written permission of the Village Administrator.
11.07 [Repealed 10-06, Eff. 2-1-10]
11.08 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
(1) ENFORCEMENT. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the Building
Inspector to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Weed Commissioner shall have
concurrent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of secs. 11.03(8), 11.05(4)-(6), 11.06 and
11.07. Such officers shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to
ensure that such provisions are not violated. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any provision of
this chapter may be enforced by the Village Administrator and Village employees designated
by the Administrator to make such inspections and reports. No action shall be taken under
this section to abate a public nuisance unless an officer shall have inspected or caused to
be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and has determined that a
nuisance does in fact exist.
[Am. 97-11, Eff. 03-17-97]
(2) SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
(a) Notice to Owner. If the inspecting officer or agent shall determine that a public
nuisance exists within the Village and that there is great and immediate danger to the public
health, safety, peace, morals or decency he shall immediately report such determination to
the Village Administrator and the Village Administrator may direct the Chief of Police to
serve notice on the person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance or upon the
owner or occupant of the premises where such nuisance is caused, permitted or maintained
and to post a copy of said notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the person
causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance or the owner or occupant of the premises
to abate or remove such nuisance within 24 hours and shall state that unless such nuisance
is so abated, the Village will cause the same to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to
the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case
may be.
[Am. 92-31, Eff. 11-2-92]
(b) Abatement by Village. If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided or if
the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the officer having the
duty of enforcement shall cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance.
[Am. 92-31, Eff. 11-2-92]
(3) NON-SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
(a) Order To Abate Nuisance. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public
nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to
threaten imminent danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he/she
11-10
shall issue an order reciting the existence of a public nuisance and requiring the owner or
occupant of the premises to remove or abate the condition described in the order within the
time period specified therein. The order shall be served personally on the owner of the
building as well as the occupant if different from the owner and applicable to the described
nuisance, or, at the option of the inspecting officer, the notice may be mailed to the last
known address of the person to be served by registered mail with return receipt. If the
owner or the occupant cannot be served, the order may be served by posting it on the main
entrance of the premises and by publishing as a class 3 notice under Chapter 985, Wis.
Stats. The time limit specified in the order runs from the date of service or publication.
[Am. 00-14, Eff. 5-19-00]
(b) Abatement by Village. If the owner or occupant fails or refuses to comply within
the time period prescribed, the inspecting officer shall enter upon the premises and cause
the nuisance to be removed or abated and the Village shall recover the expenses incurred
thereby from the owner or occupant of the premises or from the person who has caused or
permitted the nuisance.
[Am. 00-14, Eff. 5-19-00]
(c) Remedy From Order. Any person affected by such order shall, within thirty (30)
days of service or publication of the order, apply to the circuit court for an order restraining
the Village and the inspecting officer from entering on the premises and abating or removing
the nuisance, or be forever barred. The court shall determine the reasonableness of the
order for abatement of the nuisance.
[Am. 00-14, Eff. 5-19-00]
(4) OTHER METHODS NOT EXCLUDED. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Village or its officials in accordance
with the laws of the State of Wisconsin. No action taken to abate a nuisance shall preclude
an action seeking a forfeiture as provided in sec. 11.11 of this Code.
[Am. 92-31, Eff. 11-2-92; Am. 12-30, Eff. 11-3-12; Am. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
11.09 COST OF ABATEMENT. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this
chapter for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public
nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and if
notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed
against the real estate as a special charge.
11.10 JUNKED AUTOMOBILE, ETC.
[Sec. 11.10 Am. 04-35, Eff. 12-23-04]
(1) STORAGE OF AUTOMOBILES RESTRICTED.
(a) No disassembled, inoperable, unlicensed, junked or wrecked motor vehicles,
truck body, tractors or trailer, no individual parts or components detached from a motor
vehicle or trailer and no appliances shall be stored or allowed to remain in the open upon
private property within the Village for a period exceeding five (5) days in any thirty (30) day
period except on the premises of a properly licensed automobile or appliance sales, repair,
towing, or storage business enterprise located in a properly zoned area.
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09]
(b) Any business engaged in automotive or appliance sales, towing, or repair may
retain such vehicles or appliances outdoors, on properly zoned private property of that
11-11
business, provided that such storage of any one vehicle or appliance shall not continue for
more than six (6) months in any twelve (12) month period and provided that all other
applicable requirements of this Code are met.
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09]
(c) Except as provided in pars. (a) and (b), no motor vehicle shall be stored or
allowed to remain in the open upon private property within the Village for a period exceeding
three (3) months in any 12 month period.
[Cr. 94-14, Eff. 4-18-94; Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09]
(d) No disassembled, inoperable, unlicensed, junked or wrecked motor
vehicle, and no truck body, tractor, semi-trailer or appliance shall be stored or allowed
to remain outdoors on any public land or highway at any time. This paragraph shall
not apply to a disabled motor vehicle left on or adjacent to a public highway, at the
location at which it became disabled, for sufficient time to allow for towing or repair,
but not longer than 72 hours. This paragraph shall not apply to materials properly
placed within a public right of way for collection and disposal for a period not to
exceed 3 days, provided that proper arrangements for collection and disposal have
been made.
[Am. 07-37, Eff. 12-7-07]
(2) DEFINITIONS.
(a) The term “disassembled, inoperable, junked or wrecked motor vehicle, truck
body, tractor, trailer” as used in this section shall mean any motor vehicle, truck body,
tractor, or trailer in such state of physical or mechanical ruin, damage, deterioration,
disassembly or disrepair as to be incapable of being operated safely and lawfully upon the
public streets or highways in the manner for which it was designed.
(b) The term "unlicensed - motor vehicle, truck body, tractor or trailer" shall mean
any motor vehicle, truck body, tractor or trailer which do not bear lawful current license
plates.
(c) The term "motor vehicle" shall have the meaning defined in §340.01(35), Wis.
Stats.
(d) The term " appliance" shall mean any stove, oven, washer, dryer, water heater,
furnace, space heater, water softener, dishwasher, trash compactor, lawn mower, garden
tractor, refrigerator or freezer.
(3) Any vehicle, trailer or appliance, or any part thereof, stored or allowed to remain
on any property within the Village in violation of this section is declared to be a public
nuisance and shall be subject to abatement pursuant to the applicable procedures contained
in secs. 3.07 or 11.08 of this Code.
(4) Any person who shall be adjudicated to have violated any of the provisions of
this section shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $100 plus the costs of prosecution,
and upon default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the Dane
County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed 10 days. Each day
that a violation of this section continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
11-12
11.11 PENALTY.
(1) General. Except as provided in sub. (2), any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter or cause a public nuisance shall be subject to a civil forfeiture of:
[Am. 92-31, Eff. 11-2-92; Am. 14-06, Eff. 03-15-14]
(a) not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for a first violation;
(b) not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for second and subsequent
violations.
(2) Environmental Pollution Nuisances. (a) In this subsection “environmental
pollution nuisance” shall mean any nuisance prohibited by §11.03(7), (9) or (10) which
results from the intentional act or omission of any person under circumstances that the
nuisance condition could reasonably be expected to result and which:
1. continues to such an extent, and for such duration, as to unreasonably cause
a material adverse effect on the use and enjoyment of nearby properties for
the lawful purposes to which such properties are used; or
2. has a tendency to cause a substantial decrease in the value of neighboring
properties; or
3. is of such severity in degree or kind as to cause or contribute to sickness or
significant physical discomfort of persons temporarily or permanently
occupying nearby properties; or
4. causes or contributes to a violation of any applicable state or federal air or
water quality standard; or
5. is in violation of any provision of a state or federal statute, standard, regulation,
permit or permit condition limiting the discharge of any substance, chemical,
chemical compound, dust, odor or other emission from any land, structure or
operation.
[Cr. 14-06, Eff. 03-15-14]
(b) Penalty for Environmental Pollution Nuisances. Any person who shall cause or
maintain an environmental pollution nuisance shall be subject to a forfeiture of:
1. not less than $1,000 nor more than $5,000 for a first offense; or
2. not less than $1,000 nor more than $25,000 for a second or subsequent
offense.
[Cr. 14-06, Eff. 03-15-14]
(3) Continuing Violations. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. Except as provided in sub. (4), each violation shall be considered a first violation
unless 24 hours has elapsed following notice by the Village of the violation. Notice includes,
but is not limited to:
11-13
(a) Oral or written notification or warning provided to the violator;
(b) The posting of a written notice on the premises where the violation has occurred;
(c) Service of a citation, summons or other document commencing any enforcement
action; or
(d) Any other method of communication which provides actual notice of the violation
to the violator.
[Renumbered and am. 14-07, Eff. 04-04-14]
(4) Recurring Violations. Notwithstanding the provisions of sub. (3), a violation shall
constitute a second or subsequent violation if committed by a person who, within the
previous 3 years, has been adjudicated guilty of a violation of this chapter by any court of
competent jurisdiction.
[Am. 92-31, Eff. 11-2-92; Renumbered and am. 14-07, Eff. 04-04-14]
(5) Penalty Factors. In assessing forfeitures under this subsection, the court shall
consider the following non-exclusive factors:
(a) The remedial purpose of this subsection to remedy and deter nuisances
significantly affecting the public health, safety and welfare, including the rights of others to
enjoy the use of private and public properties;
(b) Whether the activity causing the nuisance is undertaken for profit, and any
competent evidence presented by the defendant relating to the amount of profit generated
by the activity;
(c) Any efforts by the defendant to prevent or mitigate the nuisance;
(d) The seriousness of the violation and the number of persons and/or properties
affected thereby; and
(e) The duration of the nuisance after notice thereof to the defendant.
[Cr. 14-06, Eff. 03-15-14]
(6) Private Remedies Preserved. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in any
way to restrict or limit the rights of private parties to pursue whatever private legal remedies
they may have available as a result of any nuisance.
[Am. 92-31, Eff. 11-2-92; Renumbered 14-06, Eff. 03-15-14]
12-1
CHAPTER 12
HEALTH AND SANITATION
12.01 Compulsory Connection to Sewer or Water .................................................. 12-1
12.02 [Repealed 07-06, Eff. 02-23-07] .................................................................................. 12-1
12.03 Regulation of Nuisance-type Businesses ...................................................... 12-2
12.04 Sale of Unwholesome or Tainted Food Prohibited ....................................... 12-2
12.045 Sale of Mercury Thermometers Prohibited .................................................... 12-2
12.05 Right of County Health Officer to Enter Premises ........................................ 12-2
12.06 Abatement of Health Nuisances ..................................................................... 12-2
12.07 Control of Weeds and Grass........................................................................... 12-2
12.08 Smoking Prohibited in Certain Areas ............................................................. 12-3
12.09 Penalty ............................................................................................................. 12-4
12.01 COMPULSORY CONNECTION TO SEWER OR WATER.
(1) To assure preservation of public health, comfort and safety, it shall be the duty of
the owner of any building used for human habitation and located adjacent to a sewer or
water main, or in a block through which one or both of such systems extend, to connect
therewith after notice as provided herein.
(2) When a sewer or water main becomes available to any building used for
habitation, the Building Inspector shall notify the owner in writing to connect thereto and to
install a water closet and such other facilities as may be reasonably necessary to protect the
public health, welfare and safety. The manner of connecting shall be prescribed by the
Building Inspector.
(3) The notice required by this section shall be given in the manner prescribed by
§281.45, Wis. Stats., or by registered mail addressed to the last known address of the
owner or his/her agent.
(4) If the owner or his agent fails to comply after 10 days' notice as herein provided,
the notifying officer may cause connections and installations to be made and the expense
thereof assessed as a special assessment tax against the property.
(5) The owner may within 30 days after receipt of an invoice for work completed, file
a written option with the Village Administrator stating that he cannot pay the cost of
connection in one sum and electing that such sum be levied in 5 equal annual installments,
with interest on the unpaid balance at the current interest rate.
(6) After connection of any building used for human habitation to a sewer main, no
privy, cesspool or waterless toilet shall be used in connection with such human habitation.
12.02 [Repealed 07-06, Eff. 02-23-07]
12-2
12.03 REGULATION OF NUISANCE-TYPE BUSINESS.
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall conduct within the Village any business
which has a tendency to create a public nuisance, except upon permit issued by the Village
Board and subject to such conditions as the Board may impose.
(2) DEFINITION. A business which has a tendency to create a public nuisance, as
defined in sec. 11.02(1) of this Code, unless properly regulated.
(3) STATUTORY REFERENCE. This section is enacted pursuant to §66.0415, Wis.
Stats.
12.04 SALE OF UNWHOLESOME OR TAINTED FOOD PROHIBITED. No person
shall sell, offer for sale or hold for sale any meat, fish, fruits, vegetables or other articles of
food or drink which is not fresh or properly preserved, sound, wholesome and safe for
human consumption or the flesh of any animal which died by disease. The County Health
Officer is hereby authorized and directed to seize and destroy any articles of food or drink
which are offered or held for sale to the public which have become tainted, decayed, spoiled
or otherwise unwholesome or unfit for human consumption.
12.045 SALE OF MERCURY THERMOMETERS PROHIBITED. The sale or
distribution of mercury fever or basal thermometers is prohibited. No person shall sell at
retail or offer for sale at retail within the Village any fever thermometer containing mercury.
[Cr. 00-43, Eff. 9-19-00]
12.05 RIGHT OF COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER TO ENTER PREMISES. The
County Health Officer shall have the right to enter and examine and public premises or any
place where meat, fish, poultry, game, milk, bakery goods or other foodstuffs are stored,
prepared or dispensed for public consumption and to inspect or examine any vehicle
transporting such foodstuffs for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
12.06 ABATEMENT OF HEALTH NUISANCES. The County Health Officer and
the Village Board shall have the power to abate health nuisances in accordance with
§254.59, Wis. Stats., which is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section
as if fully set forth herein.
12.07 CONTROL OF WEEDS AND GRASS.
[Renumbered and Am. 16-15, Eff. 06-17-16]
(1) NOXIOUS WEEDS PROHIBITED.
(a) Definition. “Noxious weeds” means any of the following plants:
1. Cirsium arvense (Canada thistle).
2. Ambrosia artemisiifolia (common ragweed).
3. Ambrosia trifida (great ragweed).
4. Euphorbia esula (leafy spurge).
5. Convolvulus arvensis (creeping jenny) (field bind weed).
6. Tragopogon dubius (goat’s beard).
7. Rhus radicans (poison ivy).
8. Cirsium vulgaries (bull thistle).
12-3
9. Pastinaca sativa (wild parsnip).
10. Arctium minus (burdock).
11. Xanthium strumarium (cocklebur).
12. Amaranthus retroflexus (pigweed).
13. Chenopodium album (common lambsquarter).
14. Rumex crispus (curled dock).
15. Cannabis sativa (hemp).
16. Plantago lancellata (English plantain).
17. Urtica dioica (stinging nettle).
18. Noxious grasses, including Agrostia alba (redtop), Dactylis glomerata
(orchard), Phleum pratensis (timothy), Poa pratensis (Kentucky blue),
Sorghum halepense (Johnson), Setaria (foxtail).
19. Other plants and rank growth, including all ragweed, thistles, smartwee,
dandelions over twelve inches (12”).
20. Any plant listed under §§ 23.235(1)(a) and 66.0407(1)(b), Wis. Stats., or
prohibited under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 40.
(b) Noxious Weeds Prohibited. All noxious weeds are prohibited. A person
owning, occupying or controlling land shall destroy all noxious weeds on the land.
[Cr. 16-15, Eff. 06-17-16]
(2) MOWING REQUIRED. No person owning property within the Village shall
permit grass to grow over twelve inches (12”) in height, and it shall be the duty of every
property owner to mow or cause to be mowed upon his premises all grasses exceeding this
height restriction.
[Renumbered and Am. 16-15, Eff. 06-17-16]
(3) MOWING AND TREATMENT BY VILLAGE. It shall be the duty of the Weed
Commissioner to enforce this section and if any person shall fail to comply herewith, the
Commissioner shall cause the premises to be mowed and/or treated to destroy weeds, and
shall report the cost thereof in writing to the Village Administrator. The Weed Commissioner
shall provide the owner with 5 days’ written notice before causing the property to be mowed
by the Village staff or contractor, except that such notice shall not be required if the same
owner has received a similar notice within the previous six months and failed to correct the
violation noticed within the time allowed. Said cost shall be invoiced to the owner. In the
event of nonpayment within 30 days from said report of cost, such cost shall be assessed
against the real estate as a special charge. Any charge assessed under this section may be
appealed as provided in Chapter 17 of this Code.
[Am. 12-30, Eff. 11-3-12; Renumbered and Am. 16-15, Eff. 06-17-16]
(4) This section shall not apply to property designated by the Village Board to be
maintained as a prairie area as provided in sec. 16.01(2)(d) of this Code.
[Cr. 93-39, Eff. 10-8-93; Am. 14-01, Eff. 1-17-14; Renumbered and Am. 16-15, Eff. 06-17-16]
12.08 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS. (1) The provisions of §101.123,
Wis. Stats., and all acts amendatory thereto, are adopted by reference.
(2) Any person violating this section shall be subject to forfeitures as provided in §20.04.
[Cr. 10-26, Eff. 8-5-11]
12-4
12.09 PENALTY.
(1) Any person who shall violate sec. 12.045 shall be subject to a forfeiture of not
less than $20 nor more than $200.
[Am. 00-43, Eff. 9-19-00]
(2) Except as provided in sub. (1), any person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to the penalty provided by sec. 20.04 of this Code.
[Am. 00-43, Eff. 9-19-00]
(3) Each violation of this section, and each day a violation continues or occurs, shall
constitute a separate offense. This section shall not preclude the Village from maintaining
an appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter.
[Cr. 00-43, Eff. 9-19-00]
13-1
CHAPTER 13
SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT
[Repealed & Recreated 05-11, Eff. 4-21-05]
SUBCHAPTER 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS ................................................................ 13-2
13.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. ............................................................................... 13-2
13.02 INTERPRETATION ........................................................................................ 13-3
13.03 DEFINITIONS. ................................................................................................ 13-3
13.035 SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR AREAS AFFECTED BY HIGHWAY TRAFFIC
NOISE…………………………………………………………………………………………13-8
13.04 JURISDICTION. ............................................................................................. 13-9
13.05 COMPLIANCE. ............................................................................................. 13-10
13.06 LAND SUITABILITY. ..................................................................................... 13-10
13.07 REQUIRED INFORMATION. ........................................................................ 13-11
13.08 FEES. ........................................................................................................... 13-12
13.09 WAIVERS AND MODIFICATIONS. .............................................................. 13-13
13.10 VIOLATIONS. ............................................................................................... 13-14
13.11 PENALTIES. ................................................................................................. 13-14
13.12 APPEALS. .................................................................................................... 13-14
13.13 EXTRATERRITORIAL LAND DIVISION POLICIES. ..................................... 13-14
SUBCHAPTER II – CERTIFIED SURVEY MAPS. ........................................................ 13-16
13.20 WHEN REQUIRED. ...................................................................................... 13-16
13.21 TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS. ................................................................... 13-16
13.22 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL. ............................................................... 13-188
SUBCHAPTER III – SUBDIVISION PLATS. ................................................................. 13-19
13.30 PLATS REQUIRED. ..................................................................................... 13-19
13.31 TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS. ................................................................... 13-20
13.32 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL. ................................................................. 13-24
13.33 CERTIFICATES. ........................................................................................... 13-26
13.34 COPIES OF RECORDED PLAT. .................................................................. 13-26
SUBCHAPTER IV – PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS...................................... 13-26
13.40 STREETS. .................................................................................................... 13-26
13.41 BLOCKS. .................................................................................................... 13-311
13.42 LOTS. ......................................................................................................... 13-311
13.43 EASEMENTS. .............................................................................................. 13-32
13.44 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES. .......................................................... 13-32
13.45 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS. .................................................................... 13-32
SUBCHAPTER V – DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS. .................................................. 13-36
13.50 PARK AND PUBLIC LAND DEDICATIONS. ................................................. 13-36
13.51 IMPACT FEES FOR PARK FACILITIES. ...................................................... 13-37
13.52 IMPACT FEES FOR PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES. .................................... 13-40
SUBCHAPTER VI – DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS. ............................................ 13-43
13.60 DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS. ............................................................... 13-43
13.61 SUBDIVIDER'S AGREEMENT. .................................................................... 13-44
13-2
Article II. SUBCHAPTER 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
13.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. (1) PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to
regulate and control the division of land within the corporate limits and extraterritorial plat
approval jurisdiction of the Village in order to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the Village.
(2) INTENT. It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate the division of land so as:
(a) To lessen congestion in the streets and highways and provide for their
appropriate and timely upgrade to serve the needs of the land division;
(b) To further the orderly layout and appropriate use of land; to secure safety from
fire, panic, flood, excessive traffic relative to road capacity, and other dangers;
(c) To provide adequate light and air;
(d) To prevent the overcrowding of land and to avoid undue concentration of
population;
(e) To facilitate adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks, bicycle and pedestrian facilities and access, playgrounds and other public requirements;
(f) To facilitate the further division of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land, while
minimizing conflict among adjoining lots and uses;
(g) To encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the community through
appropriate growth management techniques, infill development in areas with adequate public
facilities, and appropriate development phasing that limits land division in areas premature for
urban development;
(h) To ensure that public facilities, utilities, and services are available concurrent with
land division development, and that they will have sufficient capacity to serve the proposed land
division, and that the community will be required to bear no more than its fair share of the cost
of providing such facilities, utilities, and services;
(i) To ensure the protection and, where possible, the enhancement, of
environmental resources, and the preservation of productive farmland and natural beauty to the
extent consistent with Village plans;
(j) To ensure adequate legal description and proper survey monumentation of land
divisions;
(k) To provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and for
penalties for its violation; and
[Am. 08-12, Eff. 4-18-08; Ratified 08-20, Eff. 5-20-08]
(l) In general to facilitate enforcement of community development standards as set
forth in the master plan, the Zoning Code, the Building Code and the Official Map of the Village.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
13-3
13.02 INTERPRETATION
(1) ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. Nothing in this chapter is
intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants,
agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
govern.
(2) MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of
the Village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the
Wisconsin Statutes.
13.03 DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
(1) "Alley" means a public right-of-way that normally affords a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property.
(2) "Applicant" shall mean any person or entity which submits an application to the
Village for a development approval.
(3) “Arterial street” means a public street that serves longer intra-urban trips and traffic
traveling through the urban area and has limited to no direct access for abutting land uses,
including any public street designated as an arterial street within the Village’s master plan.
Examples include North Street and Main Street.
[Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(4) "Block" means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by a
combination of streets, exterior boundary lines of the subdivision, and streams or water bodies.
(5) "Building permit" means the permit required for new construction and additions
pursuant to section 14.05 of this Code.
(6) [Repealed 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(7) "Capital improvements" means public park and recreational facilities that are treated as
capitalized expenses according to generally accepted accounting principles, including the cost of
acquiring, constructing and equipping the same, but not including costs associated with the
operation, administration, maintenance, or replacement of capital improvements.
(8) [Repealed 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(9) [Repealed 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(10) "Capital Costs" means the capital costs to construct, expand or improve public
facilities, including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering and design costs to construct,
expand or improve public facilities, except that not more than 10% of capital costs may consist of
legal, engineering and design costs unless the legal, engineering and design costs which relate
directly to the public improvement for which the impact fees were imposed exceed 10% of the
13-4
capital costs. “Capital costs” does not include other non-capital costs to construct, expand or
improve public facilities or the cost of equipment to construct, expand or improve public facilities.
(11) “Collector street” means a public street that collects and distributes internal traffic
within an urban area, such as within a residential neighborhood, providing access between local
and arterial streets and limited access for abutting land uses, including any public street
designated as a collector street within the Village’s master plan. Examples include Stevenson
Street and South Street.
[Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(12) "Cul-de-sac" means a minor street having but one end open to traffic and the other
end being terminated in a vehicular turnaround.
(12d) "dB" is an abbreviation for "Decibel" which is a unit for measuring the volume of a
sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square
meter).
[Cr. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
(12e) "dB(A)" is the standard notation for the sound pressure level as measured with a
sound level meter using the A-weighting network.
[Cr. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
(13) "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
property, the use of any principal structure or land, or any other activity that requires issuance of a
building permit.
(14) "Development approval" shall mean the review and approval by the Village of a
certified survey map, preliminary plat, final plat, preliminary or final development plan,
development or subdivider's agreement or site plan and the acceptance of public improvements
in connection with any of the foregoing.
(15) [Repealed 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(15m) “Extraterritorial jurisdiction” means the unincorporated area within 1½ miles of the
Village limits, except to the extent modified by the overlapping extraterritorial jurisdiction of
another city or village under §66.0105, Wis. Stats., by cooperative plan under §66.0307, Wis.
Stats., intergovernmental agreement under §66.0301 and §236.10(4), Wis. Stats., and/or a
waiver of such jurisdiction pursuant to §236.10(5), Wis. Stats.
[Cr. 06-07, Eff. 3-9-06; Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11; Am. 12-11, Eff. 7-27-12]
(16) "Frontage street" means a local street auxiliary to and located on the side of an
arterial street for control of access and for service to the abutting development.
(17) "Impact Fee" means the fee or assessment levied pursuant to sec. 13.51 or 13.52.
[Am. 05-28;, Eff. 10-6-05]
(18) "Impact fee coefficient" means the charge per dwelling unit calculated by dividing total
public facility costs by total number of dwelling units as projected by the most current needs
assessment.
(19) [Repealed 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
13-5
(19m) “Joint Committee” means the Joint Extraterritorial Zoning Committee as defined in
§15.02(40m) of this Code.
[Cr. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13]
(20) “Land Division” is a general term for a division of land where a single parcel of land
is converted into two or more legal parcels, any one of which is less than 35 acres in area. Each
contiguous land holding under common ownership that is less than 35 acres shall be included in
a land division as a lot or outlot. The term includes land divisions resulting from the recording of
a condominium plat if the result of the recording is the creation of 2 or more lots, but does not
include a condominium plat affecting only a single, pre-existing lot.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(21) “Local street” means a street designed to provide access to abutting land uses and
leading into a collector street or into an arterial street, but which is not designed to carry through
traffic from outside the neighborhood in which it is located.
[Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
(22) "Lot" means a parcel of land having frontage on a public street or other officially
approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use
and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, yard, parking area, and other
open space provisions of this chapter and any applicable zoning ordinance.
(23) "Major thoroughfare or major street" means a street used or intended to be used
primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. Major thoroughfares shall include freeways,
expressways, and other highways and parkways, as well as arterial streets.
(24) "Master plan" means a comprehensive plan prepared by the Village, pursuant to
Wis. Stats. §62.23(3) or §66.1001, indicating the general locations recommended for the various
functional classes of land use, places and structures, and for the general physical development
of the Village, and includes any unit, component, or part of such plan separately adopted and
maintained, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(24a) “Mature Tree” means any tree that is twelve (12) inches or greater in diameter at a
height of four and one-half feet above grade, other than a tree specifically planted and grown for
commercial purposes or any Box Elder, Siberian Elm, Buckthorn, Russian Olive, or other
invasive or nuisance tree as designated by the Village Forester.
[Cr. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13]
(24b) “Mature Woodland” means an area or stand of trees with a total combined canopy
area of one acre or greater, with at least 50% of the trees having a diameter of at least six (6)
inches at a height of four and one-half feet above grade, other than an area or stand of trees
specifically planted and grown for commercial purposes or dominated by invasive or nuisance
trees as designated by the Village Forester.
[Cr. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13]
(24m) “Minor division” means a land division not involving the dedication of land within
the Village, proposed to be completed by certified survey map and prepared for one of the
following purposes, as determined by the Zoning Administrator:
(a) The certified survey map will adjust one or more a common property lines between
lots, outlots, legal parcels, or other mortgage descriptions where no new lots are created and
13-6
where all dimensional, setback, lot area, and other requirements of this chapter and Chapter 15
of the Municipal Code would be met;
(b) The certified survey map will combine one or more lots, outlots, legal parcels, or
other mortgage descriptions in a manner that does not conflict with the intent of the original land
division approval or conditions thereto, if known; or
(c) The certified survey map will split an existing lot developed with a two-family
residential building, or proposed for development with a two-family residential building, for the
purpose of zero lot line construction, as defined in §15.02(103m), per the requirements in
§15.10(4)(a), and if permitted in the associated zoning district under Table 15.10A.
[Cr. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(24q) “Mixed Use Development” means a land development that includes or allows a
blend of commercial services, retail, office, multiple family residential, and/or institutional uses
within a single lot or building. Single family and/or two family residential development may not
be part of and is not considered mixed use development.
[Cr. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(25) "Needs Assessment" means the assessment of needs required to identify public
facility costs for the purpose of calculating impact fees as described in §66.0617, Wis. Stats.
(25k) “Official Map” means a map of the Village and surrounding areas depicting current
and future public rights-of-way, drainageways, and other public lands, as authorized under
§§61.35 and 62.23(6), Wis. Stats.
[Cr. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
(25p) “Outdoor Living Area” means a space associated with a residential land use that is
typically used for outdoor recreational activities or an outdoor space associated with other
noise-sensitive uses, including outdoor patio, deck, and balcony areas; public parks and outdoor
play areas including those associated with child care facilities; outdoor patient recovery or
resting areas associated with medical facilities or housing for the elderly, and similar areas as
determined by the Zoning Administrator. “Outdoor Living Area” does not include any front yard
area, driveway area, parking lot, maintenance area or storage area, or any exterior area at a
medical facility that is not used for patient activities.
[Cr. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
(26) “Pedestrian Ways” are defined as public pedestrian access other than sidewalks
along public streets.
(27) "Protective covenants" mean contracts entered into between private parties or
between private parties and public bodies pursuant to Wis. Stats. §236.293, that constitute a
restriction on the use of all private or platted property within a land division created by a certified
survey map or subdivision for the benefit of the public or property owners and to provide
protection against undesirable aspects of development that would tend to impair stability of
values or otherwise.
(27m) "Public Improvement" means any sanitary sewer main, storm sewer, stormwater
management, curb and gutter, water main, roadway, park, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way,
bicycle path, trail, tree or other vegetation, or other facility or infrastructure for which the Village
has assumed, or intends to ultimately assume, the responsibility for ownership, maintenance,
and operation.
[Cr. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
13-7
(28) "Replat" means the process of changing or a map or plat that changes the
boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of a large block, lot
or outlot within a recorded subdivision plat or certified survey map without changing exterior
boundaries of such block, lot, or outlot is not a replat.
(29) “Residential development” means any development which includes any building or
structure designed or intended for residential use.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 08-12, Eff. 4-18-08; Ratified 08-20, Eff. 5-20-08]
(30) "Site" means the land on which development takes place.
(31) "Subdivider" means any person or any agent thereof dividing or proposing to divide
land resulting in a subdivision plat, certified survey map, or replat.
(32) "Subdivision" means a division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the owner thereof
or the owner's agent for the purpose of sale or of building development, and to which any of the
following applies:
(a) The act of division creates 5 or more parcels or building sites of 1 1/2 acres each or
less in area; or
(b) Five or more parcels or building sites of 1 1/2 acres each or less in area are created
by successive divisions within a period of 5 years.
Notwithstanding the above, “subdivision” does not include a division of land into not
more than nine lots and outlots of 1½ acres each or less where the land division is in an area is
zoned for commercial, industrial, or mixed use development in the Village or its extraterritorial
zoning area, as that term is defined in Section 15.02(26m) of the Zoning Code.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(33) "Usable land" means land intended for public park dedication where required under
this chapter that:
(a) Is located outside of the floodplain, wetlands, surface waters, storm water basins
and conveyance routes, and other areas with severe limitations for park development in the
determination of the Village Board;
(b) Contains developer-finished slopes of less than 4% for active recreation areas, and
slopes of less than 12% for passive recreation areas and conservancy;
(c) Is sufficiently shaped and contains suitable soils for construction of the anticipated
park facilities, in the determination of the Director of Public Services;
(d) Has at least 15% of its perimeter adjacent to a public street;
(e) Is visible and accessible to the public for foot, bike, and motor vehicle access and
for effective monitoring for public safety;
(g) Does not present any environmental hazard, risk or liability to the community, such
as through soil contamination or nuisance or invasive vegetation; and
13-8
(h) Is situated in a location that is consistent with the Village’s master plan including its
Park and Open Space Plan component, that contributes to the Village’s community
development goals, and that adequately serves the park’s service area.
[Cr. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
13.035 SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR AREAS AFFECTED BY HIGHWAY TRAFFIC
NOISE.
(1) APPLICABILITY. This section applies to any new plat or certified survey map that is
located wholly or partially within 300 feet of the right-of-way for Interstate 39/90/94, U.S.
Highway 51, and/or State Highway 19. No such plat or certified survey map shall be entitled to
approval unless the application demonstrates that the provisions of this section will be
consistently met.
(2) HIGHWAY NOISE STANDARDS. For each plat or certified survey map subject to this
section, and future development within such areas, the maximum exterior noise level within any
outdoor living area shall not exceed 67 dB(A) at any time following the recording of the
applicable plat or certified survey map.
(3) HIGHWAY NOISE MITIGATION PLAN. No application for approval of a final plat or
certified survey map governed by this section and zoned for uses that might reasonably be
expected to include at least one outdoor living area shall, if par. (d) applies, be deemed
complete unless the Village Director of Public Services, or designee, has approved a Highway
Noise Mitigation Plan for the affected lands. Such plan shall be prepared by a professional
skilled in sound measurement and mitigation. The Highway Noise Mitigation Plan shall provide
clear evidence that the noise standards in sub. (2) will be continuously met and shall contain all
of the following elements:
(a) Map. A map depicting and labeling the plat or certified survey map area and all lands
and highway rights-of-way within 300 feet thereof, existing topography, existing vegetation,
existing parcel lines, proposed lot lines within the plat or certified survey map area, and
proposed or likely locations of outdoor living areas under the zoning designation as defined in
§13.03.
(b) Current Noise Measurements. Noise measurements to quantify the existing noise
levels, recorded within one year prior to Village approval of the final plat or certified survey map.
Noise levels shall be measured by a professional skilled in sound measurement and mitigation,
on non-holiday weekdays between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., and in no less than 5 minute
continuous time blocks at each outdoor living area, or at a representative sample of such
outdoor living areas as approved by the Director of Public Services.
(c) Future Noise Level Projections. Calculations showing anticipated future noise levels
at each of the proposed outdoor living areas (or sample thereof if approved by the Director of
Public Services) at 10 years and 20 years following the expected recording date of the plat or
certified survey map, based on projected traffic increases on nearby highways. If the subdivider
is not required to provide a traffic study under this chapter, and a traffic study has not otherwise
been completed, traffic projections shall be based on WisDOT forecasts or such other available
information as may be approved by the Director of Public Services.
13-9
(d) Noise Mitigation Approach. If the current or projected future noise levels at any
proposed outdoor living area (or sample thereof if approved by the Director of Public Services)
under subs. (b) or (c) exceed the applicable standard under sub. (2), above, the Noise
Mitigation Plan shall include:
1. An overview of different noise mitigation options that would enable compliance with
the standard under sub. (2). To mitigate noise below threshold levels at proposed
outdoor living areas, mitigation options may include enforceable restrictions on the
location of outdoor living areas, other changes in site orientation or topography,
adjustments to permissible building layouts, or noise barriers. Walls or fences shall
not be used as noise barriers, unless approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
2. A detailed description and/or representation of the type, height, length, location, and
character of the subdivider’s proposed noise mitigation option from among those
options analyzed.
(e) Implementation Timetable. A description and proposed timetable for implementation
of all proposed sound mitigation measures, including how the subdivider intends to meet the
implementation requirements of this section.
(4) IMPLEMENTATION.
(a) Following approval of the Highway Noise Mitigation Plan by the Director of Public
Services or his or her designee, the subdivider shall install all approved noise mitigation
measures prior to or concurrent with infrastructure construction within the applicable
development phase(s) of the plat or certified survey map.
(b) Upon completion of construction of all noise mitigation measures specified under par.
(a) and prior to the issuance of any building permits within the plat or certified survey map area,
the subdivider shall submit a written report to the Director of Public Services. The report shall be
prepared by a professional skilled in sound measurement and mitigation, and shall indicate asbuilt
noise levels at all permissible outdoor living areas for which measurements were taken in
the Highway Noise Mitigation Plan per the same procedure used under sub. (3)(b). In the
event that such report indicates that any outdoor living areas do not meet the noise standard
under sub. (2), the subdivider shall implement additional mitigation measures to meet the
standard.
(c) The subdivider or a property owners’ association shall install and maintain all noise
mitigation measures in perpetuity, unless otherwise agreed to by the Village. Perpetual
maintenance responsibilities shall be included within covenants prepared by the subdivider,
approved by the Village, and recorded against the plat or certified survey map area.
[Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
13.04 JURISDICTION. This chapter shall apply to all lands within the corporate limits of
the Village, as well as in the Village’s extraterritorial jurisdiction The provisions of this chapter,
as they apply to divisions of tracts of land into less than 5 parcels, shall not apply to:
(1) Transfers of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order.
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages, or easements.
13-10
(3) Sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if
additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum
size required by these regulations, the Zoning Code, or other applicable laws or ordinances.
[Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
13.05 COMPLIANCE. No person shall divide any land subject to this chapter in any
manner which results in a subdivision, land division, or a replat; no such subdivision, land
division or replat shall be entitled to be recorded; and no street shall be laid out or
improvements made to land without compliance with all requirements of this chapter that are in
effect when a subdivider submits a preliminary plat or certified survey map, and the following:
(1) All provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, including Ch. 236 and §80.08, Wis. Stats.
(2) Applicable state agency rules, including but not limited to those of the Wisconsin
Departments of Natural Resources, Transportation, and Safety and Professional Services.
(3) The duly approved Village master plan, along with the Zoning Code, Official Map,
and all other applicable ordinances of the Village that are in effect when the subdivider submits
a preliminary plat or certified survey map.
(4) Any applicable Village, town, and county ordinances that are in effect when the
subdivider submits a preliminary plat or certified survey map.
[Am. 11-2, Eff. 6-10-11; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15; Am 19-07, Eff. 4-3-19]
13.06 LAND SUITABILITY.
(1) DETERMINATION OF UNSUITABILITY. No land shall be divided in a manner
that would create any lot intended for development that is held unsuitable for development by
the Village Board for reason of flooding; inadequate current or proposed drainage; adverse soil
or rock formations, composition or conditions; negative impact on wetlands, waterways, or other
sensitive natural resources; unfavorable topography; or any other feature likely to be harmful to
the health, safety, or welfare of the future residents of the proposed land division or of the
community. Development suitability or unsuitability shall be based on the results of a completed
and accurate site assessment checklist (or similar document) and any attachments thereto, as
normally required under Sections 13.21(4) and 13.31(4), and the Village’s analysis of such
materials. No land which is, or within the ten (10) years preceding the application for approval of
the land division was, encumbered by a conservation easement or other restriction precluding
development consistent with any farmland preservation plan or program shall be divided unless
the easement or restriction is subject to termination by the Village Board and the Village Board
determines that termination of the restriction is in the public interest. The Village Board, in
applying the provisions of this subsection, shall record in its minutes the particular facts upon
which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for use and afford the subdivider an
opportunity to present evidence regarding such unsuitability if he or she so desires. Thereafter
the Board may affirm, modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11; Am. 12-11, Eff. 7-27-12]
(2) TESTING. The Planning and Zoning Commission or the Village Board may require
that borings and soundings be made in specified areas to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and
water conditions, including depth to bedrock and depth to ground water table whenever
deemed necessary by the committee to determine the suitability of a land division or any part
thereof for development as proposed.
13-11
13.07 REQUIRED INFORMATION. All land divisions shall be subject to the
requirements of this section.
(1) APPLICATION. No application for approval of a certified survey map or plat shall
be complete or be deemed filed unless accompanied by the number of copies of all maps,
plans, drawings, and related data as required under this chapter, along with the applicable
application fee. The time period within which the Village is required to act shall not begin to run
until a completed application has been received.
[Recreated 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 16-44, Eff. 11-16-16]
(2) PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PLANS. The subdivider shall provide plans for all public
improvements that are proposed or required under the applicable provisions of this chapter.
[Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13]
(3) COVENANTS.
(a) At the time of final plat or certified survey map application, the subdivider shall submit
protective covenants to be recorded against the affected land as follows:
[Am. 19-07, Eff. 4-3-19]
1. Where the subdivider proposes to provide for the private maintenance or protection of
any common open space, storm water management facility, drainageway, private
road or other required public or private improvement, the covenants shall establish an
enforceable method ensuring the proper maintenance and management of such
space, facility, and/or improvement.
2. Where the subdivider proposes a residential subdivision, protective covenants shall
impose standards or other means to effectively minimize monotony in the design of
single-family and two-family (duplex) residences.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
3. Where the subdivider is required to install sound mitigation measures under §13.035,
covenants shall ensure the construction and maintenance of those measures.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
4. In any other case as determined necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and required as a condition of development approval.
(b) In all cases where the requirements of this chapter are proposed to be satisfied or
guaranteed by private covenants or restrictions, such covenants or restrictions shall contain
provisions prohibiting the repeal or amendment of such covenants or restrictions without the
written and recorded approval of the Village Board, and shall be expressly made enforceable by
the Village. Unless the form of such covenants or restrictions is specified by the Village Board,
the adequacy thereof shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator. All required deed
restrictions and protective covenants shall be recorded prior to, or concurrently with, the final
plat or certified survey map. The violation of any covenant or restriction required as a condition
of approval of a land division shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
[Sub. (2) Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
(4) PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION. Whenever a subdivider proposes that any
common open space, storm water management facilities, drainageway, private road or other
13-12
required development component is to be privately managed by a property owners' association,
the Planning & Zoning Commission may require submission of a draft of the legal instruments
and rules for proposed property owners associations at the time of submission of a proposed
plat or certified survey map. If the Village Board approves the private maintenance of required
development components by such an association, the organizational documents creating such
organization shall be filed prior to, or concurrent with, the recording of the final plat or certified
survey map and appropriate protective covenants pursuant to sub. (2) or a binding agreement
between the Village and the association assuring such management shall be recorded with the
plat or map.
(5) AREAS AFFECTED BY HIGHWAY TRAFFIC NOISE. Wherever a subdivider
proposes a land division within an area described in §13.035(2), all information required by
§13.035 must be submitted with the submittal of a preliminary plat.
[Cr. 06-07, Eff. 3-9-06; Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
(6) TITLE REPORT. With each application for preliminary plat, final plat, or certified
survey map approval, except for minor divisions as defined in §13.03(24m), the subdivider shall
provide a 60 year title report for the land to be divided to verify clear title to the land and to
identify existing easements and other encumbrances on the land. All such existing easements
shall be delineated and labeled or notated on the plat or certified survey map.
[Cr. 12-11, Eff. 7-27-12; Repealed 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15; Recreated 19-07, Eff. 4-3-19]
13.08 FEES.
(1) APPLICATION FEES. Every applicant for a land division approval shall pay the
Village all application fees as established by the Village Board from time to time by ordinance or
resolution. The Village Board may waive all or a portion of the fee requirements in this section
pursuant to the standards of §13.09.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(2) FEES FOR REVIEW AND ADMINISTRATION. Every applicant shall pay, in addition
to any applicable application fee, all of the following fees. Such fees shall be paid by the
applicant within thirty (30) days of the date of an invoice from the Village. In the event fees are
not paid in a timely manner, the Village shall not be required to take any further action with
respect to the development approval. Non-payment of fees shall be deemed sufficient cause for
rejection of the application or future applications from the same or a related applicant over all or
part of the same land.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(a) PROFESSIONAL CONSULTING FEES. The Applicant shall pay a fee equal to the
actual cost to the Village for all planning, legal, engineering, and other professional services
incurred by the Village in connection with the development approval, including any required
inspections. The amount of the fee shall be based on the amount properly charged to the
Village by outside consultants under the terms of the agreements between the Village and the
consultants for all reviews, consultations and other work deemed necessary or appropriate by
the Village.
[Am. 16-44, Eff. 11-16-16]
(b) TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS. In any case where the Village Engineer determines
that the proposed development within a land division is likely to cause a significant impact on
traffic on streets or highways beyond the proposed land division, the applicant shall pay the
fees of a traffic engineer to be retained by the Village to complete and present a Traffic Impact
Analysis following Wisconsin Department of Transportation District One guidelines, or shall
13-13
retain a traffic engineer approved by the Village Engineer who shall prepare and provide such
an analysis. Where the report of the analysis concludes that the proposed development will
cause off-site public roads, intersections, or interchanges to function below Level of Service C,
as defined by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, the Village may deny the application,
require a size reduction in the proposed development, or require that the developer construct
and/or pay for the share of required off-site improvements that is attributable to the
development.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15; (2)(b) repealed 16-44, Eff. 11-16-16; (2)(c) renumbered to (2)(b) 16-44, Eff. 11-16-16]
(3) FEE ESCROWS. Except as provided in sub. (10), at such time as the applicant
submits an application for a development approval, the applicant shall deposit with the Village,
in escrow, the escrow amount established from time to time by the Village Board by ordinance
or resolution. No application shall be deemed complete until the required escrow deposit is
made.
(4) ESCROW REPLACEMENT. In the event that escrow deposit falls below twenty-five
percent (25%) of the original amount required to be deposited, the Planning and Zoning
Commission or the Village Board shall have the option to require the applicant to restore the
escrow balance to the original amount required hereunder.
(5) ESCROW REFUNDS. In the event that funds remains in escrow over and above the
Village’s fees after withdrawal, approval or final denial of the application, or otherwise as
provided in sub. (10), the remaining balance shall be refunded to the applicant. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the applicant may elect to apply any remaining balance to any escrow deposit
required as part of a subsequent application for a development approval for the same project.
(6) ESCROW INTEREST The escrow account shall not bear interest for the benefit of
the applicant.
(7) WITHDRAWALS FROM ESCROW. The Village Finance Director shall draw upon the
escrowed funds to reimburse the Village for the fees it has incurred in reviewing the
development approval on a monthly basis.
(8) ACCOUNTING. An accounting of all fees incurred by the Village and the status of
the escrow shall also be provided to the applicant within thirty (30) days after each withdrawal.
Any dispute with respect to the propriety or amount of any withdrawal shall be subject to appeal
pursuant to Chapter 17 of this Code.
(9) DEFAULT. In the event that the subdivider defaults in restoring the escrow account,
the Village shall not be required to act further upon the request. Failure to replenish the escrow
account shall be sufficient cause to reject the application for development approval.
(10) EXCEPTION. No escrow deposit shall be required if the fees required by sub. (2)
are guaranteed by the applicant, with adequate security, pursuant to a subdivider's or
development agreement with the Village. At the time of execution of such an agreement, the
Finance Director shall refund any remaining escrow balance to the applicant.
13.09 WAIVERS AND MODIFICATIONS. Where, in the judgment of the Village land
division approval authority, the literal application of certain provisions of this chapter to a
particular land division or development is unnecessary to achieve the intent and purpose of this
chapter and would result in unnecessary hardship to the subdivider, or where a Village13-
14
approved planned unit development project suggests waiver or modification of certain
provisions, the Village land division approval authority may waive or modify such provisions to
the extent deemed just and proper and consistent with Wisconsin law. Such relief shall be
granted only upon a finding by the land division approval authority that the waiver or
modification will not result in any significant detriment to the public good nor conflict with the
intent and purpose of this chapter or the desirable general development of the community in
accordance with the master plan of the Village. A 2/3 vote of the entire membership of the land
division approval authority shall be required to grant any waiver or modification to such
provisions.
[Am. 12-11, Eff. 7-27-12; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
13.10 VIOLATIONS. It shall be unlawful to build upon, divide, convey, record, or
monument any land in violation of this chapter or the Wisconsin Statutes and no person shall
be issued a building permit by the Village authorizing the building on, or improvement of, any
subdivision, land division or replat with the jurisdiction of this chapter not of record as of the
effective date of this Code until the provisions and requirements of this chapter have been fully
met. The Village may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin violations of this
chapter or the applicable Wisconsin Statutes.
13.11 PENALTIES.
(1) Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 plus the costs of prosecution
for each violation and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in
the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding 6 months. Each day a violation exists
or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Any person who shall record a plat without the required approvals shall be subject
to forfeitures as provided in §236.30, Wis. Stats.
(3) Any person who shall convey any lot in unrecorded plats shall be subject to
forfeitures as provided for in §236.31, Wis. Stats.
(4) Any person failing to place monuments or disturbing monuments in place in
violation of §236.32, Wis. Stats. shall be subject to forfeitures as provided therein.
13.12 APPEALS. Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or a failure to approve
a plat may appeal therefrom, as provided in §236.13(5) and 62.23(7)(e)10 to 15, Wis. Stats.,
within 30 days of notification of the rejection of the plat. Where failure to approve is based on
an unsatisfied objection, the agency making the objection shall be made a party to the action.
13.13 EXTRATERRITORIAL LAND DIVISION POLICIES. To the extent permitted
under Wisconsin law, the following policies shall be applied in the Village’s review of land
divisions within its extraterritorial jurisdiction in order to protect rural character and farming
viability, preserve future opportunities for orderly urban development and associated public
utility extensions, ensure that land divisions will be provided with adequate public facilities and
services, and implement the Village’s master plan.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(1) DENSITY POLICY. Land divisions within the extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be
permitted where the cumulative development density will not exceed one lot for each thirty-five
13-15
(35) acres of land owned within the extraterritorial jurisdiction as of January 1, 2007 (hereinafter,
“the January 1, 2007 parcel”) by the then-current property owner. The Village shall determine
the land ownership configuration and property acreage as of January 1, 2007 using the most
recent property records prior to January 1, 2007. All lots divided from the January 1, 2007
parcel following that date shall be counted against this density policy, except if the intended use
is permanently restricted for open space purposes. The Village may waive or modify this
density policy if conditions allowing for a waiver or modification under the provisions of Section
13.09 are or will be met, and one or more of the following circumstances is present:
(a) Lots being created to separate a pre-2007 farmstead from the remainder of the
January 1, 2007 parcel shall not be counted against this density policy, unless the applicable
Town comprehensive plan advises that such lots be counted.
(b) Where a land division of greater density is within an area identified in the Village’s
master plan, extraterritorial zoning ordinance, or both, for future development at a density in
excess of one lot per thirty-five (35) acres, and public facilities at a level advised in the master
plan for that area will be provided at the time of land division.
(c) Where a land division of greater density is in an area where such greater density is
allowed or directed by an intergovernmental agreement or cooperative plan between the Village
and Town.
(d) Where the applicable Town land division policy, as included in the Town’s
comprehensive plan or subdivision ordinance, is as strict or stricter than the density policy set
forth in this section, the Village may elect to follow the Town’s policy.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(2) LOT AREA POLICY. In addition to the density policy in subsection (1), the minimum
lot size within the extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be one (1) acre, except for lands over which
the Village’s master plan specifies a different minimum lot size or where the Village Board
approves a zoning district that allows a smaller lot size.
[Cr. 06-61, Eff. 2-8-07; Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 08-12, Eff. 4-18-08; Ratified 08-20, Eff. 5-20-08; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(3) APPLICATION OF DENSITY AND LOT AREA POLICIES. Each plat or certified
survey map submitted for extraterritorial approval shall include or be accompanied by a map
showing the entire parcel of land from which new lots would be created by the proposed land
division and the January 1, 2007 parcel. In its application of the density and lot area policies
contained herein, the Village may require lands included in the land division, the balance of the
entire parcel from which the new lots would be created, or both, to be subject to a conservation
easement or similar development limitation acceptable to the Village, and enforceable by the
Village. A note shall be placed on the face of the plat or certified survey map indicating areas
that are subject to any such development limitation.
[Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13]
(4) ADEQUATE SERVICES. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter
and except as otherwise expressly provided in an intergovernmental agreement, cooperative
plan, or extraterritorial zoning ordinance between the Village and appropriate town, no land
division shall be approved which would permit residential densities of greater than one dwelling
unit per five (5) gross acres of land, unless a binding commitment has been made by the town in
which the land division is located to provide such land with police protective services at service
levels equal to or greater than those maintained by the Village from time to time, commencing
not later than one (1) year after the date of approval of the land division, and continuing for such
13-16
time as the development exceeds the density policy stated in this section.
(5) APPLICATION AND FEES. No person shall divide any land located within the
Village’s extraterritorial jurisdiction without first filing an application, meeting all submittal
requirements, and paying the Village’s standard land division review fees contained in this
chapter. The timing for filing the application and paying the Village’s review fees shall be the
same as otherwise required for land divisions within the Village per Section 13.08.
[Cr. 06-12, Eff. 12-22-06]
Article III. SUBCHAPTER II – CERTIFIED SURVEY MAPS.
13.20 WHEN REQUIRED. Except for subdivisions as defined under §13.03(32), land
divisions as defined under §13.03(20), consolidation of pre-existing lots, and any division of an
existing block, lot, or outlot within a recorded subdivision without changing the boundaries of
said block, lot or outlot, shall be accomplished by the recording of a certified survey map
approved in accordance with §13.22.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-13-08; Am. 08-12, Eff. 4-18-08; Ratified 08-20, Eff. 5-20-08; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
13.21 TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS.
(1) GENERAL. A certified survey map shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor
and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Section 236.34, Wis. Stats. Each
certified survey map shall also include the information listed in §13.31(1) to the extent
determined applicable by the Zoning Administrator. If requested by the subdivider, the Village
will accept and review a preliminary certified survey map, provided that:
(a) All the land included in the land division is within the Village’s extraterritorial
jurisdiction, and
(b) The preliminary certified survey map is professionally, accurately, and clearly
drawn to a recognized scale, accurately depicting the existing and proposed parcel and lot
boundaries.
If the Village approval authority designated in §13.22 approves a preliminary certified
survey map under this subsection, the Village Zoning Administrator may approve a final certified
survey map that complies in all respects with the requirements of Section 236.34, Wis. Stats.,
and conforms with the preliminary certified survey map and any conditions of such approval.
[Am. 06-07, Eff. 3-9-06; Am. 12-15, Eff. 8-2-12; Am. 19-07, Eff. 4-3-19]
(2) CERTIFICATES. The surveyor shall certify on the face of the map that the map
fully complies with all the provisions of this chapter. Upon Village approval of the map, and
satisfaction of all applicable approval conditions, the Village Clerk shall certify Village approval
on the face of the map.
[Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13]
(3) PRELIMINARY ENGINEERING PLANS. Where public streets, public sanitary sewer
main, water main, storm sewer, or other stormwater management features are required to serve
the land proposed for division by a certified survey map, the subdivider shall prepare and submit
one PDF copy and hard copies in a quantity determined by the Zoning Administrator of
preliminary engineering plans with the certified survey map submittal, meeting the technical
requirements of §13.31(3).
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
13-17
(4) SITE ASSESSMENT CHECKLIST.
(a) With the submittal of the certified survey map, the subdivider shall complete and
submit a site assessment checklist on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator. The site
assessment checklist shall include questions to the subdivider that are intended to discern
information about the presence of, and impacts on, land, water, biological, historical and
archaeological, energy, transportation, and communications resources on the property. Issues
identified on the site assessment checklist shall be explained in detail by attaching maps and
supportive documentation on the type, location, and extent of the identified feature and the
expected impact of the proposed land division on that feature and of that feature on the
developability of the land.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(b) Adjustments to the proposed land division to minimize or mitigate adverse impacts
may be required. The completed site assessment checklist and any attached information, along
with the Village’s assessment of those materials, will be considered in the determination of the
suitability of the land for division and compliance with other Village ordinance standards.
(c) The Zoning Administrator may waive the filing of a site assessment checklist for land
divisions that involve fewer than two (2) acres in total area, will result in two (2) or fewer new
lots, will divide land that has been subdivided in the last ten (10) years where a still-applicable
site assessment checklist is on file with the Village, or will not result in any additional land
development for the foreseeable future. The Zoning Administrator may also waive or modify the
site assessment checklist requirement when such waiver or modification would meet applicable
criteria in Section 13.09.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11; Am. 12-11, Eff. 7-27-12]
(5) TREE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION PLAN. Where the certified survey map
area includes one or more mature woodlands or mature trees outside of a mature woodland, the
subdivider shall prepare a Tree Protection and Preservation Plan including all of the
components required by Section 13.31(5), and submit such plan to the Village as part of the
certified survey map submittal, except that submittal or contents of such plan may be waived or
modified by the Zoning Administrator under one or more of the following circumstances:
(a) The certified survey map would not allow for any additional development for the
foreseeable future.
(b) The certified survey map would allow for only one new residential dwelling unit.
(c) If the certified survey map is within the extraterritorial jurisdiction and the subdivider
submits clear evidence that the Village’s tree preservation standards will be met under
applicable town or county ordinance requirements or development approvals.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
(6) OTHER APPLICABLE SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS. All applicable information
required by Sections 13.07 shall be submitted with the certified survey map submittal for such
submittal to be considered complete.
[Cr. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
13-18
13.22 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.
(1) APPLICATION. The subdivider shall file with the Zoning Administrator an
application for approval along with nine (9) hard copies and a digital copy of the proposed
certified survey map, a completed site assessment checklist on a form provided by the Zoning
Administrator, and preliminary engineering plans and a tree protection and preservation plan if
required under §13.21. The Zoning Administrator may reduce the number of hard copies
required if the Village recommending and/or approval authorities do not to require hard copies
for their own use.
(2) REVIEW AND ACTION BY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. Except
as provided under subs. (3) or (8), the Commission shall review the certified survey map for
conformance with this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations, and
Village master plan, and take action as follows:
(a) Any certified survey map that does not propose the dedication of any public land
to the Village, includes only lands within the Village's extraterritorial jurisdiction, or both, shall be
approved, conditionally approved or rejected, within sixty (60) days from the date of a complete
application submittal, by the Commission.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(b) The Commission shall recommend Village Board approval, conditional approval,
or rejection of any certified survey map that proposes the dedication of public lands to the
Village, within forty-five (45) days from the date of a complete application submittal. The
Commission shall transmit such map along with its recommendations to the Village Board,
including reasons for a recommended rejection or any conditions on a recommended approval.
(3) CSM REVIEW UNDER INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS. The Joint
Committee shall function in lieu of the Planning and Zoning Commission under sub. (2) with
respect to certified survey maps dividing lands within the Village’s extraterritorial jurisdiction if,
and to the extent, provided in an intergovernmental agreement between the Village and the
town, and shall assure that all applicable requirements contained in the intergovernmental
agreement are satisfied.
(4) VILLAGE BOARD APPROVAL. For certified survey maps governed by sub.
(2)(b), except for minor land divisions under sub. (8), the Village Board shall within ninety (90)
days from the date of a complete submittal, approve, conditionally approve or reject the certified
survey map.
(5) REVIEW PERIODS AND EFFECT OF APPROVAL. The time period within
which action on a certified survey map is required under subs. (2), (3), (4), and (8) shall not
commence until the Village has received a complete application. An application shall be
deemed complete only if accompanied by the required number of all maps, plans, drawings, and
related data as required by this chapter, along with the applicable application fee. Such review
periods may be extended by written agreement of the subdivider. If the approval authority
designated under subs. (2), (3), (4), or (8) fails to act on such certified survey map within the
indicated timeframe(s), the period of time has not been extended by agreement, and no
unsatisfied objections have been filed within that period, the certified survey map shall be
deemed approved, and upon demand, the Village Clerk shall apply a certificate to that effect on
the face of the certified survey map. If the map is rejected or conditionally approved, the
13-19
reasons for rejection or conditions of approval shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting or in
the approval ordinance, and a written statement shall be forwarded to the subdivider.
[Am. 16-44, Eff. 11-16-16]
(6) RECORDATION. The subdivider shall record the certified survey map with the
Dane County Register of Deeds within six (6) months of the date of its last approval and within
twenty-four (24) months of the date of the first approval, or Village approval shall be deemed
void. The subdivider shall promptly provide a copy of the recorded map to the Zoning
Administrator.
(7) PRELIMINARY CERTIFIED SURVEY MAPS. If a preliminary certified survey
map is filed in accordance with §13.21, the applicable provisions of subs. (1) through (5) hereof
shall apply to the preliminary map. If the preliminary certified survey map is approved or
conditionally approved, the Village Zoning Administrator shall review and either approve or
reject a final certified survey map for the same property following within thirty (30) days after the
date of its submission. The final certified survey map shall be approved if it is consistent with
the approved preliminary map in all material respects, and all technical requirements and
conditions of approval have been satisfied. In all other cases, approval shall be denied.
(8) MINOR DIVISIONS. The Zoning Administrator may within twenty (20) days from
the date of a complete submittal of a certified survey map that would result in a minor division,
as defined in §13.03(24m), approve, conditionally approve or reject said map. The Zoning
Administrator shall use the requirements included and referenced in this chapter as the sole
basis for such action. The action of the Zoning Administrator is final, and the procedures in
subs. (2), (3), and (4) shall not apply to such certified survey map, except in the following
circumstances:
(a) The Zoning Administrator, within twenty (20) days of a complete submittal, may
refer the certified survey map to the Planning and Zoning Commission or other recommending
or approval authority under sub. (3); or
(b) The subdivider, within five (5) days of Zoning Administrator action, appeals such
action to the Planning and Zoning Commission or other recommending or approval authority
under sub. (3).
[Section Repl. & Recr. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13, Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
Article IV. SUBCHAPTER III – SUBDIVISION PLATS.
13.30 PLATS REQUIRED.
(1) GENERAL PROVISIONS. A final plat prepared by a registered land surveyor and
approved by the Village Board shall be required for all subdivisions. The final plat may, if
permitted by the Village Board, consist of only that portion of the approved preliminary plat
which the subdivider proposes to record at that time.
(2) PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIRED. A preliminary plat shall be required for all
subdivisions and shall be based upon a survey by a registered land surveyor and the plat
prepared on paper of good quality at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch and shall
satisfy all of the requirements of sec. 13.31.
13-20
13.31 TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS.
(1) FEATURES TO BE INCLUDED ON PLAT. Every plat shall comply in all respects
with the requirements of §236.20, Wis. Stats. The preliminary plat shall show correctly on its
face, all of the following:
(a) Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider and land surveyor preparing the
plat.
(b) The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded.
(c) A complete legal description of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision
in metes and bounds, referenced to a corner established in a U. S. Public Land Survey and the
total acreage encompassed thereby.
(d) Date, scale and north point.
(e) Contours at vertical intervals of not more than 2 feet. Elevations shall be marked on
such contours based on National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
(f) Location and names of any adjacent subdivisions, parks and cemeteries, and
owners of record of abutting unplatted lands.
(g) Locations of all existing property boundary lines, structures, drives, streams and
watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, railroad tracks and other similar
significant features within the tract being subdivided or immediately adjacent thereto.
(h) Railroad rights of way within and abutting the plat.
(i) Water elevations of adjoining lakes and streams at the date of the survey and
approximate high and low water elevations, all referred to National Geodetic Vertical Datum of
1929.
(j) Any proposed lake, stream or drainageway access with a small drawing clearly
indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to the access.
(k) Any proposed lake, stream or drainageway improvement or relocation.
(l) The location, right of way width and names of all existing streets, pedestrian paths,
alleys or other public ways, easements, railroad and utility rights of way and all section and
quarter section lines within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto.
(m) The location, width and names of all proposed streets and public rights of way such
as alleys, pedestrian paths and easements.
(n) The proposed length of right of way lines, and proposed names for all proposed
new streets or extensions of existing streets.
(o) Exact street widths along the line of any obliquely intersecting street.
(p) The location and description of all existing and proposed easements.
13-21
[Am. 19-07, Eff. 4-3-19]
(q) A description of the types of proposed uses of all lots created by the subdivision.
(r) The location, size and approximate dimensions of any sites to be:
1. reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways or other public use;
2. used for group housing, shopping centers, church sites or other nonpublic uses;
or
3. reserved for the common use of property owners within the plat.
(s) Special restrictions required by the Village Board relating to access control along
public ways or provisions for planting strips.
(t) The approximate dimensions of all lots and outlots together with proposed lot and
block numbers. All lots shall be consecutively numbered.
(u) Approximate centerline radii of all curves.
(v) Existing zoning on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
(w) Corporate limits lines.
(x) Certification on the face of the plat by the surveyor preparing the plat that it is a
correct representation of all existing land divisions and features and that he or she has fully
complied with the provisions of this chapter.
(y) All vision triangles shall be clearly shown on arterial and collector roads designed in
accordance with current AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(z) The boundaries of all wetlands, floodplains, environmental corridors, and shoreland
zones and setback areas, as established under municipal, county, regional, state, and federal
laws, regulations, plans, or ordinances.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-13-08]
(aa) The location and dimensions of all structures, facilities or features proposed as
part of all noise mitigation strategies, along with the submittal of a Noise Study, if required
under §13.035.
[Cr. 06-07, Eff. 3-9-06]
(bb) The outer edges of all mature woodlands and parts of mature woodlands within the
plat area, and the locations and species of all mature trees that are not located within a mature
woodland as defined in §13.03.
[Cr. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
(2) In addition to the requirements of sub. (1), two copies of each proposed plat shall
be filed with the Zoning Administrator showing on its face the following additional information:
[Am. 12-11, Eff. 7-27-12]
13-22
(a) The current zoning district designation of each lot and, if a rezoning request is
pending or proposed, the proposed zoning classifications;
(b) All building setback lines required by the Zoning Code. If rezoning is pending, only
the setback lines required by the proposed district regulations for each lot shall be shown.
(3) PRELIMINARY ENGINEERING PLANS. With the submittal of the preliminary plat,
the subdivider shall submit five (5) copies of preliminary engineering plans, including the
following:
(a) Preliminary street profiles showing existing and proposed centerline elevations.
Profiles shall be shown for a minimum distance of 300 feet beyond the plat boundaries where
future street extensions may be planned.
(b) Preliminary utility layouts, including sanitary sewer, water main, and storm sewer,
and indication of any expected need for improvements to existing facilities to provide for such
utility needs.
(c) Preliminary stormwater calculations, in order to demonstrate that adequately sized
and positioned areas have been reserved for storm water management on the preliminary plat.
(d) A preliminary engineering plan map at least covering the area of the preliminary plat
and showing the features described in this subsection, along with property lines, contours at
vertical intervals of not more than 2 feet for the portion of the plat or CSM proposed for
disturbance or development, and applicable environmental features such as wetlands and
floodplains.
[Cr. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08]
(4) SITE ASSESSMENT CHECKLIST. (a) With the submittal of the preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall complete and submit a site assessment checklist on a form provided by the
Zoning Administrator. The site assessment checklist shall include questions to the subdivider
that are intended to discern information about the presence of, and impacts of on, land, water,
biological, historical and archaeological, energy, transportation, and communications resources
on the property. Issues identified on the site assessment checklist shall be explained in detail by
attaching maps and supportive documentation on the type, location, and extent of the identified
feature and the expected impact of the proposed land division on that feature and of that feature
on the developability of the land.
(b) Adjustments to the proposed land division to minimize or mitigate adverse impacts
may be required. The completed site assessment checklist and any attached information will be
considered in the determination of the suitability of the land for division and compliance with
other Village ordinance standards.
(c) The Zoning Administrator may waive the filing of a site assessment checklist for land
divisions that would result in two (2) or fewer new lots, involve fewer than two (2) acres in total
area, will divide land that has been subdivided in the last ten (10) years where a still-applicable
site assessment checklist is on file with the Village, or will not result in any additional land
development in the foreseeable future. The Zoning Administrator may also waive or modify the
site assessment checklist requirement when such waiver or modification would meet applicable
criteria in Section 13.09.
[Cr. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11; Am. 12-11, Eff. 7-27-12]
13-23
(5) TREE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION PLAN. Where the plat area includes
one or more mature woodlands, or one or more mature trees outside of a mature woodland, the
subdivider shall prepare a Tree Protection and Preservation Plan, and submit such plan to the
Village along with the preliminary plat submittal, except that the submittal or contents of such
plan may be waived or modified by the Zoning Administrator under one or more of the following
circumstances:
(a) The plat would not allow for any additional development for the foreseeable future.
(b) The plat would allow for only one new residential dwelling unit.
(c) If the plat is within the extraterritorial jurisdiction and the subdivider submits clear
evidence that the Village’s tree preservation standards will be met under applicable town or
county ordinance requirements or development approvals.
When required, the Plan shall include the following components:
(a) The outlines of mature woodlands and mature trees that are outside of a mature
woodland.
(b) Specific strategies to preserve native, non-invasive trees to the extent practical
during general grading and installation of public improvements within the proposed land
division, including structural solutions and alterations included within the preliminary plat layout
and/or grading plan.
(c) If more than 30% of a mature woodland (or more than 30% of that part of a mature
woodland within the plat area) will be removed during the land division process, a plan showing
locations and species for additional tree plantings within the plat area to compensate, on an
acre-for-acre basis, for all acreage of mature woodlands proposed for removal above the 30%
removal standard. All such additional trees shall be at least 1 inch caliper.
(d) If more than 30% of mature trees outside of mature woodlands will be removed
during the land division process, a plan for additional tree plantings within the plat area to
compensate, on a 2-to-1 basis, for all mature trees proposed for removal above the 30%
removal standard. All such additional trees shall be at least 3 inch caliper.
(e) All requirements for tree installation under this section shall be in addition to other
tree installation requirements of this chapter and of the Zoning Code.
[Cr. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
(6) COPIES TO UTILITY PROVIDERS AND STATE AGENCIES.
(a) Before the filing of the final plat, the subdivider shall also provide a copy of the
preliminary plat and preliminary engineering plans to all local utility providers, including natural
gas, telephone, cable television, other telecommunications, and electric utilities, so that they
may identify appropriate locations for facilities and easements to be indicated on the final plat.
(b) The subdivider shall be responsible for providing each preliminary and final plat
to State, County, and other agencies as may be required by Chapter 236, Wis. Stats. and other
applicable law.
[Cr. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 12-11, Eff. 7-27-12]
13-24
(7) OTHER APPLICABLE SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS. All applicable information
required by Sections 13.07 shall be submitted with the preliminary plat submittal for such
submittal to be considered complete.
[Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
13.32 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.
(1) PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL.
(a) Pre-Application and Concept Plan. Prior to the filing of an application for approval of
a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall consult with, and submit a concept plan map to, the
Village Zoning Administrator. The concept plan map shall include all contiguous land owned or
controlled by the subdivider; depict the general layout of the proposed subdivision, including
existing and proposed building sites, roads, major public utilities, open spaces, and general
proposed land use patterns; and represent relationships to nearby properties and land uses.
The concept plan map may rely on and refer to detailed neighborhood development plans
prepared by or for the Village to provide direction on proposed layout. The Zoning Administrator
shall refer the concept plan map to the Joint Committee in order to obtain its advice and
assistance if all of the following are applicable: the proposed plat area is within the Village’s
extraterritorial jurisdiction, the Zoning Administrator does not anticipate the area will be annexed
to the Village prior to final plat approval, and the Village has entered into an intergovernmental
agreement with the town designating the Joint Committee as a review agent for such plats. In
all other instances, the Zoning Administrator shall refer the concept plan map to the Village
Planning and Zoning Commission in order to obtain its advice and assistance. In the event the
concept plan map depicts a land division or development inconsistent with the Village master
plan or raises significant issues of interpretation with respect to its consistency with the master
plan, the Zoning Administrator shall also refer the concept plan map to the Village Board.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15; Am. 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
(b) Preliminary Plat Submittal. Following Planning and Zoning Commission or Joint
Committee review of a concept plan map, the applicant may file an application for preliminary
plat approval including ten (10) hard copies and a digital copy of the preliminary plat and all
supplemental materials meeting the requirements of §13.30(2) and §13.31. The Zoning
Administrator may reduce the number of hard copies required if the Plan Commission and/or
Village Board elects not to require hard copies for their use.
(c) Referral of Preliminary Plat. The Zoning Administrator shall provide copies of the
Preliminary Plat and supplemental materials to Public Works; Parks, Recreation and Natural
Resources; and Public Safety staff for their comments and recommendations. Such staff
members may refer the plat to the appropriate Village committee(s) for review if they determine
that the plat raises significant issues affecting matters within the scope of the functions of that
committee or if requested by the subdivider.
(d) Village Planning and Zoning Commission Recommendation. Except as provided
under subsection (e), the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the plat for
conformance with applicable plans, ordinances, and statutes and shall forward its
recommendation on the preliminary plat to the Village Board. The Commission's
recommendation shall be to approve, approve with conditions, or reject the plat and shall
include the reasons for rejection or the imposition of conditions.
13-25
(e) Preliminary Plat Review Under Intergovernmental Agreements. The Joint Committee
shall function in lieu of the Planning and Zoning Commission under par. (d) with respect to
preliminary plats within the Village’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, if, and to the extent, provided in
an intergovernmental agreement between the Village and the town in which the plat is located.
(f) Village Board Action. The Village Board shall, within ninety (90) days of the date of
the filing of a complete preliminary plat application, approve, approve conditionally or reject the
preliminary plat, unless the time is extended by mutual agreement with the subdivider. The
Village Clerk shall then return one copy of the plat to the subdivider with the date and action
endorsed thereon and if approved conditionally or rejected, a copy of the ordinance setting forth
the conditions of approval or a letter setting forth the reasons for rejection shall accompany the
plat. One copy of the plat and letter shall be placed in the permanent files of the Village.
Failure of the Village Board to act within ninety (90) days of a complete application shall
constitute an approval, unless the time is extended by mutual agreement with the subdivider.
(g) Expiration of Approval. Approval of a preliminary plat shall expire thirty-six (36)
months after the date of approval or conditional approval by the Village Board, unless within
such period a complete application for final plat approval for the preliminary plat area is filed as
provided in sub. (2) or the Village Board extends the timeframe for submittal of one or more
final plats within the preliminary plat area.
(2) FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
(a) Pre-Application Consultation and Application. Following the submittal of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider shall file an application for final plat approval including ten (10)
hard copies and a digital copy of the final plat, and such other materials and fees as required for
a complete final plat submittal under this chapter and under Chapter 236, Wis. Stats. to the
Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may reduce the number of hard copies required
if the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Village Board elects not to require hard copies
for their use. The Zoning Administrator may allow the subdivider to submit a final plat application
in conjunction with the filing of a preliminary plat application provided that:
1. The applicant provides a written agreement to extend the review time under par. (e)
below to a date not earlier than the review deadline determined under sub. (1)(f), and
2. The combination of the preliminary and final plat review stages will not compromise
the Village’s ability to effectively review the plat against the requirements of this chapter.
[Cr. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(b) Technical Review. The Zoning Administrator or designee shall provide required
review and approval bodies under this chapter with (i) his or her conclusions as to whether the
final plat conforms substantially to the preliminary plat and Village ordinances and (ii) a
recommendation on approval of the final plat. The conclusions and recommendation shall be
part of the record of the proceedings at which the final plat is being considered.
(c) Village Planning and Zoning Commission Recommendation. Except as provided
under par. (d), the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the plat for conformance with
the approved preliminary plat, conditions of its approval, and all applicable ordinances and
statutes, and shall forward its recommendation to the Village Board. The Commission’s
recommendation shall be to approve, approve with conditions, or reject the plat and shall
13-26
include the reasons for rejection or conditions associated with any recommendation for
approval.
(d) Final Plat Approval under Intergovernmental Agreements. The Joint Committee shall
function in lieu of the Planning and Zoning Commission under par. (c) with respect to final plats
if, and to the extent, provided in an intergovernmental agreement between the Village and the
town in which the plat is located.
(e) Village Board Action. The Village Board shall, within sixty (60) days of a complete
final plat submittal, approve, conditionally approve, or reject such plat, unless the time is
extended by mutual agreement with the subdivider. If the plat is rejected, the reasons shall be
stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement of the reasons forwarded to the
subdivider. Upon failure of the Village Board to act within sixty (60) days, the time having not
been extended and no unsatisfied objections having been filed, the plat shall be deemed
approved.
(f) Recordation. After the final plat has been approved or conditionally approved by the
Village Board; all conditions imposed by that approval have been satisfied; and the subdivider
has verified that copies were forwarded to objecting agencies as required by law, the date
thereof, and that no objections have been filed within twenty (20) days or, if filed, have been
satisfied, the Village Clerk shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the plat attesting to such
approval to be duly executed and the plat returned to the subdivider for recording with the Dane
County Register of Deeds. The plat shall be submitted for recording within twelve (12) months
from the date of the last approval and within thirty-six (36) months from the date of the first
approval, or the Village approval shall be deemed void.
(3) REPLATS. When it is proposed to replat a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, so
as to change the boundaries of a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, the subdivider or person
wishing to replat shall vacate or alter the recorded plat as provided in §§236.40 through 236.44,
Wis. Stats. The subdivider, or person wishing to replat, shall then proceed as specified in subs.
(1) and (2).
[Section Repl. & Recr. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13]
13.33 CERTIFICATES. All final plats shall include all the certificates required by
§236.21, Wis. Stats.; and, in addition, the surveyor shall certify that the plat fully complies with
all of the provisions of this chapter.
13.34 COPIES OF RECORDED PLAT. Within one month of the final plat being recorded
by the Dane County Register of Deeds, the subdivider shall provide two (2) copies of the plat
and a digital version of the plat referenced to the Dane County Coordinate System in an
AutoCad compatible format, to the Public Works and Economic Development/Planning
Departments.
Article V. SUBCHAPTER IV – PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
13.40 STREETS. All proposed streets in any subdivision or other land division within the
Village shall be designed and constructed as provided in this section and as specified on the
Village standard specifications, Village design guidelines, or industry best practices, available
from the Director of Public Services. The access control standards contained in §15.07(7) of
the Zoning Code shall be satisfied by all subdivision plats and certified survey maps within the
13-27
jurisdiction of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in an intergovernmental agreement
between the Village and a town in which the land division is located.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(1) STREET ARRANGEMENT.
(a) General Provisions. Street layouts shall conform to the arrangement, width and
location indicated on the official map, master plan, component neighborhood development plan
of the Village or any applicable Preliminary Development Plan. In areas for which such plans
have not been completed, the street layout shall recognize the functional classification of the
various types of streets and shall be developed and located in proper relation to existing and
proposed streets, to the topography, to such natural features as streams and tree growth, to
public convenience and safety, to existing and proposed utilities, to the proposed use of the
land to be served by such streets, and to the most advantageous development of adjoining
areas. The subdivision or land division shall be designed so as to provide each lot with
satisfactory access to a public street.
(b) Collector Streets. Collector streets shall be arranged so as to provide ready
collection of traffic from residential areas and conveyance of this traffic to the arterial street and
highway system and shall be properly oriented to special traffic generators such as schools,
churches and shopping centers and other concentrations of population and to the major streets
into which they feed.
(c) Minor Streets. Minor streets shall be arranged to conform to the topography, to
discourage use by through traffic, to permit the design of efficient storm and sanitary sewerage
systems, and to require the minimum street area necessary to provide safe and convenient
access to abutting property.
(d) Proposed Streets. Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract
being subdivided unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the
opinion of the Village Board, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination
of the layout of the subdivision or land division or for the advantageous development of the
adjacent tracts.
(e) Reserve Strips. Reserve strips shall not be provided on any plat to control access
to streets or alleys, except where control of such strips is granted to the Village under
conditions approved by the Village Board.
(f) Alleys. Alleys may be provided in commercial and industrial districts and as
permitted in an approved preliminary development plan for PUD districts, for off-street loading
and service access. Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted and alleys shall not connect to a
major thoroughfare.
(g) Street Names.
1. All proposed street names shall be subject to approval by the Village Board in its
discretion.
2. Street names shall not duplicate or be similar to the names of any other existing
street and existing street names within the DeForest Fire/EMS Area or shall
otherwise confuse or confound the traveling public and logical street addressing.
13-28
3. The same street name shall be projected to extensions of the same street, except
where approved by the Village Board, such as in cases where the extension crosses
an arterial street.
[Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
(2) LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY AND RAILROAD RIGHTS OF WAY. Whenever a
proposed subdivision or land division contains or is adjacent to a limited access highway or
railroad right of way, the design shall provide the following treatment:
(a) When lots within a proposed commercial subdivision or land division back upon the
right of way of an existing or proposed limited access highway or railroad right of way, a
planting strip of at least 30 feet in depth shall be provided adjacent to the highway or railroad.
Such planting strip shall be part of the platted lots, but shall be in addition to the required
minimum lot depth. Planting strips shall be labeled on the face of the plat or certified survey
map with the following restriction: “This strip reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs. No
structures are permitted, except as approved by the Village Board.”
[Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
(b) When lots within a proposed residential subdivision or land division back upon the
right-of-way of an existing or proposed limited access highway or railroad right-of-way, a lowmaintenance
landscaped berm shall be designed and constructed at the subdivider’s expense
according to plans approved by the Director of Public Services. Required landscaping berms
shall extend at least five (5) feet above the elevation of the centerline of the adjacent right of
way and not less than thirty (30) feet in width along the entire frontage adjacent to such right of
way. The requirements of this subsection may be modified by the Village where an alternative
plan for noise mitigation along such highway or railroad right-of-way is approved under
§13.035.
[Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(c) Streets parallel to a limited access highway or railroad right of way, at the point of
their intersection with a major street and highway or collector street which crosses said railroad
or highway, shall be located at a minimum distance of 250 feet from said highway or railroad
right of way.
(d) Minor streets parallel to railroad rights of way shall be located such that the back of
the curb line is not less than fifteen feet (15') from such right of way. Minor streets in residential
areas which are parallel to arterial streets or controlled access highways shall be located such
that the rights of way are separated by not less than 150 feet.
(3) STREET DESIGN STANDARDS. The minimum right of way and roadway width of
all proposed streets and alleys shall be as specified by the master plan, official map, Village
adopted neighborhood development plan or applicable PUD Preliminary Development Plan or
Final Development Plan. If no width is specified therein, the minimum widths shall be as
follows:
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(a) Street Widths. The following minimum widths shall be provided for all public
streets. The specified width shall be increased as determined by the Planning & Zoning
Commission if on-street bike lanes are shown as part of the Village master plan.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 08-12, Eff. 4-18-08; Ratified 08-20, Eff. 5-20-08; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
13-29
TYPE OF STREET R.O.W. WIDTH
TO BE
DEDICATED*
PAVEMENT WIDTH*
Arterial Streets 80+ feet 56 feet F/F
Collector Streets 70 feet 40 feet F/F
Minor Streets 66 feet 32 feet F/F
Alleys 20 feet 10 to 20 feet
Multiuse Paths 20 feet 10 feet
Pedestrian Ways 10 feet 5 feet
NOTES: * “F/F” means face to face of opposite curbs. The Village Board may authorize standard rights-of-way or
street pavement widths less than those specified in this table in or along predominantly single family subdivisions with
densities of less than 4 dwelling units per acre and/or where parking will be restricted to one side of the street.
(b) Cul-de-sacs. The use of cul-de-sac streets is only allowed when necessitated by
exceptional topography, to minimize environmental impact or other limiting factors of good
design. When allowed, cul-de-sac streets within the Village limits shall terminate in a circular
turn-around having a minimum right-of-way radius of 60 feet and a minimum inside curb radius
of 45 feet, and shall not exceed 500 feet in length within the Village limits and 1,000 feet in
length within the extraterritorial jurisdiction.
[Am. 06-07, Eff. 3-9-06]
(c) Temporary Dead-ends or Cul-de-sacs. Temporary dead-ends or cul-de-sacs shall not
exceed 1,600 feet in length (or longer if approved by the Director of Public Services where a
second point for emergency access will be provided) and shall meet all of the standards listed in
subparagraphs 1 through 3, below. [Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
[Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11; Am. 19-07, Eff. 4-3-19]
1. A temporary turnaround is required if the street serves more than one lot on
either side of the street.
2. A temporary “T” turnaround is required if the distance from the centerline of the
nearest street intersection to the farthest lot line of the last lot of the applicable
construction phase is 400 feet or less. The “T” turnaround shall have a
minimum width of 24 feet, a minimum transverse length of 60 feet, a minimum
radius of 10 feet and be surfaced with 2 inches of bituminous asphalt over a 10
inch stone base.
3. Either a temporary “T” or temporary circular turnaround shall be required as
determined by the Director of Public Services when the closed end of a deadend
street is not visible from the nearest intersection or when the distance from
the centerline of the nearest intersecting street to the farthest lot line of the last
lot in the construction phase is greater than 400 feet. A temporary “T”
turnaround shall be constructed as specified in par. (c)2. Circular turnarounds
shall have a minimum radius of 40 feet and be surfaced with 2 inches of
bituminous asphalt over a 10 inch stone base.
[Am. 06-07, Eff. 3-9-06; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(d) Street Grades. Street grades shall be established wherever practicable so as to
avoid excessive grading, the excessive removal of ground cover the tree growth, and general
leveling of the topography. Unless a greater grade is determined necessary by the Director of
13-30
Public Services due to exceptional topography subject, the maximum centerline grade of any
street or public way shall not exceed the following:
1. Collector Streets. 6-8%
2. Minor Streets, Alleys and Frontage Streets. 10%
3. Pedestrian Ways. 12:1 unless landings of acceptable design are provided.
Conformance with ADA requirements is required unless accessibility cannot
reasonably be achieved. Proper signage shall be provided in this situation.
The grade of any street shall in no case exceed 12% or be less than 1/2 of one percent
(0.5%).
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(e) Half Streets. Where an existing dedicated or platted half street is adjacent to the
tract being divided, the other half of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. The
platting of half streets shall not be permitted unless determined necessary by the Village Board
to avoid an unreasonable hardship.
(4) STREET INTERSECTIONS.
(a) Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly right angles as topography and other
limiting factors of good design permit, and all intersections shall be designed to provide
adequate visibility and safety for motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians using such streets.
(b) The number of streets converging at one intersection shall not exceed 2 unless
otherwise approved by the Village Board.
(c) The number of intersections along arterial streets shall be held to the minimum
practicable. The distance between such intersections shall not be less than 600 feet unless
necessitated by exceptional topography or other limiting factors of good design.
(d) Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a minimum radius of 15
feet or of a greater radius when deemed necessary by the Village Board to provide for safe and
efficient traffic movements.
(e) Minor streets need not continue across arterial or collector streets, but if the
centerline of two minor streets approach the major streets from opposite sides within 150 feet
of each other, measured along the centerline of the arterial or collector street, then the location
shall be adjusted such that the alignment across the major or collector street is continuous, and
a jog is avoided.
(5) DRIVEWAYS, ACCESS CONTROL, AND VEHICULAR SIGHT DISTANCE. All
applicable requirements within Section 15.07(7) of the DeForest Municipal Code shall be met in
the design of the plat or certified survey map.
[Cr. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
13-31
13.41 BLOCKS.
(1) GENERAL PROVISIONS. The widths, lengths and shapes of blocks shall be suited
to the planned use of the land, the applicable zoning requirements, the need for convenient
access, control and safety of street traffic and the limitations and opportunities of topography.
(2) LENGTH. Blocks in residential areas shall not be less than 600 feet nor more than
1600 feet in length unless necessitated by exceptional topography or other limiting factors of
good design.
[Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
(3) PEDESTRIAN WAYS. Pedestrian ways not less than 10 feet in width may be
required near the center and entirely across any block over 900 feet in length where deemed
reasonably necessary by the Village Board to provide adequate pedestrian circulation or
access to schools, parks, playgrounds, shopping center, churches or transportation facilities.
(4) WIDTH. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for 2 tiers of lots of appropriate
depth except where otherwise required to separate residential development from through
traffic. The width of lots or parcels reserved or laid out shall be adequate to provide for offstreet
service and parking required by the use contemplated and the area zoning restrictions for
such use.
13.42 LOTS.
(1) GENERAL PROVISIONS. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall comply with
all of the dimensional standards set forth in the Zoning Code and shall be appropriate for the
location of the land division and for the type of development and use contemplated. The lots
shall be designed to provide an aesthetically pleasing building site and a proper architectural
setting for the buildings contemplated.
(2) SIDE LOT LINES. Side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or
radial to curved street lines on which the lots face. Lot lines shall follow municipal boundary
lines rather than cross them.
(3) DOUBLE FRONTAGE AND REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTS. Double frontage and
reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited except where necessary to provide separation of
residential development from through traffic or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation.
(4) ACCESS. Every lot shall front or abut on a public street, unless the Village Board
shall approve the use of private streets for such access. Private streets shall not be permitted
unless adequate provisions are made for permanent public street access to and from all units
to be served by such street and for adequate maintenance and repair of the improvements
within the right of way of such street. In any case where more than one lot or occupancy unit is
served by a private street, the Village shall have full regulatory authority to control of traffic and
parking on and adjacent thereto to the same extent as if the street were dedicated to the public.
(5) CORNER LOTS. Corner lots shall have an extra width of 10 feet to permit
adequate building setbacks from side streets.
13-32
(6) REMNANTS. All remnants of lots which do not meet the minimum size for lots as
required by the Zoning Code after a larger tract is subdivided shall be added to adjacent lots
unless other provisions are made and approved by the Village Board to convert such remnants
into usable parcels.
(7) NO SPLIT ZONING OF LOTS. All new lots created by certified survey map or plat
shall be entirely within one base zoning district at the time of recording. The boundaries of
overlay zoning districts may follow the edges of natural features, pre-defined buffers, or other
features they are intended to represent.
[Cr. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11]
13.43 EASEMENTS.
(1) UTILITY EASEMENTS. The subdivider shall provide utility easements of widths
deemed adequate by the Director of Public Services for the intended purpose where necessary
or advisable for electric power and communication poles, wires and conduits; storm and
sanitary sewers; and gas, water and other utility lines.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(a) DRAINAGE EASEMENTS. Where a subdivision or land division is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway channel or stream, or low area, an adequate easement or drainage
right of way shall be provided substantially conforming to the lines of such watercourse; and
parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith. Where necessary, storm
water drainage shall be maintained by landscaped open channels of adequate size and grade
to hydraulically accommodate a 100-year frequency storm event. A buffer area of at least 75' in
width along both sides of the drainage easement shall be shown on the plat or certified survey
map and shall be maintained in an undeveloped state. Design details for drainage facilities
shall be subject to review and approval by the Village Board.
13.44 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES. In the design of the plat or certified survey
map, suitable sites of adequate area for future schools, parks, playgrounds, drainageways and
other public purposes shall be reserved if designated on the master plan, master plan
component, official map or neighborhood development plan. Such areas shall be designated
on the plat or map. If not so designated, the location of such sites shall assure, to the extent
practicable, the preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands of fine trees, marshes, lakes
and ponds, watercourse, watersheds and ravines.
13.45 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS. All proposed public improvements in any
subdivision or other land division within the Village shall be designed and constructed as
provided in this section and as specified on the Village’s current Public Improvement Design
Standards and Specifications, available from the Director of Public Services.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(1) SURVEY MONUMENTS. The subdivider shall install survey monuments placed in
accordance with the requirements of §236.15, Wis. Stats., and as may be required by the
Village Board. The Village Board may waive the requirement for placing monuments required
pursuant to §236.15(1)(b) – (d) for a reasonable time on the condition that the subdivider
provide a letter of credit, surety bond or other adequate security to ensure that such
monuments will be placed within the time required by the Board.
(2) GRADING. After the installation of temporary block corner monuments by the
subdivider and establishment of street grades by the Village Board, the subdivider shall grade
13-33
the full width of the right of way of all streets proposed to be dedicated in accordance with plans
and standard specifications approved by the Village Board. The subdivider shall grade the
roadbeds in the street rights of way to subgrade.
(3) ROADWAY SURFACING. After the installation of all utility and storm water
drainage improvements, the subdivider shall provide for surfacing all roadways in streets
proposed to be dedicated to the widths prescribed by these regulations and the master plan or
master plan components of the Village. Said surfacing shall be done in accordance with plans
and standard specifications approved by the Village, and by the Dane County Highway
Department where County approval is required.
(4) CURB AND GUTTER. The subdivider shall provide concrete curb and gutter on all
Village streets in accordance with Village standard specifications and Village design guidelines.
In the absence of such specifications or guidelines, construction shall conform with industry
best practices as determined by the Director of Public Services. Wherever possible, provision
shall be made at the time of construction for driveway access curb cuts. No Village building
permit shall be issued for the construction of any building before the installation of curb and
gutter, unless otherwise approved by the Village Board.
[Am. 06-07, Eff. 3-9-06; Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(5) SIDEWALKS.
(a) The subdivider shall provide a sidewalk on both sides of arterial and collector
streets. Sidewalks along minor streets shall be provided on both sides of the street if so
designated in the Village's sidewalk and trail system plans, and otherwise on at least one side
of such street. Sidewalks shall have a minimum 5 feet of width, unless a lesser width is
approved by the Village Board for good cause, and shall be constructed of concrete in
accordance with Village specifications.
(b) Wider than standard sidewalks may be required by the Village Board in the vicinity
of schools, commercial areas and other places of public assemblage and the Village Board
may require the construction of sidewalks in locations other than those required under the
preceding provisions of this chapter if it determines such walks to be reasonably necessary for
safe and adequate pedestrian circulation.
(c) Alternative pedestrian ways (including 10’ asphalt paths) may be approved in lieu of
sidewalks where the proposed alternative pedestrian ways are constructed of all-weather
material, are dedicated to the Village, or are owned and maintained by a properly registered
homeowners association and have frontage on each parcel otherwise required to be provided
with a sidewalk.
(d) The right of way along the side of any street where sidewalks are not required by
this subsection shall be graded so as to accommodate the future construction of sidewalks
along that side of the street. If the subdivider can show that terrain will prohibit future sidewalk
construction, the Village Board may waive this provision.
(6) BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN TRAILS. In all cases where the Village’s approved
master plan, park and open space plan, official map, Village adopted neighborhood
development plan, or applicable PUD Preliminary Development Plan or Final Development
Plan includes a bicycle or pedestrian trail within a land division, the subdivider shall grade and
surface the trail, show the trail within a dedicated right-of-way or public access easement on the
13-34
final plat, and dedicate the trail to the public, except where the Village Board releases the
subdivider of this requirement.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 08-12, Eff. 4-18-08; Ratified 08-20, Eff. 5-20-08; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15; Am. 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
(7) STREET LIGHTING. The subdivider shall install streetlamps along all streets
proposed to be dedicated to the public. Streetlamps shall be installed at all street intersections
and along all street curves and at such other interior block spacing in accordance with Village
standard specifications and Village design guidelines. In the absence of such specifications or
guidelines, construction shall conform with industry best practices as determined by the
Director of Public Services. Unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Services,
street lamps shall be spaced at intervals not to exceed 300 feet. Street lamps shall meet
Village specifications or design guidelines, or in their absence electrical utility requirements.
[Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15; Am. 19-07, Eff. 4-3-19]
(8) PAVEMENT MARKINGS AND REGULATORY SIGNS. The subdivider shall
provide regulatory traffic signs and all markings of traffic lanes, bicycle lanes, restricted parking
areas, crosswalks and other regulatory pavement markings in accordance with a plan prepared
by the subdivider and approved by the Director of Public Services. Regulatory traffic signs
shall be designed and located according to the WisDOT approved version of the USDOT
Federal Highway Administration Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
[Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(9) STREET NAME SIGNS. The subdivider shall provide pole mounted street name
signs of a style approved by the Director of Public Services based on Village standard
specifications, design guidelines, or prevailing or Village approved signage for the area. Street
name signs shall be mounted at all street intersections. The Director of Public Services may
approve the mounting of street name signs above regulatory signs where allowed by WisDOT
approved version of the USDOT Federal Highway Administration Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
[Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(10) PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERAGE. The subdivider shall provide sanitary sewers in
such a manner as to make adequate sanitary sewerage service available to each lot within the
subdivision. The size, type and installation of all sanitary sewers proposed to be constructed
shall be in accordance with Village standard specifications or design guidelines. In the absence
of such specifications or guidelines, construction shall conform with industry best practices as
determined by the Director of Public Services.
[Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(11) STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES. The subdivider shall provide storm
water management facilities necessary to comply with Chapter 24 of the Municipal Code and to
prevent unreasonable hazard to life and property, in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Director of Public Services. In addition, the following design requirements shall
be met within each land division:
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15; Am. 19-07, Eff. 4-3-19]
(a) Storm sewer piping shall be sized to convey the 10-year frequency storm event
without surcharging.
(b) Streets and other paved areas shall be designed to completely contain the 25-year
frequency storm event within the street section to the top of curb.
13-35
(c) Overland conveyance channels shall be sized to accommodate the 25-year
frequency storm event within the channel bottom and banks, except as otherwise required
under par. (d).
(d) Where no safe overflow route exists, new overland conveyance channels, pipes,
and/or culverts that are sized to accommodate the 100-year frequency storm event shall be
constructed.
(e) Upstream or off-site drainage shall be included in all design calculations for storm
sewer piping and overland conveyances.
(f) Proposed discharges shall not exceed the safe capacity of the downstream receiving
systems.
[Am. 93-39, Eff. 10-8-93; Repealed & Recr. 12-11, Eff. 7-27-12]
(11a) GRADING AND LANDSCAPING. The subdivider shall submit grading, restoration,
and landscaping plans in conjunction with the erosion control plan. Such plans shall be
approved by the Director of Public Services in accordance with Village standard specifications,
or Village design guidelines, or in their absence industry best practices, available from the
Director, except that the Director may require or the subdivider may request Village Board
approval. The subdivider shall provide such as-built plans prior to the issuance of building
permits. Such plans shall include the following:
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15; Am. 19-07, Eff. 4-3-19]
(a) Spot elevations shown at all lot corners, high points, and at other locations if required
by the Director of Public Services, with drainage arrows representing the intended
flow paths shown along all lot lines.
(b) Where the use of swales is proposed, they shall have a minimum of 1% slope, unless
otherwise approved by the Director of Public Services.
[Am. 19-07, Eff. 4-3-19]
(c) Clear indication that no new building opening will be less than two feet above the
base flood elevation associated with any nearby floodplain, detention basin, or
drainageway.
(d) A restoration plan for detention areas, greenways, and other areas with natural
prairie seed mixtures conducive to the soil conditions and intended functions of such
areas.
(e) A landscape plan for every detention basin, road ditch, greenway, or open channel,
in accordance with standard specifications approved by the Director of Public
Services and applicable zoning ordinance landscaping requirements. Grasses, trees,
shrubs, wild flowers, other vegetation, or any combination thereof shall be planned
and planted to promote the function, maintenance and aesthetic characteristics of
such facilities.
[Cr. 2013-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 19-07, Eff. 4-3-19]
(12) PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY FACILITIES. The subdivider shall provide water mains
in such a manner as to make adequate water service available to each lot within the
subdivision. The size, type and installation of all public water mains proposed to be
constructed shall be in accordance Village standard specifications or design guidelines. In the
13-36
absence of such specifications or guidelines, construction shall conform with industry best
practices as determined by the Director of Public Services.
[Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(13) FIRE HYDRANTS. Village standard fire hydrants shall be installed by the
subdivider where determined reasonably necessary to provide appropriate fire protection by the
Village Engineer.
(14) OTHER UTILITIES. No telephone service lines or electrical distribution system,
as defined in §7.071(2)(a) of this Code, shall be located on overhead poles except where
underground installation is impossible due to exceptional topography or other physical barrier.
Plans indicating the proposed location of all gas, electrical power and telephone distribution
and transmission lines required to service the land division shall be approved by the Village
Director of Public Services in accordance with Village standard specifications or design
guidelines. In the absence of such specifications or guidelines, construction shall conform with
industry best practices as determined by the Director of Public Services.
[Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(15) STREET TREES. Street trees shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of §15.06(7) of the DeForest Zoning Code. The Director of Public Services may
require the developer to install the trees at the time of development or place funds into an
escrow account to cover the cost of future Village installation, in amounts established by the
Village Board from time to time.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(16) PARKS AND PUBLIC LANDS. Where land is dedicated for active public park and
recreational use, the subdivider shall rough grade, topsoil, and seed land for its intended use
before it will be accepted by the Village. Where land is dedicated for passive recreational use,
the Village may require an alternate restoration or planting plan. If specified within a
subdivider’s agreement, the subdivider may also be responsible for installation of additional
recreational facilities within dedicated public park space.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08]
Article VI. SUBCHAPTER V – DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS.
13.50 PARK AND PUBLIC LAND DEDICATIONS.
(1) GENERAL PROVISIONS. The requirements of this section are established to
ensure that adequate parks, open spaces, and sites for other public uses are properly located
and preserved as the Village grows. They have also been established to ensure that the cost
of providing the park and recreation sites and facilities necessary to serve the additional people
brought into the community by land development may be equitably apportioned on the basis of
additional needs created by development. This section shall apply to all lands proposed for
residential development.
(2) PARK DEDICATION.
(a) Required Dedication. The subdivider shall dedicate usable land, as defined in
§13.03(33), to provide park, playground, recreation and open space to meet the needs to be
created by the subdivision, land division, or development project in accordance with the
standards outlined hereinafter. The parkland dedication requirement is 1,921 ft2 for each single
family or duplex unit, and 1,440 ft2 for each multifamily unit. If the Director of Public Services
13-37
determines that fees in lieu of land should be paid, based on an evaluation against the Village’s
Parks and Open Space Plan and any other policies adopted by the Village Board, the amount
to be paid shall be as provided in section 13.51(4)(c). If the Director of Public Services
determines that a proposed dedication meets some but not all of the usable land criteria in
§13.03(33), he/she may recommend and the Village Board may approve acceptance of that
land with partial credit to the parkland dedication requirement in this subsection.
[Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15; Am. 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
(b) Designated Park Lands. Whenever a proposed public playground, park, trail or
similar recreational facility (other than streets or drainage ways) designated in the master plan,
master plan component or on the official map of the Village, is embraced, in whole or in part, in
a tract of land to be subdivided, those proposed public lands as lie within the land division shall
be made a part of the plat or certified survey map and shall be dedicated to the public by the
subdivider and credited toward the requirements of par. (a).
(c) Access. Public access shall be provided consistent with the “usable land”
definition in §13.03(33) except in cases of partial credit under par. (2)(a). In cases where
private lots adjoin public park space, the Village may require that the subdivider grade, sign
and/or landscape the area along such property lines to clearly demarcate the borders between
private lots and public park space.
[Cr. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(3) OTHER LAND DEDICATIONS. Whenever a tract of land to be subdivided
embraces all or any part of an arterial street, drainageway or other public way which has been
designated in the master plan, master plan component, or on the official map of the Village, that
portion of the public way as lies within the proposed plat or certified survey map shall be made
a part of the plat or map and dedicated to the public by the subdivider.
[Am. 92-10, Eff. 3-16-92; Subs. (4)-(7) repealed 95-19, Eff. 5-4-95; Am. 06-12, Eff. 4-20-06]
13.51 IMPACT FEES FOR PARK FACILITIES.
(1) INTENT. This section is intended to impose an impact fee upon residential
developments in an amount based upon the number of residential dwelling units created, in
order to finance park facilities, the demand for which is generated by new residential
development. The fees shall be used to finance capital costs for new or enlarged capital
improvements that substantially benefit those developments that pay the fees.
(2) AUTHORITY. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit the
power of the Village to adopt any ordinance pursuant to any source of local authority or to
utilize any other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set
forth herein, either in lieu of or in conjunction with this section.
(3) DEFINITIONS. As used in this section, the term "building permit" shall not include
permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure or
rebuilding a damaged or destroyed structure, which result in no increase in the number of dwelling
units.
(4) IMPOSITION OF IMPACT FEE.
(a) No building permit for a residential development shall be issued unless the impact fees
calculated pursuant to this section has been paid.
13-38
(b) In the case of any new subdivision or land division as defined in §13.03, the impact fee
due shall be payable upon execution of a subdivider’s agreement unless otherwise provided in
such agreement. In cases where no subdivider’s agreement is required by ordinance, the fee
shall be tendered with a building permit application.
(c) The impact fee for park land shall be $3,308 per residential unit in single family or
duplex structures, and $2,486 per residential unit in multifamily structures. If the Village accepts
the dedication of park land pursuant to §13.50, the fee calculated under this paragraph shall apply
only with respect to the number of residential units in excess of the number for which the required
land dedication was made.
(d) The impact fee for park improvements shall be $1,739 per residential unit in single
family and duplex structures, and $1,308 per residential unit in multifamily structures. The fee
imposed by this paragraph is in addition to any amounts imposed by par. (d).
(5) NEEDS ASSESSMENT. The needs assessment adopted pursuant to Ordinance
2006-12 shall be used as the basis for calculation and expenditure of impact fees imposed
pursuant to this section after April 20, 2006.
[Note: The adopted needs assessment is on file with the Village Clerk]
(6) ADMINISTRATION OF IMPACT FEE.
(a) Transfer of funds to Village Finance Director. Upon receipt of impact fees, the
Village Finance Director shall be responsible for placement of such funds into separate
accounts as hereinafter specified. All such funds shall be deposited in interest-bearing
accounts in a bank authorized to receive deposits of Village funds. Interest earned by each
account shall be credited to that account and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for
funds of such account.
(b) Establishment and maintenance of accounts: The Finance Director shall establish
separate accounts and maintain records for each such account whereby impact fees collected
pursuant to this section prior to April 20, 2006 can be segregated from impact fees imposed on or
after such date. Impact fees imposed prior to April 20, 2006 shall be expended in accordance with
the Needs Assessment approved by Ordinance 95-19.
(c) Maintenance of records. The Village Finance Director shall maintain and keep
accurate financial records for each such account that shall show the source and disbursement of
all revenues; shall account for all monies received; shall ensure that the disbursement of funds
from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the capital improvements specified in
the appropriate Needs Assessment, and shall provide an annual account for each impact fee
account showing the source and amount of all funds collected and the projects that were funded.
(d) Annual review and modification: On or before April 30 in each year, the Village
Finance Director shall adjust the amount of the impact fees imposed by this section to account for
the increased cost of park improvement construction from the previous year based on the inflation
rate established by the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index or other appropriate
index of inflationary price increases.
(7) BONDING OF EXCESS FACILITY PROJECTS. The Village may issue bonds,
promissory notes, revenue certificates, and other evidences of indebtedness in such manner and
subject to such limitations as may be provided by law in furtherance of the provision of capital
13-39
improvement projects. Funds pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificates, or other
obligations of indebtedness for such projects may include impact fees and other Village revenues
as may be allowed by the Board. Impact fees paid pursuant to this section, however, shall be
restricted to use solely and exclusively for financing directly or as a pledge against bonds, notes,
revenue certificates, and other obligations for the cost of capital improvements as specified herein.
(8) REFUNDS.
(a) The current owner of property on which an impact fee has been paid may apply for
a refund of all or part of such fee that has not been expended or pledged toward repayment of
indebtedness incurred for capital improvements under this section within the time established in
par. (b).
(b) The Village Board finds that the reasonable period for the expenditure of impact
fees collected under this section is no less than the statutory maximum period of seven (7)
years for all of the capital improvements identified in the Needs Assessment to be funded by
impact fees. Any amounts not expended within seven (7) years after they are collected,
determined on a first-in, first-out basis, shall be refunded to eligible property owners, as
provided in par. (a).
(9) APPEALS. A developer or an applicant for a building permit may appeal the
imposition or amount of the impact fee, and any property owner may appeal a decision on a claim
for refund of unexpended impact fees, under the provisions of Chapter 17 of this Code and
Chapter 68, Wis. Stats. If the notice of appeal challenges the imposition of an impact fee, or the
amount imposed, the developer or applicant may pay the fees imposed under protest and the
building inspector shall issue any building permits withheld solely due to the nonpayment of the
fees. If the applicant prevails on appeal, the Finance Director shall refund that portion of the fee
so paid as finally determined in the appeal process.
(10) WAIVERS AND EXCEPTIONS. Petitions for waivers or exceptions to the application
of this section shall be made to the Director of Public Services which shall make a
recommendation for determination by the Village Board. Full or partial waivers or exceptions from
any requirement of this section may be granted if the Board determines that the literal application
of such provisions will have an adverse effect on the availability of affordable housing, or is
otherwise unreasonable or inequitable due to unique circumstances of the particular property at
issue.
[Am. 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
(11) CREDITS.
(a) The Village Board may enter into agreements with any developer granting credits
against the impact fees imposed against the developer for park improvements in exchange for the
construction, installation or provision of improvements which are eligible for funding through impact
fee revenues. Such agreements shall be in writing, shall be entered into prior to the due date of
the impact fees against which the credit is given, and shall specify the improvements to be
provided, the cost thereof, and the amount of credit granted against the impact fees. In no event
shall the Village provide a refund for a credit that is greater than either the impact fees due from
the developer or the fair market value of the improvements provided. Any decision to allow a
developer to provide improvements in lieu of fees shall rest in the sole discretion of the Village
Board.
[Section created by 95-19, Eff. 5-4-95; Am. 06-12; Eff. 4-20-06]
13-40
13.52 IMPACT FEES FOR PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES.
(1) INTENT. This section is intended to allocate financial burdens of providing public
facilities fairly between residents living in the Village at the time of adoption of this section and
owners of existing development projects in the Village and developers of new land
developments, as well as to comply with Wis. Stats. §66.0617.
(2) AUTHORITY. The Village Board has enacted this section to provide a means to
recover the cost of development beyond that already existing to finance public facilities by other
means authorized by law as authorized under Wis. Stats. §66.0617(2)(b), including, without
limitation because of enumeration herein, Wis. Stats. §§236.13(2) and (2m).
(3) DEFINITIONS. As used in this section, the term "building permit" shall not include:
(a) Any permit required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing
residential structure, which result in no increase in the number of dwelling units on the building
site;
(b) Any permit required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to a nonresidential
structure which result in no increase in the total area of floor space within the structure;
(c) Any permit required for rebuilding a structure damaged or destroyed after the effective
date of this section, provided that any reconstructed residential building has no more residential
units, and any reconstructed non-residential building has no more floor space, than the building
being replaced;
(d) Any permit required for construction of an accessory building in a residential district
having an estimated value of not more than $15,000.
(4) IMPOSITION OF IMPACT FEE.
(a) Except as provided in par. (b), no building permit shall be issued for any residential or
non-residential development within the Village unless the impact fee imposed by this section is
paid.
(b) The Village Board may authorize the payment of impact fees otherwise payable in full
at the time of the issuance of a building permit in installment payments. If installment payments
are authorized, interest shall be paid on the installment payments at the same rate charged by the
Village on installments of special assessments. If installment payments are permitted, a building
permit may be issued only upon payment of any installment due at the time of issuance as
determined by the Village Board.
(c) The impact fee pursuant to this section shall be determined as follows:
1. Residential Development. The impact fee for residential developments shall be
$798.00 for each new residential unit to be constructed pursuant to the permit. The
total fee consists of $355.00 for new buildings and $443.00 for new equipment.
2. Non-Residential Development. The impact fee for non-residential shall be based on
a good faith estimate by the Building Inspector of the cost of the construction
13-41
authorized by the permit. The fee shall be $1.72 per $1,000.00 of estimated value.
The fee consists of $0.77 for new buildings and $0.95 for new equipment.
(d) Fee Credit. Where additions are made to existing non-residential buildings, the impact
fee shall be reduced based on the proportion of the assessed value of the existing building to the
estimated value of the building following completion of the addition.
(5) NEEDS ASSESSMENT. The needs assessment entitled "Public Facility Needs
Assessment for Public Safety Impact Fees" prepared by Virchow, Krause & Company dated May
26, 2005 and adopted pursuant to Ordinance 2005-28 shall be used for calculation of impact fees
imposed pursuant to this section.
[Note: The adopted needs assessment is on file with the Village Clerk]
(6) ADMINISTRATION OF IMPACT FEE.
(a) Transfer of funds to Village Finance Director. The Village Finance Director shall be
responsible for placement of all impact fees collected under this section into one or more
segregated accounts and all such funds shall be accounted for separately from other funds of
the Village. All such funds shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts in a bank authorized
to receive deposits of Village funds. Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that
account and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds of such account on a firstin
first-out basis.
(b) Expenditure of Impact Fees.
1. Disbursements. Impact fees collected under this section, and interest accrued
thereon, shall be used to pay part of the Village's obligation to the DeForest Area
Fire Protection District for its share of the cost of the capital improvements for
which the impact fee is imposed. Such funds shall be used only to pay that portion
of the Village's entire share that equals the proportionate cost of the new facilities
that is necessitated by new development. Such funds shall be paid to the District
when the Village's funding obligation for such improvements is determined to be
due and payable, and shall be used by the District only for those capital costs for
which the impact fees were imposed. Such costs may include the costs of debt
service on bonds, notes or similar debt instruments when the debt has been
incurred for the purpose of proceeding with designated public facilities projects
prior to the collection of all anticipated impact fees for that project, to reimburse the
Village for advances of other funds or reserves, and such other purposes
consistent with §66.0617, Stats. which are recorded and approved by the Village
Board.
2. Impact Fee Zones. In the event the Village should ever establish separate impact
fee zones with different fees depending upon the zone in which the property is
located, separate accounts shall be kept of fees collected from different impact fee
zones, and revenues collected in particular zones shall be spent in those zones as
appropriate.
3. Time Period for Expenditures. The Village Board has determined that the following
time periods are reasonable and appropriate for the planning, financing, acquisition
and construction, expansion and/or improvements of the facilities as identified in
the needs assessment:
13-42
Type of Facility
Equipment
Buildings
Maximum Expenditure Period
10 years
15 years
(c) Maintenance of records. The Finance Director shall maintain and keep accurate financial
records for each such account that shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues; shall
account for all monies received; shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from each account shall
be used solely and exclusively for the purposes specified in the needs assessment described in sub.
(5); and shall provide an annual account for each impact fee account showing the source and amount
of all funds collected and the projects that were funded.
(7) REFUNDS. Impact fees held by the Village which have not been expended or
encumbered within the period provided in sub. (6)(b)3 shall be refunded to the then-current owner
of record of the property with respect to which the impact fees were imposed, together with the
interest earned on the impact fee paid.
(8) APPEALS. Any developer, as defined in §66.0617, Stats., upon whom an impact fee is
imposed under this section, may appeal to contest the amount, collection or use of the impact fee as
provided in this subsection.
(a) It shall be a condition to the commencement of an appeal that the impact fee from which the
developer appeals shall be paid as and when the fee or any installment thereof becomes due and
payable, and upon default in making any such payment, such appeal may be dismissed.
(b) The only questions appealable under this section shall be:
1. The amount of the fee charged and paid by the developer;
2. The method of collection or the right of the Village to collect the impact fee; and
3. The use made of the impact fee paid by the developer, or of any interest thereon, by the
Village.
(c) Appeals shall be brought within thirty (30) days of the date of payment of the impact fee or, if
the appeal relates to the use of the impact fee, within thirty (30) days of the payment being challenged.
(d) Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Village Clerk shall compile a record of the ordinance
imposing the impact fee that is the subject of the appeal, a record of the management and expenditure
of the proceeds of the impact fee, and shall transmit these documents to the Village Board. In
consultation with the Village Finance Director and the Fire Department, the Village Clerk shall also
compile a report on each appeal in which the appellant is seeking a reduction or total refund in the
impact fee paid. This report shall specify the fiscal impact on the Village if the appeal overturns the
impact fee. If the fiscal impact report indicates that the appeal, if successful, will cause a revenue
shortfall that otherwise was not budgeted with respect to the public facility, and if this revenue shortfall
cannot be reconciled by reduction in impacts caused by the development on the appellant's property,
the report shall estimate whether it will be necessary for the Village to adjust impact fees, or amend
existing ordinances to recover the proposed revenue shortfall.
(e) The Village Board shall hold a public hearing on the appeal, preceded by a Class 1 notice,
providing a fair opportunity for the appellant to be heard. The burden shall be on the appellant to
13-43
establish the illegality or impropriety of the fee from which the appeal has been taken. Following the
close of the hearing, the Village Board shall deliberate on the matter, and shall conduct such studies
and inquiries as it deems appropriate to decide the appeal.
(f) If the Village Board determines that the appeal has merit, it shall determine appropriate
remedies. These may include reallocation of the proceeds of the challenged impact fee to accomplish
the purposes for which the fee was collected, refunding the impact fee in full or in part, along with
interest collected by the Village thereon, or granting the appellant the opportunity to make the impact
fee payment in installments, or such other remedies as it deems appropriate in a particular case.
[Section Cr. 05-28, Eff. 10-6-05; Renumbered 06-12, Eff. 4-20-06]
Article VII. SUBCHAPTER VI – DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
13.60 DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
(1) COMMENCEMENT. No building permit shall be issued, and no construction or
installation of improvements shall commence, in a proposed subdivision or land division until the
final plat or certified survey map has been approved by the Village Board and a subdivider’s
agreement has been approved pursuant to §13.61, except that a subdivider's agreement shall not
be required for a certified survey map division which does not require any public improvements.
(1) PLANS. The following plans and accompanying construction specifications shall be
approved by the Village Director of Public Services, if such plans are in accordance with Village
specifications, Village design guidelines, or in their absence industry best practices approved by the
Director, before authorization of construction or installation of improvements. In the event the
subdivider desires a variation to any Village specification, Village design guideline, or in their
absence industry best practice approved by the Director; the subdivider otherwise requests Village
Board action; or the Director determines that the submitted plans and accompanying construction
specifications raise policy issues, the following plans and accompanying specifications shall require
the approval of the Village Board. Any such plans and specification shall be submitted at least thirty
(30) days before the Village Board meeting, unless a shorter period is approved by the Director of
Public Services:
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15; Am. 19-07, Eff. 4-3-19]
(a) Street plans and profiles showing existing and proposed grades, elevations and cross
sections of required improvements.
(b) Sanitary sewer plans and profiles showing the locations, grades, sizes, elevations and
materials of required facilities.
(c) Storm sewer plans and profiles showing the locations, grades, sizes, cross sections,
elevations and materials of required facilities.
(d) Water main plans and profiles showing the locations, sizes, elevations and materials of
required facilities.
(e) Erosion and sedimentation control plans meeting the requirements of chapter 24 of this
Code.
(f) Planting plans showing locations and species of any required grasses, vines and shrubs
and the locations, ages, calipers and species of all required trees.
(g) Master grading plan for the subdivision.
13-44
(h) Regulatory and entryway signage plan.
(i) Additional special plans or information, as required by the Director of Public Services.
[Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(3) CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL. The subdivider shall comply with
Chapter 24 of the Municipal Code, Erosion Control and Stormwater Management.
(4) PROTECTING EXISTING FLORA/TREE PRESERVATION. The subdivider shall make
every effort to protect and retain all existing trees, shrubbery, vines and grasses not actually lying in
public roadways, drainageways, building foundation sites, private driveways, soil absorption waste
disposal areas, paths and trails. Such vegetation shall be protected and preserved during
construction in accordance with sound conservation practices, including the preservation of trees by
well islands or retaining walls wherever abutting grades are altered, and by minimizing soil grading
and compaction within the drip edges of such trees. Where required under §13.21 or §13.31, the
subdivider shall implement and continuously maintain the Tree Protection and Preservation Plan
during site development.
[Am. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08]
(5) CULVERT REQUIREMENTS. The subdivider shall show all driveway culvert locations.
A Village culvert permit must be obtained before installation of any culvert for storm water
management purposes and shall comply with the standards set forth therein. Culverts shall be
installed prior to any construction activity occurring on the site.
(6) INSPECTION. Prior to commencing any work within the subdivision or land division, the
subdivider shall make arrangements with the Director of Public Services to provide for adequate
inspection of any work involving or affecting any public improvements within the development. The
Director of Public Services shall approve all completed work prior to acceptance of the
improvements or release of sureties, where in accordance with approved plans and specifications.
[Am. 97-3, Eff. 2-3-97; Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
13.61 SUBDIVIDER'S AGREEMENT.
(1) REQUIRED TERMS. In any case where a subdivider’s agreement is required under this
chapter, or any approval granted hereunder, the agreement shall:
(a) Be substantially complete, in the determination of the Village Administrator, at the time
the associated final plat or certified survey map is presented to the Village Board for action. A
subdivider’s agreement that is not substantially complete at this time may be a basis for Board
rejection of the associated plat or map.
(b) Be executed and delivered to the Village prior to recording of the plat or certified survey
map and the commencement of any work on any improvements within the plat or certified survey
map area.
(c) Be in a form approved by the Village Administrator.
(d) Bind the subdivider to comply with the requirements of this Code and any specifications,
plans, or conditions imposed or approved pursuant thereto.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15; Am. 16-30, Eff. 9-6-16]
(2) A subdivider's agreement required pursuant to sub. (1) shall include provisions for the
following:
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
13-45
(a) Providing for approval by the Village of all contractors performing work on any public
improvements.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15; Am. 16-30, Eff. 9-6-16]
(b) Specifying the public improvements to be constructed or installed by the subdivider.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(c) Providing for adequate supervision and regulation of construction activities, schedules,
and methods.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(d) Outlining the requirements for acceptance of public improvements by the Village.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(e) Requiring that contractors engaged in work on public improvements or any other
improvements on lands owned by, or dedicated to, the Village, be adequately insured for liability
including workers' compensation liability and assuring that such insurance coverage will indemnify
the Village and its engineer in the event of a claim.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(f) Assuring that the subdivider and all contractors agree to indemnify the Village and its
engineer for any liability arising out of the construction of public improvements or work on lands
owed by, or dedicated to, the Village.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15; Am. 16-30, Eff. 9-6-16]
(g) Providing for guarantees by the subdivider of all public improvements for not less than
one (1) year following final acceptance by the Village, and an additional period equal to the initial
guaranty period for each replacement of any guaranteed work.
[Am. 13-13, Eff. 7-12-13; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15; Am. 16-30, Eff. 9-6-16]
(h) Providing for the payment of required fees and the dedication of required lands and
improvements.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(i) Providing for the reimbursement of the Village for professional consultant's fees and other
costs incurred in connection with the development of the property.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15; Am. 16-30, Eff. 9-6-16; Am. 16-44, Eff. 11-16-16]
(j) Providing for a letter of credit, performance bond, or other surety at the option of the
developer and approved by the Village Administrator, to guarantee completion of the public
improvements and the other obligations of the subdivider under the agreement or this Code. The
subdivider may construct the project in such phases as the Village Board approves. If the
subdivider’s project will be constructed in phases, the amount of the surety required shall be limited
to the phase of the project that is currently being constructed and any remaining surety obligations
from previous phases. Any surety required by the Village under this section shall be limited to 120%
of the estimated cost of the public improvements, and to a term not exceeding fourteen (14) months
after substantial completion, as determined by the Director of Public Services.
[Am. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11; Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15; Am. 16-30, Eff. 9-6-16]
(k) Assuring that, in the event of a default by the subdivider on any obligation under the
agreement, the Village will have the ability to promptly recover from a third-party surety, an escrow
deposit, or other form of security, the necessary funds to complete the construction of the
improvements, and recover all of its costs, including all engineering, legal, planning and other fees
relating to the default.
[Repealed & Recr. 12-11, Eff. 7-27-12; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
13-46
(l) Requiring the subdivider to reimburse the Village for the preparation of record drawings in
a digital format compatible with the Village’s record management system. The Village or its
engineering consultant, if so directed by the Village, shall complete a survey of the constructed
improvements and utilize digital drawings provided by the subdivider to prepare the Record
Drawings. All costs associated with the survey of and completion of record drawings shall be
reimbursed by the subdivider.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(m) Requiring the subdivider’s compliance with all other Village ordinances, conditions of
approval and other applicable regulations.
[Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(n) Requiring the subdivider to control weeds and all growth of natural vegetation in a
manner consistent with Village ordinances on each lot, outlot, or publicly dedicated parcel until such
time as that land is transferred to another entity.
[Cr. 06-07, Eff. 3-9-06]
(o) Specifying that private covenants will be imposed on all residential subdivisions, including
a provision that individual home owners be required to plant and maintain a minimum 300 points of
landscaping per lot, in accordance with the landscape improvement standards in §15.06(4) of the
Zoning Code, or equivalent.
[Cr. 06-07, Eff. 3-9-06; Am. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(p) Requiring that the subdivider be responsible for clearing all soil, vegetation, gravel, and
similar construction site debris that is tracked onto public streets during the day on which such
tracking occurs.
[Cr. 08-09, Eff. 3-14-08]
(q) Requiring the construction and maintenance of highway noise mitigation measures as
approved to meet any applicable requirements under § 13.035.
[Cr. 11-21, Eff. 6-10-11; Am. 16-30, Eff. 9-6-16]
(r) Assuring that all improvements are completed in accordance with all Village standards
and the approved engineering plans within eighteen (18) months from the date of the agreement, or
such other timeframe as may be approved by the Village Board.
[Cr. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
(s) Including such other provisions as deemed necessary or appropriate by the Village
Administrator to carry out the intent of this chapter and other provisions of this Code applicable to
the development.
[Cr. 15-37, Eff. 8-18-15]
14-1
CHAPTER 14
BUILDING REGULATIONS
[Repealed and Recreated 14-001, Eff. 1-17-14 ]
SUBCHAPTER I: BUILDING CODE .................................................................................... 14-2
14.01 TITLE. .................................................................................................................. 14-2
14.02 PURPOSE. .......................................................................................................... 14-2
14.03 SCOPE. ............................................................................................................... 14-2
14.04 BUILDING INSPECTOR. ..................................................................................... 14-2
14.05 BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTION. ........................................................... 14-3
14.06 STATE CODES ADOPTED. ................................................................................ 14-9
14.07 GARAGES. ........................................................................................................ 14-10
14.09 NEW METHODS AND MATERIALS. ................................................................. 14-10
14.10 SIGNS. ............................................................................................................... 14-10
14.11 UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND MOVING BUILDINGS. .......................................... 14-10
14.12 OUTDOOR FURNACES REGULATED. ............................................................ 14-11
14.13 SWIMMING POOLS REGULATED. ................................................................... 14-12
14.14 DISCLAIMER ON INSPECTIONS...................................................................... 14-12
14.15 PENALTIES AND VIOLATIONS. ....................................................................... 14-12
SUBCHAPTER II: PLUMBING CODE ................................................................................ 14-13
14.16 DEFINITIONS. ................................................................................................... 14-13
14.17 STATE CODE ADOPTED. ................................................................................. 14-13
14.18 PLUMBING SUPERVISOR, POWERS AND DUTIES. ....................................... 14-13
14.19 APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS. .................................................................... 14-144
14.20 INSPECTION OF WORK. .................................................................................. 14-14
14.21 CONNECTIONS TO SANITARY SEWER AND WATER SYSTEMS. ................ 14-14
14.22 CROSS-CONNECTIONS. .................................................................................. 14-14
14.23 CLEAR WATERS. ............................................................................................. 14-15
14.24 GREASE SEPARATORS. ................................................................................. 14-16
14.25 DUPLEX SERVICE CONNECTIONS. ................................................................ 14-16
14.26 DISCLAIMER ON INSPECTIONS.................................................................... 14-177
14.27 PENALTY. ......................................................................................................... 14-17
SUBCHAPTER III: ELECTRICAL CODE ............................................................................ 14-17
14.28 ELECTRICAL PERMITS AND INSPECTION. ................................................... 14-17
14.29 STATE CODE ADOPTED. ................................................................................. 14-18
14.30 100 AMP. SERVICE REQUIRED. ...................................................................... 14-18
14.31 OUTSIDE WATER METER WIRING. ................................................................. 14-18
14.32 PENALTY. ......................................................................................................... 14-18
14.33 DISCLAIMER ON INSPECTIONS...................................................................... 14-18
14-2
SUBCHAPTER I: BUILDING CODE
14.01 TITLE. This subchapter shall be known as the "Building Code of the Village
of DeForest."
14.02 PURPOSE. This code provides certain minimum standards, provisions and
requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction and uses of materials in
buildings and structures hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved,
converted to other uses or demolished, and regulates the equipment, maintenance, use
and occupancy of all such buildings and structures. Its purpose is to protect and foster the
health, safety, and wellbeing of persons occupying or using such buildings and the general
public.
14.03 SCOPE. New buildings and structures hereafter erected in, or any building
or structure hereafter moved within or into, the Village shall conform to all the requirements
of this code except as they are herein specifically exempted from part or all of its
provisions. Any alteration, enlargement or demolition of an existing building and any
installation therein of electrical, gas, heating, plumbing or ventilating equipment which
affects the health or safety of the users thereof or any other persons, is a "new building" to
the extent of such change. Any existing building shall be considered a "new building" for
the purposes of this code whenever it is used for dwelling, commercial or industrial
purposes unless it was being used for such purposes at the time this code was enacted.
The provisions of this code supplement the laws of the State of Wisconsin pertaining to
construction and use and the Zoning Code of the Village and amendments thereto to the
date this chapter was adopted, and in no way supersede or nullify such laws and said
Zoning Code.
14.04 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
(1) GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES. The Building Inspector shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter and of all other ordinances and the laws and orders of the State
of Wisconsin which relate to building construction, plumbing and electrical installations and
for these purposes may at all reasonable times enter buildings and premises. The Building
Inspector may pass upon any questions arising under the provisions of this chapter relating
to buildings, subject to conditions contained in this chapter. No person shall interfere with
the said Inspector while in the performance of the duties prescribed in this chapter. The
Building Inspector shall direct the activities of the Assistant Building Inspector. Any person
feeling aggrieved by any order or ruling of the Building Inspector may, within 20 days
thereafter, appeal from such order or ruling to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Such an
appeal must be in writing.
[Am. 19-003, Eff. 2-16-19]
(2) QUALIFICATIONS.
(a) The Building Inspector shall have the necessary qualifications required by the
State of Wisconsin to supervise the general construction of buildings.
(b) The Building Inspector shall be certified by the Wisconsin Department of Safety
and Professional Services to administer and enforce all the provisions of the Wisconsin
Uniform Dwelling Code.
14-3
(3) RECORDS. The Building Inspector shall keep a record of all applications for
building permits, and regularly number each permit in the order of issuance. The Building
Inspector shall keep a record of all inspections made and of all removal and condemnation
of buildings. The Building Inspector shall make a report to the Village Board on the above
matters when requested by the Village Board.
[Am. 19-003, Eff. 2-16-19]
14.05 BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTION.
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. (a) General. No building or structure of any kind shall be
moved within or into the Village and no building or structure, or any part thereof, shall
hereinafter be erected, or ground broken for the same, or enlarged, altered, moved,
demolished, razed or used within the Village, except as herein provided, until a permit
therefor shall first have been obtained by the owner, or an authorized agent, from the
Building Inspector, with zoning approval from the Zoning Administrator.
(b) Early Start Permits. In cases of new construction, the Building Inspector shall
have the authority to grant an Early Start Permit before issuance of the Building Permit
allowing the initiation of site grading (with an approved erosion control permit and
stormwater management plan, where applicable), the installation of utilities to the building
site, and installation of structural footings. Early Start Permits may be granted at the
discretion of the Building Inspector when he or she determines that a complete application
related to the structure has been submitted and appears to comply with all requirements for
issuance of the building permit. By accepting an Early Start Permit, the applicant
acknowledges that the building plans and permit, when finally approved, shall control with
respect to the required location and specifications of utility and footing installations and site
grading, notwithstanding any work already initiated or completed under authority of the
Early Start Permit, and that compliance with the approved plans and permit and the full cost
thereof shall be the responsibility of the applicant. The applicant further acknowledges and
agrees that the issuance of an Early Start Permit shall not obligate the Village to
subsequently issue a building permit, and in no event shall the Village be liable for any
expense or loss resulting in whole or in part from the issuance of the Early Start Permit.
[Cr. 11-12, Eff. 4-29-11]
(2) APPLICATION. Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon
a form furnished by the Building Inspector and shall state the name and address of the
owner of the land and also the owner of the building if different, the legal description of the
land upon which the building is to be located, the name and address of the designer, the
use to which said building is to be put, and such other information as the Building Inspector
may require.
(3) DEDICATED STREET REQUIRED. No building permit shall be issued unless
the property on which the building is proposed to be built abuts a street that has been
dedicated for street purposes, and which street may be lawfully accessed from the
property.
(4) UTILITIES REQUIRED.
(a) Except as provided in sub. (b), no building permit shall be issued for the
construction of any building until a sanitary sewer main providing a connection to the public
14-4
wastewater treatment system, a water main connected to the Village’s municipal water
distribution system, grading, graveling and curb and gutter (where required) are installed in
the street abutting the property for which the permit is required.
(b) The installation of water and/or sewer mains in the abutting street shall not be
required as a condition of issuance of a building permit for construction in any of the
following circumstances:
1. Unplatted lands located in an area which, at the time of application, are
located more than one-half mile from the nearest Village water main, unless
installation of water and/or sewer mains is required by any other ordinance
or as a condition of any land division or zoning approval;
2. Parcels located within plats which were approved prior to their annexation
to the Village, unless Village water and/or sewer mains are located
adjacent to the parcel to which the application applies; and
3. Properties requiring building permits only for repairs or remodeling which
do not increase the number of dwelling units and which are not located
adjacent to a Village water or sewer main.
4. Any parcel for which the Director of Public Services determines that the
installation of the required sewer and water facilities prior to completion of
construction is adequately guaranteed by an agreement with the owner or
a developer satisfying all of the following requirements:
a. The agreement shall provide that if the utility installation is not
completed as promised, the Village may complete the installation at the
developer or owner’s expense. The promised completion date shall allow
sufficient time for the Village to design, solicit bids, contract for, and
complete the installation prior to the anticipated building completion date;
b. Performance by the developer or owner is guaranteed by a
cash deposit or letter of credit approved by the Village Administrator
allowing the Village to promptly realize on the security to pay any costs
incurred or to be incurred by the Village under subd. a;
c. The applicant for the building permit and property owner
execute the agreement, or a separate agreement, acknowledging and
agreeing that no occupancy permit will be issued for the proposed
building until all required utility services are established.
(c) The provisions of §12.01 shall apply to any property exempted under par. (b)1-
3.
[Am. 15-19, Eff. 05-01-15]
(5) REST ROOM FACILITIES AT CONSTRUCTION SITES.
(a) General. Except as provided in par. (b), every general contractor or other
person in charge of construction at a site for which a building permit is required under sub.
(1) shall provide portable restrooms as defined in Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 391.03(7),
14-5
which shall be available for unrestricted use by all contractors, subcontractors, material
suppliers, inspectors, architects, engineers, surveyors, the employees of any of the
foregoing, and any other persons lawfully on the site when any construction-related activity
is taking place. Such portable restrooms shall meet the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code
§SPS 362.2900(1)(a)3 and 391.13.
(b) Paragraph (a) shall not apply to any of the following:
1. Any site which has fully operational toilet facilities attached to a permanent
sanitary waste pipe which are available for the unrestricted use of the
persons described in par. (a) during all construction activities.
2. Any site located on the same block as, or if the site is not part of an
approved plat then within 600 feet of, another site where portable toilet
facilities are provided by the same contractor or person in charge of
construction, provided that at least one portable toilet shall be provided for
each 20 persons, or any fraction thereof, described in par. (a) who are
present, or are expected to be present, on all such sites at any one time.
3. Any site, the construction on which consists solely of a residential
remodeling project which does not render the permanent toilet facilities on
that site temporarily unavailable for more than 24 hours, provided that
adequate access to alternative facilities is available at all times to all
persons described in par. (a).
4. Any site served by other toilet facilities if determined by the building
inspector to be sufficient to meet the sanitation needs of all persons
described in par. (a).
[Cr. 06-03, Eff. 2-23-06]
(6) RECYCLING AND MANAGEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION WASTE. Every
general contractor or other person in charge of construction at a site for which a building
permit is required under sub. (1) shall assure that cardboard suitable for recycling is not
commingled with general waste or garbage at the site and is properly deposited for
recycling at an appropriate recycling facility. Such persons shall also assure that all
cardboard and other construction debris is stored and secured in such a manner as to
prevent it from being carried by wind or from becoming a place of harborage for rodents.
(7) PLANS. With such application there shall be submitted a complete set of plans
and specifications, including a plot plan showing the location of the proposed building with
respect to adjoining roads, highways, streets, alleys, lot lines and buildings. Plans for
buildings involving the State Building Code shall bear the stamp of approval of the State
Department Safety and Professional Services. One plan shall be submitted which shall
remain on file in the office of the Building Inspector. All plans and specifications shall be
signed by the designer. Plans for all new 1- and 2-family dwellings shall comply with the
provisions of Wis. Adm. Code §SPS 320.09(4).
(8) WAIVER OF PLANS. If the Building Inspector finds that the character of the
work is sufficiently described in the application, he may waive the filing of plans for
alterations, repairs or moving.
14-6
(9) APPROVAL OF PLANS. If the Building Inspector determines that the building
or structure will comply in every respect with all ordinances and orders of the Village and all
applicable laws and orders of the State of Wisconsin, and upon issuance of any required
zoning permit, he or she shall issue a building permit which shall state the use to which
said building is to be put, which shall be kept and displayed at the site of the proposed
building or structure. After being approved, the plans and specifications shall not be altered
in any respect which involves the safety of the building or the occupants, except with the
written consent of the Building Inspector. In case adequate plans are presented for part of
the building only, the Building Inspector, at his discretion, may issue a permit for that part of
the building before receiving the plans and specifications for the entire building. No work is
to be started unless a proper grade has been reviewed by the Public Works Department,
including the grade for sidewalks, curb and gutter, driveways and general construction.
(10) FEES FOR BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS.
(a) Fees established. Fees shall be paid by each applicant for a building permit.
The amount of fees shall be determined from time to time by the Village Board by
ordinance or resolution.
(b) Construction without permit. In the event any work is commenced prior to
obtaining a required permit, the fee for each such permit shall be twice the amount
established by the Village Board.
(c) Payment of Building Permit Fees.
1. General. Except as provided in subd. 2, building permit fees shall be paid at the
time of application. No application shall be entitled to review or approval unless
all applicable fees have been paid.
2. Defer of Permit Fees for Residential Development Events. Payment of permit
fees for construction of new residential structures for purposes of display as part
of a residential development showcase event, may be deferred until thirty (30)
days after the conclusion of the event or three (3) days after the closing of the
first sale of any dwelling unit in the structure, whichever occurs first.
Residential development events qualifying for permit fee deferral shall be
determined by the Zoning Administrator and shall include only events of regional
or greater scope which are designed primarily to display to the public examples
of new designs, fixtures, equipment, construction materials or methods, or other
features of construction in newly constructed, unoccupied residential dwelling
units. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any dwelling unit until the
applicable permit fees have been paid. Any permit fee not paid when due shall
be extended on the tax roll against the affected parcel as a special charge.
(11) INSPECTION OF WORK. (a) Initial Inspections and Issuance of Certificate of
Occupancy. The builder, permittee, or his or her agent, shall promptly notify the Building
Inspector when the construction is ready for any inspections required under this Code,
including any applicable inspections required by the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code and
the Wisconsin Commercial Building Code. Upon completing the final inspection, the
Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy if he or she finds that the work
conforms to the provisions of the building permit and all applicable codes and ordinances.
The certificate of occupancy shall contain the date and the result of such inspection, and a
14-7
duplicate certificate of occupancy shall be filed in the office of the Building Inspector. The
term “certificate of occupancy” is synonymous with the term “occupancy permit” used
elsewhere in other Chapters of this Code.
(b) Change in Occupancy or Use for Non-residential buildings and structures. The
provisions of this section (b) apply only to public buildings and places of employment as
defined under §101.01, Wis. Stats., but excluding residential buildings and structures.
1. Whenever there is a change in use or occupancy of a building or structure, a
new certificate of occupancy shall be required. The owner shall submit
notification of the changes in writing to the Building Inspector within five
working days of the change. The information shall consist of the following:
a. Name and address of occupancy;
b. Owner’s name, address and phone number(s);
c. Agent’s name, address and phone number(s);
d. A description of the nature of the change in use or occupancy; and,
e. Other information as required by the Building Inspector.
2. No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of any building or
structure, or any space within a building, structure, or space of a building or
structure either in a different division of the same occupancy group or in a
different occupancy group, unless the building or structure complies with the
requirement of this Chapter and Chapters 5 and 15 of this Code for the new
occupancy, other than temporary use changes or changes approved in
advance by the Fire Inspector and Building Inspector which result in a new
occupancy that will be less hazardous, based on life and fire risk, than the
existing use and which are permissible under the applicable zoning
restrictions.
3. An inspection by the Fire Inspector shall be required for any new or changed
use or occupancy, including temporary use changes. Upon an owner
submitting notification of a change in use or occupancy to the Building
Inspector, the Building Inspector shall promptly notify the Fire Inspector of
the notification and the need for an inspection by the Fire Inspector, who
shall promptly perform such inspection. Upon the Fire Inspector completing
his inspection, a new certificate of occupancy shall be issues by the Building
Inspector. The Building Inspector may also inspect the building or structure
prior to the issuance of the new certificate of occupancy.
4. Temporary Use. The Fire Inspector and Building Inspector may permit a
building or portion of a building to be used temporarily in a manner that
differs from the approved use for the building or space, or may approve a
14-8
temporary building to be used by the public, subject to all of the following
provisions:
a. The Fire Inspector and Building Inspector shall determine the timeframe
within which the temporary use is permitted, based on the extent to
which hazards are created by the temporary use.
b. The Fire Inspector shall enforce the maximum occupancy load as
determined by the Building Inspector.
c. The temporary use meets all applicable fire safety and zoning
requirements set forth in Chapters 5 and 15 of this Code.
(c) Fire Safety. The Fire Inspector may condition approval of a certificate of
occupancy and temporary use on the installation of fire protection and control devices, and
other life safety provisions that the Inspector shall determine reasonably necessary to
minimize the risk to the occupants from fire or explosion.
(12) CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED. No new building shall be
occupied or otherwise used prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(13) EROSION CONTROL REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTIFICATE OF
OCCUPANCY. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building constructed on
any site described in §24.07(1) of this Code unless there is in place:
(a) an entrance pad or similar controls as required by Chapter 24 or a finished
surface of asphalt, concrete or other appropriate material on all driveways servicing the
parcel; and
(b) the erosion control measures required by Chapter 24 or a covering of grass or
sod over all areas of soil sufficiently established so as to prevent erosion of the soil.
(14) REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate of
occupancy may be revoked by the Building Inspector when an owner or occupant of a
building or structure fails to comply with any corrective order issued by the Building
Inspector applicable to that building or structure.
(15) KEY BOX REQUIREMENTS. Prior to the issuance of any certificate of
occupancy, the Building Inspector shall ensure that the requirements of §5.51 of this Code
are satisfied.
(16) IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED FOR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. In
addition to all other requirements set forth in this Code for the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, the following requirements must be met prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for a property:
(a) The binder course (lower lift) of asphalt for the adjoining street and the sidewalk
abutting the property have been completed; and,
14-9
(b) The property owner has repaired or replaced, in compliance with Village
specifications, all public improvements damaged by or resulting from the construction of the
building or structure. The term “public improvements” includes, but is not limited to,
grading, groundcover, utility infrastructure, street terrace trees, sidewalks, and street curbs.
(17) DURATION OF BUILDING PERMITS.
(a) Permit Lapse. A building permit shall lapse and be void unless building
operations are commenced within 6 months of the issuance of the building permit, or if
construction has not been completed within one year from the issuance of the building
permit.
(b) Permit Extension. An application for an extension of a building permit may be
submitted to the Building Inspector no less than 14 days prior to the lapse of the issued
building permit. If approved, the extension shall be for 6 months, and a building permit may
be extended only one time. If the permit applicant has altered the building plans then an
additional plan review fee shall be submitted with the application for the extension. If
construction standards have changed during the term of the original building permit, the
new standards will apply for the extended building permit, and the permit applicant may be
subject to additional fees if additional inspections or plan reviews are necessary.
[Am. 17-16, Eff. 06-06-17]
(18) REVOCATION OF BUILDING PERMITS. If the Building Inspector shall find at
any time that applicable ordinances, laws, orders, plans and specifications are not being
complied with, and that the holder of the permit refused to conform after written warning or
instruction has been issued to him, he shall revoke the building, electrical or plumbing
permit by written notice posted at the site of the work. When any such permit is revoked, it
shall be unlawful to do any further work thereunder until the permit is reissued, except such
work as the Building Inspector may order to be done as a condition precedent to the
reissuance of the permit or as he may require for the preservation of human life and safety.
The Building Inspector shall revoke any permit or certificate issued under this
chapter in any case where he or she finds that there has been false statement or
misrepresentation of any material fact in the application or plans on which the issuance was
based.
(19) REPORT OF VIOLATIONS. The police or other Village officers shall report at
once to the Building Inspector any building which is being carried on without a permit as
required by this chapter.
14.06 STATE CODES ADOPTED.
(1) WISCONSIN COMMERCIAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED. Wis. Admin. Code
§SPS. 361 to 366 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter with
respect to those classes of buildings to which said Chs. 361 to 366 specifically apply. Any
future amendments, revisions and modifications of said administrative code incorporated
herein are intended to be made a part of this code. A copy of said Chs. 361 to 366 and
amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector.
(2) WISCONSIN UNIFORM DWELLING CODE ADOPTED. Wis. Admin. Code
§SPS 320 to 325, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter and
14-10
shall apply to all new 1- and 2-family dwellings, all additions to existing and new 1- and 2-
family dwellings, and all remodeling or alterations to existing 1- and 2- family dwellings. Any
further amendments, revisions and modifications of said administrative code incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this code. A copy of said Chs. 320 to 325 and
amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector.
14.07 GARAGES. Private garages shall be built in accordance with the general
construction standards established in the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, and the
applicable standards in Chapter 15 of this Code. Whenever a garage is constructed as part
of any building, the ceiling and the walls or wall separating the garage from other portions
of the building shall be of not less than 45 minute fire-resistive construction as specified in
Wis. Adm. Code §SPS 321.
14.08 BASEMENTS. First floor subflooring shall be completed within 60 days
after the basement is excavated.
14.09 NEW METHODS AND MATERIALS. All materials, methods of construction
and devices designed for use in buildings or structures covered by this code and not
specifically mentioned in or permitted by this code shall not be so used until approved in
writing by the State Department of Safety and Professional Services. Such materials,
methods of construction and devices, when approved, must be installed or used in strict
compliance with the manufacturer's specifications and any rules or conditions of use
established by the State Department of Safety and Professional Services. The date, tests
and other evidence necessary to prove the merits of such material, method of construction
or device shall be determined by the State Department of Safety and Professional
Services.
14.10 SIGNS.
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. No sign, other than a sign excepted by §15.08(2) of this
Code, shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged,
converted or structurally altered until a sign permit is issued by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator and a building permit is obtained from the Building Inspector.
(2) FEES. The sign permit fees shall be determined from time to time by the
Village Board by ordinance or resolution.
(3) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS. All signs shall conform with the provisions of
§15.08 of this Code.
14.11 UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND MOVING BUILDINGS.
(1) UNSAFE BUILDINGS. Whenever the Building Inspector finds any building or part
thereof within the Village to be in his judgment so old, dilapidated or so out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use,
and so that it would be unreasonable to repair the same, he shall order the owner to raze
and remove it at the owner's option. Such order and proceedings shall be carried out in the
manner prescribed for the razing of buildings in §66.0413, Wis. Stats. Where the public
safety requires immediate action, the Building Inspector shall enter upon the premises with
such assistance as may be necessary, and cause the building or structure to be made safe
14-11
or to be removed, and the expenses of such work may be recovered by the Village in an
action against the owner or tenant.
(2) MOVING BUILDINGS. See §7.11 of this Code.
14.12 OUTDOOR FURNACES REGULATED.
(1) DEFINITION. As used in this section, “Outdoor Furnace” means any device,
equipment or apparatus designed for the combustion of solid fuel for purposes of providing
indoor heat and/or heated water to any building or other structure, which is located outside
of the building or structure.
(2) LOCATION RESTRICTIONS. No outdoor furnace shall be constructed,
installed or operated except on parcels larger than 20 acres and zoned in the A-1, A-1X
and A-2 Agricultural District or the C-1 Conservancy District. The Village Board may
condition any land division on the removal of any outdoor furnace located on any parcel
proposed to consist of less than 20 acres as a result of the land division.
(3) INSTALLATION STANDARDS. The following standards shall apply to permitted
outdoor furnaces.
(a) No outdoor furnace shall be located nearer than 200 feet from any property
line.
(b) No outdoor furnace shall be located nearer than 200 feet from any building
intended for human occupancy other than the building served by the furnace.
(c) All outdoor furnaces shall be installed in accordance with all manufacturer’s
recommendations.
(d) All outdoor furnaces shall be installed upon a nominal four (4) inch permanent
concrete pad of such dimensions as to allow for not less than six (6) inches of exposed
surface area around the entire perimeter of the pad.
(e) Installation of any electrical or plumbing apparatus or device used in connection
with the operation of the outdoor furnace shall comply with all applicable electrical and
plumbing codes.
(f) All outdoor furnaces shall be equipped with a properly functioning spark arrestor.
(4) USE AND OPERATION. All outdoor furnaces shall be used and operated in
accordance with the following restrictions:
(a) All outdoor furnaces shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer’s
directions, except as otherwise provided herein.
(b) No industrial waste, rubber, plastic, used motor oil, toxic chemicals, hazardous
waste, yard waste, painted or chemically treated wood, processed wood products,
household garbage, cardboard, waste paper or animal waste shall be burned in an outdoor
furnace.
14-12
(c) Outdoor furnace shall not be operated between May 31 and the next following
September 1.
(d) Outdoor furnaces shall not be operated in a manner that produces excessive
smoke, dust or odors.
(e) Outdoor furnaces shall meet all applicable state and federal emission
standards.
(5) PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall install, construct or connect to any
building in the Village, any outdoor furnace without first obtaining a building permit from the
Building Inspector and paying the applicable fee.
(6) PENALTIES. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $200 for a first offense. The
forfeiture for a second and subsequent offenses shall be not less than $200 nor more than
$500. Forfeitures assessed under this section shall be in addition to court costs and any
additional assessments provided by law.
14.13 SWIMMING POOLS REGULATED. Permits for swimming pools shall be
issued as provided in §15.04(14) of this Code.
14.14 DISCLAIMER ON INSPECTIONS. The purpose of the inspections under
this code is to improve the quality of buildings and structures in the Village. The inspections
and the reports and findings issued after the inspections are not intended as, nor are they
to be construed, as a guarantee. In order to so advise owners and other interested
persons, a disclaimer shall be included in each inspection report as follows: "The findings of
inspection contained herein are intended to report conditions of noncompliance with code
standards and are readily apparent at the time of inspection. The inspection does not
involve a detailed examination of the mechanical systems or the closed structural and
nonstructural elements of the building and premises. No warranty of the operation, use or
durability of equipment and materials not specifically cited herein is expressed or implied."
14.15 PENALTIES AND VIOLATIONS. Any building or structure hereafter
erected, enlarged, altered, repaired or moved, or any use hereafter established, in violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an unlawful building, structure or use. The
Building Inspector shall promptly report all such violations to the Village Attorney, who shall
bring an action to enjoin the erection, enlargement, alteration, repair or moving of such
building or structure or the establishment of such use, or to cause such building, structure
or use to be removed and may also be subject to a penalty as provided in §20.04 of this
Code. In any such action, the fact that a permit was issued shall not constitute a defense,
nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the Building Inspector
constitute a defense. Compliance with the provisions of this subchapter may also be
enforced by injunctional order at the suit of the owner or owners of any real estate within
the jurisdiction of this subchapter.
14-13
SUBCHAPTER II: PLUMBING CODE
14.16 DEFINITIONS. As used in this subchapter:
(1) "Cross connection" means a connection or potential connection between any
part of a water supply system and another environment containing substances in a manner
that, under any circumstances, would allow the substances to enter the water supply
system by means of back siphonage or back pressure.
(2) “Plumbing” includes:
(a) All plumbing as defined in§145.01(10) Wis. Stats.
(b) The construction, connection to or alteration of any drain, soil or waste pipe to
carry domestic sewage, storm water or industrial waste from a point 3 feet outside of the
foundation walls of any building to the sewer lateral at the curb or other disposal terminal
including the private sewage disposal or treatment plant.
(c) Plumbing does not include minor repairs to faucets and the removal of
stoppages in soil or waste pipes.
14.17 STATE CODE ADOPTED. The provisions and regulations of Ch. 145, Wis.
Stats., and Wis. Admin. Code §SPS 381 to 383, are hereby made a part of this subchapter
by reference and shall extend over and govern all plumbing installed, altered or repaired in
the Village. Any further amendments, revisions and modifications of said statutes and
administrative code incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this subchapter.
14.18 PLUMBING SUPERVISOR, POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Building Inspector:
(a) shall act as the plumbing supervisor and shall perform such duties as are
provided for in §145.05(1), Wis. Stats., and this code and shall make reports to the Village
Board when requested.(b) shall enforce all of the provisions of this subchapter and shall
prepare suitable forms for applications, permits and reports.
(c) shall be certified by the Department of Safety and Professional Services to
make the necessary inspections to enforce the plumbing section of the Wisconsin Uniform
Dwelling Code.
(d) may enter all buildings in the performance of the foregoing duties during
reasonable hours and no person shall willfully or knowingly resist or obstruct the Building
Inspector in the performance of those duties.
(e) may withhold approval of an application for a plumbing permit to any person
who has not complied with a lawful order of the Building Inspector. Any person refused
such a permit may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within the time permitted by the
rules of said board.
(f) make periodic inspections as provided in §14.22 to identify unapproved crossconnections
and issue appropriate orders in connection therewith.
14-14
14.19 APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS.
(1) For new construction, no plumbing shall be installed in the Village without first
filing a complete set of plans with the Building Inspector and receiving a permit. Licensed
master plumbers only may receive such permits, except that a permit may be issued to a
property owner to repair, maintain or install plumbing in a single family residence which is
owned and occupied as the primary residence of such owner.
(2) A permit shall be applied for and received before commencing any plumbing or
excavating in any street, alley or other public way to repair, alter or install plumbing.
14.20 INSPECTION OF WORK. The plumber in charge shall notify the Building
Inspector whenever any work is ready for inspection (i.e., soil, vent, underground drain,
final inspection). All plumbing work shall be left exposed until such time as the Inspector
has completed his examination and inspection. When, in the opinion of the Inspector, a test
in addition to any test required under the Wisconsin Administrative Code is necessary, he
may require a water or air test in any part of or the entire installation.
14.21 CONNECTIONS TO SANITARY SEWER AND WATER SYSTEMS. No
outhouse, privy or vault shall be built, constructed or maintained upon any lot or part of a lot
in the Village. The owners of all lots and parts of lots in the Village where privies are now
used shall connect with the sanitary sewer and water systems in such manner as
prescribed by the Building Inspector and all privies shall be removed from said lots. Such
privies are hereby declared to be a nuisance and a menace to health.
All plumbing, as defined in this subchapter, within the Village shall connect properly
with the sanitary sewer and water mains of the Village, where such mains are available in a
street, alley or public way adjoining the lot or lots upon which such plumbing exists. All
septic tanks shall be removed or emptied and filled with earth. Shutoff valves shall be
installed at inlet and outlet points at each meter. Each dwelling unit or business must have
a separate water service connection to the water mains.
14.22 CROSS-CONNECTIONS. (1) Regulation. No person shall establish,
maintain, authorize or permit the existence of an unprotected cross-connection as defined
by Wis. Admin. Code §NR811.02, in or upon any property owned or controlled by such
person, unless such cross-connection is protected in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code
§SPS382.41.
(2) Inspections and Compliance Program.
(a) Non-Residential Inspections. The Building Inspector shall periodically inspect
all non-residential buildings and premises served by the Village Water Utility for
unprotected cross-connections, and shall order all such cross-connections to be
immediately eliminated. The Building Inspector shall comply with the inspection and
compliance procedures outlined in the “Village of DeForest Water Utility Cross-Connection
Control Program Manual” dated December 17, 2013 on file with the Village Clerk. The
Inspector shall keep a record of each such inspection, all orders issued under this section
and all follow-up compliance inspections performed. Copies of all inspection records and
other documents relating to cross-connection compliance shall be promptly filed with the
DeForest Water Utility. Inspections shall be conducted at least annually, and at such other
14-15
times as provided in the Cross-Connection Control Program Manual. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, if the Director of Public Services determines that any commercial property poses
a risk similar to, or less than, residential properties, he or she may waive the inspection
requirement under this paragraph and cause inspections of such property to be made
pursuant to par. (b). The Director shall keep a record of each such designation and file a
copy with the water utility.
(b) Residential Inspections. The Director of Public Services, or a qualified
employee of the Water Utility, shall inspect all residential structures served by the Utility
whenever any water meter is removed, replaced or serviced, whenever he or she has
reason to believe an unprotected cross-connection exists, at other times when requested
by the property owner and otherwise as required by the adopted Cross-Connection Control
Program Manual. A record of each such inspection shall be maintained by the Utility. The
inspecting employee shall order the immediate elimination of all unprotected crossconnections.
(c) Public Education. The Director of Public Services shall assure that public
educational materials as provided in the adopted Cross-Connection Control Program
Manual are distributed to all Water Utility customers on or before January 31, 2014 and
thereafter to each new customer upon the establishment of a new service account. The
materials shall also be made available to the public on the Village’s website at all times and
shall be provided to existing customers in written form at least once every 3 years.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(3) Inspection Fees. Inspection fees shall be charged to owners of non-residential
properties in an amount determined by the Village Board by resolution to reflect the actual
cost to the Village of providing each inspection under sub. (1)(a). Inspection fees shall not
apply to inspections conducted by the Water Utility under sub. (1)(b).
(4) Discontinuation of Water Service. In addition to all other penalties for violation
of this section, the Director of Public Services shall cause the discontinuation of public
water service, after reasonable notice, to any property which:
(a) contains a cross-connection prohibited by this section; or
(b) for which an inspection could not be completed due to denial of access by the
owner or person in control of the premises.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
14.23 CLEAR WATERS.
(1) DISCHARGE. No person shall cause, allow or permit any roof drain, surface
drain, sub-soil drain, drain from any mechanical device, gutter, ditch, pipe, conduit, sump
pump, or any other object or thing used for the purposes of collecting, conducting,
transporting, diverting, draining or discharging clear water from any part of any private
premises owned or occupied by said person to discharge into a sanitary sewer.
(2) NUISANCE. The discharge into a sanitary sewer from any roof drain, surface
drain, sub-soil drain, drain from any mechanical device, gutter, ditch, pipe, conduit, sump
pump or any other object or thing used for the purposes of collecting, conducting,
14-16
transporting, diverting, draining or discharging clear water from any part of any private
premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a hazard to the health, safety and
well-being of the residents of the Village and to the protection of property.
(3) GROUND WATER. Where deemed necessary by the Building Inspector, every
house shall have a sump pump installed for the purpose of discharging clear waters from
foundation drains and ground infiltration and where the building is not serviced by a storm
sewer shall either discharge into an underground conduit leading to a drainage ditch,
gutter, dry well, or shall discharge onto the ground surface in such other manner as will not
constitute a nuisance as defined herein.
(3m) DRAIN TILES. Every basement excavated after the effective date of this
section shall have a drain tile system constructed according to the specifications of Ch.
Comm. Wis. Admin. Code.
(4) STORM WATER. All roof drains, surface drains, drains from any mechanical
device, gutters, pipe, conduits or any other objects or things used for the purpose of
collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining or discharging storm waters shall be
discharged either into a storm sewer, a dry well, an underground conduit leading to a
drainage ditch or onto the ground surface in such other manner as will not constitute a
nuisance as defined herein.
(5) STORM SEWER LATERAL. Where municipal storm sewers are provided and it
is deemed necessary by the property owner and/or the Village to discharge clear waters
from a parcel of land, a storm sewer lateral shall be installed and connected to the storm
sewer main at the expense of the owner.
(6) CONDUCTING TESTS. If the Building Inspector or his designated agent
suspects an illegal clear water discharge, as defined by this code or by any other applicable
provision of the Wisconsin Administrative Code as it may from time to time be amended, he
may, upon reasonable notice and at reasonable times, enter the private premises where
such illegal clear water discharge is suspected and conduct appropriate tests to determine
whether such suspected illegal clear water discharge actually exists.
(7) COMPLIANCE AND PENALTY. Any person determined to be in violation of
any provision of this subsection shall be given a written notice stating the nature of such
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. Any
person who shall continue any violation beyond the foregoing time limits shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties of §20.04 of this Code.
14.24 GREASE SEPARATORS. Grease catch basins or separators of a capacity
based upon the temperature and the amount of the water tributary shall be installed
wherever kitchen or other greasy wastes from hotels, restaurants, club houses, boarding
houses, public or private institutions, hospitals or similar places are discharged into a public
sewer or private sewage disposal system. Garbage disposal units shall not be tributary to
grease catch basins or interceptors.
14.25 DUPLEX SERVICE CONNECTIONS. Each unit of a duplex shall have
separate water and sewer services.
14-17
14.26 DISCLAIMER ON INSPECTIONS. The purpose of the inspections under
this code is to improve the quality of buildings and structures in the Village. The inspections
and the reports and findings issued after the inspections are not intended as, nor are they
to be construed, as a guarantee. In order to so advise owners and other interested
persons, a disclaimer shall be included in each inspection report as follows: "The findings of
inspection contained herein are intended to report conditions of noncompliance with code
standards and are readily apparent at the time of inspection. The inspection does not
involve a detailed examination of the mechanical systems or the closed structural and
nonstructural elements of the building and premises. No warranty of the operation, use or
durability of equipment and materials not specifically cited herein is expressed or implied."
14.27 PENALTY. In addition to the penalties specifically provided in this
subchapter, any person who shall violate any provision of this subchapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in §20.04 of this Code.
SUBCHAPTER III: ELECTRICAL CODE
14.28 ELECTRICAL PERMITS AND INSPECTION.
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. No electrical work shall be installed in any building or any
part thereof within the Village until a permit therefor shall first have been obtained by an
electrical contractor or by the owner of the premises, except that repairs or replacement of
broken or defective sockets, switches or base receptacles may be made without a permit.
(2) APPLICATION. Application for an electrical permit shall be made in writing
upon a form furnished by the Building Inspector and shall state the name and address of
the owner of the premises and the name and address of the electrical contractor.
(3) PLANS. With such application, there shall be submitted a set of plans and
specifications showing, in detail, the electrical work for which a permit is requested. If the
Building Inspector finds that the character of the work is sufficiently described in the
application, he may waive the filing of plans for alterations or repairs.
(4) APPROVAL OF PLANS. Upon the approval of the plans by the Building
Inspector, he shall issue an electrical permit.
(5) INSPECTION OF WORK. (a) The Building Inspector shall act as Electrical
Inspector. The Electrical Inspector, as certified by the Department of Safety and
Professional Services, is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all the
provisions of this code.
(b) The contractor shall notify the Building Inspector when ready for inspection and
the Building Inspector shall inspect all electrical work when completed. All electrical wiring
and installations shall be left exposed until such time as the Building Inspector has
completed his inspection. No electrical service shall be connected by a power company
until a notarized affidavit stating that the final electrical inspection has been made and
approved has been filed with the Building Inspector. No building where electrical service
has been cut off due to fire shall be reconnected until authorized by the Building Inspector.
14-18
If the Building Inspector shall determine that the work has not done been in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter, the contractor shall correct the same within 10 days
after receiving notice thereof. If the defective work has not been corrected within 10 days,
the Building Inspector shall cancel the permit until the provisions of this subchapter have
been complied with.
(6) APPEAL. In the event the electrical contractor disagrees with the decision of
the Building Inspector, he may appeal such decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals within
5 days after receiving the decision of the Building Inspector. The Board shall fix a date for
hearing on said appeal and shall notify both the contractor and the Building Inspector of the
time of said hearing which shall be not more than 20 days after the appeal has been taken.
At the hearing, both the contractor and the Building Inspector may present such evidence
as they deem necessary and the Board shall render its decision promptly.
14.29 STATE CODE ADOPTED.
(1) Wis. Adm. Code §SPS 324 is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this subchapter and shall apply to the construction and inspection of new 1- and 2-family
dwellings and additions or modifications to existing 1- and 2-family dwellings.
(2) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. SPS 316 and Wis. Adm. Code Ch. PSC 114 are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
[Am. 19-003, Eff. 2-16-19]
(3) Any further amendments, revisions and modifications of said code and rules
incorporated therein are intended to be made a part of this subchapter.
14.30 100 AMP. SERVICE REQUIRED. Each residential dwelling unit shall have
a minimum 100 amp. service.
14.31 OUTSIDE WATER METER WIRING. Wiring for each water meter shall be
provided for outside meter reading.
14.32 PENALTY. In addition to the penalties specifically provided in this
subchapter, any person who shall violate any provision of this subchapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in §20.04 of this Code.
14.33 DISCLAIMER ON INSPECTIONS. The purpose of the inspections under
this code is to improve the quality of housing in the Village. The inspection and the reports
and findings issued after the inspections are not intended as, nor are they to be construed
as a guarantee. In order to so advise owners and other interested persons, a disclaimer
shall be included in each inspection report as follows: "The findings of inspection contained
herein are intended to report conditions of noncompliance with code standards that are
readily apparent at the time of inspection. The inspection does not involve a detailed
examination of the mechanical systems or the closed structural and nonstructural elements
of the building and premises. No warranty of the operation, use, or durability of equipment
and materials not specifically cited herein is expressed or implied.
15-1
CHAPTER 15
ZONING CODE
15.01 SCOPE AND INTERPRETATION. ...................................................................................................... 1
15.02 DEFINITIONS. .................................................................................................................................... 3
15.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. ..................................................................................... 18
15.035 EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONING ADMINISTRATION. ..................................................................... 23
15.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS.................................................................................................................. 25
15.05 SITE PLAN REVIEW. ........................................................................................................................ 43
15.06 LANDSCAPE PLANS. ...................................................................................................................... 58
15.065 LIGHTING PLANS AND STANDARDS. .......................................................................................... 67
15.07 OFF-STREET PARKING, ACCESS, LOADING. .............................................................................. 68
15.08 SIGN PERMITS. ................................................................................................................................ 77
15.09 ZONING DISTRICTS; MAPS. ......................................................................................................... 100
15.10 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. ........................................................................................................... 101
15.105 RESIDENTIAL MIX - BUSINESS DISTRICT.................................................................................. 109
15.11 BUSINESS DISTRICTS. .................................................................................................................. 116
15.115 OFFICE AND RESEARCH DISTRICT. .......................................................................................... 131
15.12 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS. .............................................................................................................. 139
15.13 A-1 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT. ..................................................................................................... 155
15.131 A-I EXCLUSIVE AGRICULTURE DISTRICT. .............................................................................. 157
15.132 A-2 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT. ................................................................................................... 159
15.14 C-1 CONSERVANCY DISTRICT. ................................................................................................... 163
15.15 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) DISTRICT .................................................................. 166
15.155 WP WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT ............................................................... 177
15.17 NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS. ................................................................ 189
15.01 SCOPE AND INTERPRETATION.
(1) TITLE. This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to or cited as the “DeForest Zoning
Code.”
(2) INTENT AND PURPOSE. This chapter, in conjunction with the Village Master Plan, is intended to
serve the following purposes:
(a) To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
(b) To promote the public health, safety, comfort, and general welfare;
(c) To conserve the values of property throughout the village and neighboring areas and to protect the
character and stability of residential, business, and industrial areas, and to promote the orderly and beneficial
development of such areas;
15-2
(d) To prevent the overcrowding of land;
(e) To avoid undue concentration of population;
(f) To provide adequate light, air, privacy, and convenience of access to property;
(g) To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other
public requirements;
(h) To lessen or avoid congestion in the public streets and highways;
(i) To encourage the protection of groundwater resources;
(j) To lessen or avoid hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from the accumulation or
runoff of storm or flood waters;
(k) To regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, location and use of
buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, and other uses, and to regulate and restrict the
intensity of such uses;
(l) To divide the village areas subject to this chapter into districts of such number, shape, area, and of
such different classes, according to the use of land and buildings, and the intensity of such use, as best suited
to carry out the purpose of this chapter; and
(m) To prohibit uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the character of the respective districts.
(3) JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY. This chapter shall apply to all lands, water and property within
the corporate limits of the Village, including those owned by other municipal corporations and governmental
bodies, and to all lands within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the Village when approved by the joint
committee having authority over such lands. This chapter is adopted under the authority provided by §62.23,
Wis. Stats.
(4) SCOPE OF REGULATIONS. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no building, structure,
or land shall be used or occupied, and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter
governing the zoning district in which it is located. No lot shall be created which does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter for the zoning district in which the land is located.
(5) RELATIONSHIP TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The Village Comprehensive Plan shall have
the force and affect ascribed to it by §66.1001 and §62.23, Wis. Stats. The decision as to whether and when
particular elements of the Comprehensive Plan will be implemented by regulatory ordinances is reserved for
the Village Board to make from time to time taking into account, among other factors, the type of development
that is contemplated and the timing of such development in the context of the public interest of the Village as a
whole, under the circumstances then existing and reasonably anticipated in the future.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(6) RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. The following rules shall apply in construing or interpreting the
terms and provisions of this chapter:
(a) The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the minimum requirements for the promotion and
protection of the public health, safety and general welfare, and shall be construed to achieve the purposes for
which this chapter is adopted.
(b) This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing
easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits previously
15-3
adopted or issued pursuant to law. In any case where the conditions, standards, or requirements imposed by
this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable standards imposed by any other
restriction, the provisions which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall
govern.
(c) In the event there is any conflict in the limitations, requirements, or standards contained within this
chapter as applied to an individual use or structure, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
(d) In the event of a conflict between the text of this chapter and any caption, figure, illustration, table or
map contained or referred to herein, the text shall control.
(e) The word "shall" is mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply with the
particular provision. The word "may" is permissive in nature.
(f) Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number
include the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the
particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the masculine gender include the neuter and
feminine gender.
(7) EFFECT ON UNLAWFUL STRUCTURES AND USES. No building, structure or use which was not
lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of
the adoption of this chapter; and to the extent that, and in any manner that, said unlawful building, structure, or
use is in conflict with the requirements of this chapter, it remains unlawful hereunder.
(8) SEVERABILITY. The various provisions of this chapter are intended to be severable. If any
section, paragraph, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(9) EFFECTIVE DATE. This chapter shall be effective on May 8, 1998.
15.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning:
(1) ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. A subordinate building or use which is located on the same lot
on which the principal building or use is situated, and which is reasonably necessary and clearly incidental to
the permitted use of the principal building or the conduct of the principal use permitted by district regulations.
(2) ADDITION. A structural expansion to an existing building.
(2M) ADULT ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS. Businesses defined and regulated by §9.015 of the
DeForest Municipal Code including:
(a) "Adult Bath House" means an establishment or business which provides the service of baths of all
kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy, that is not operated by a medical practitioner or a
professional physical therapist licensed by the State of Wisconsin and which establishment provides to its
customers an opportunity for engaging in specified sexual activities as defined in §9.015(1)(qq).
(b) "Adult Body Painting Studio" means an establishment or business wherein customers are afforded
an opportunity to paint images on a body which is wholly or partially nude.
(c) "Adult Bookstore" means an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock
and trade in books, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
15-4
as defined herein. The term includes an establishment having as its stock in trade, for sale, rent, trade, lease,
inspection or viewing books, films, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, computers or computer
programs in any format, motion pictures, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, and in conjunction therewith have facilities for the presentation of adult
entertainment, including adult-oriented videotapes, films, motion pictures or other offered entertainment for
observation by customers therein. The term includes a commercial establishment that, as one of its principal
business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration instruments, devices, or paraphernalia
that are designed for use in connection with “specified sexual activities.”
(d) "Adult Cabaret" means a nightclub, dance hall, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment that regularly features:
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or
2. Live performances that are characterized by “specified sexual activities”; or
3. Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic or computer reproductions
or depictions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities”
or “nudity”.
(e) "Adult Entertainment" means any exhibition of any motion pictures, live performance, display or
dance of any type, wherein a significant or substantial portion of such performance is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on any actual or simulated performance of specified sexual activities, the
exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical areas, or the removal of articles of clothing to reveal specified
anatomical areas.
(f) "Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater" means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty
(50) customers, including establishments that have coin operated video or motion picture booths, used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein for observation by customers
therein.
(g) "Adult Motel" means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which:
1. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides customers with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
2. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
3. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is
less than ten (10) hours.
(h) "Adult Motion Picture Theater" means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more
persons at which a significant or substantial portion of the material presented is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by customers therein.
(i) "Adult Motion Picture Theater (Outdoor)" means a parcel of land from which individuals may view a
motion picture presented out of doors which presents material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas for
observation by customers.
15-5
(j) "Adult Novelty Shop" means an establishment or business having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock and trade in novelty or similar items which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or for simulation of the foregoing.
(k) Any other establishment which includes, but is not limited to, adult theaters, sexual encounter
centers, escort agencies, establishments featuring live sexually explicit performances, and any premises to
which public customers or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged so as to
provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common area of the premises for
the purposes of viewing adult oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment
to a member of the public, a customer or a member, whether or not such adult entertainment is held,
conducted, operated or maintained for profit, direct or indirect. An adult oriented establishment further includes,
without being limited to, any adult entertainment studio or any premises that is physically arranged and used as
such whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio,
encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other term of like import.
(L) "Adult Oriented Establishment" shall not include:
1. theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet,
music and dramatic performances of serious artistic, social or political merit are offered on a
regular basis; and in which the predominant business or attraction is not the offering of
entertainment which is intended for the sexual interests or titillation of customers; and where the
establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on or the advertising or promotion of nude or
semi-nude performances; or
2. any public or private school, as defined in Chapter 115, Wis. Stats., when instructing pupils as
part of its curriculum.
[Cr. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06]
(2s) AGRICULTURAL USE. Any of the following activities conducted for the purpose of producing an
income or livelihood:
(a) Crop or forage production.
(b) Keeping livestock.
(c) Beekeeping.
(d) Nursery, sod, or Christmas tree production.
(e) Floriculture.
(f) Aquaculture.
(g) Fur farming.
(h) Forest management.
(i) Enrolling land in a federal agricultural commodity payment program or a federal or state agricultural
land conservation payment program.
[cr. 15-044; Eff. 12-24-15]
(2u) AGRICULTURAL ACCESSORY USE. Any of the following land uses on a farm:
(a) A building, structure, or improvement that is an integral part of, or is incidental to, an agricultural
use.
(b) An activity or business operation that is an integral part of, or incidental to, an agricultural use.
(c) A farm residence.
(d) A business, activity, or enterprise, whether or not associated with an agricultural use, that is
conducted by the owner or operator of a farm, that requires no buildings, structures, or improvements other
15-6
than those described in par. (a) or (c), that employs no more than 4 full-time employees annually, and that
does not impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of the farm or of other protected farmland. Such
activities may include, but are not limited to:
1. Sale of agricultural and dairy products not produced on the premises and incidental sale of nonalcoholic
beverages and snacks.
2. The seasonal storage of recreational equipment and motor vehicles owned by private
individuals other than those residing on the premises, but not including the storage of a dealer's
inventory.
3. Agricultural entertainment activities exceeding 45 days per year, in aggregate, or events
planned or anticipated to attract 200 or more persons per day.
4. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm
machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities, occurring on more
than five days in a calendar year.
5. Horse boarding stables, riding stables, hay and sleigh rides, and horse training facilities,
including the sale of bridles, saddles, grooming supplies and related items at a horse boarding or riding
stable facility.
[cr. 15-044; Eff. 12-24-15]
(3) ALLEY. A narrow public right-of-way, not over 20 feet in width, which is used primarily as a means
of access to the rear of residences or business establishments and which affords only a secondary means of
access to the property abutting along its length.
(4) ALTERATION. Any change in, addition to, or modification of a building or structure.
(4a) ANIMAL UNIT. One animal unit shall be defined as being the equivalent of 1 cow, 4 hogs, 10
sheep, 10 goats, 100 poultry, 1 horse, 1 pony, 1 mule or 100 rabbits or an equivalent combination thereof.
Other animals not listed above shall be assigned an animal unit equivalent by the Zoning Administrator based
on their typical adult weight.
[Cr. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(4m) AQUIFER. A saturated, permeable, geologic formation that contains, and will yield, significant
quantities of water.
[Cr. 13-006, Eff. 4-4-13]
(5) ARTERIAL. A public street that serves longer intra-urban trips and traffic traveling through the
urban area and has limited to no direct access for abutting land uses, including any public street designated as
an arterial street within the Village’s comprehensive plan.
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11]
(6) AWNING. A movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and of a type
which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the supporting building.
(7) [Repealed 08-27; Eff. 8-22-08]
(8) BUILDING. Any covered structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, chattels or
movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land.
(9) BUILDING BULK REGULATIONS: Restrictions controlling the size of buildings or other structures
and the relationship of buildings, structures and uses to each other and to open areas and lot lines, including
restrictions controlling height, lot coverage, floor area ratio and size of yards.
15-7
(10) BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the mean elevation of a finished lot
grade along the front of a building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or the deck of a mansard roof,
or to the mean level between the eaves and the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, or to the highest point of
a shed roof.
(11) BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. Any building in which a primary or independent use of the lot on which it
is located is conducted.
(12) BUILDING COVERAGE. The percentage of the building area in relation to the total lot area.
(12j) CAMPGROUND. A parcel or tract of land, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of
supplying temporary or overnight living accommodations to the public by providing designated areas for the
placement of trailers, tents, buses, recreational vehicles, camping cabins, yurts, automobiles, or sleeping bags,
and which may include buildings to provide services to the patrons such as restrooms, bathing, laundry,
playgrounds, pools, convenience product purchase, and commissary facilities.
(12m) CAMPING. Human habitation of a camping cabin, camping unit or resort cabin.
(12o) CAMPING CABIN. A camping unit that is a hard sided tent, shelter, or yurt, which is designed to
be moveable.
(12p) CAMPING UNIT. Any structure, equipment, or vehicle intended for temporary sleeping
accommodations for recreation or travel, not more than 400 square feet in area, including recreational vehicles
(RV’s), camping trailer, pick-up trucks with sleeper attachments, motor homes, camping trailers, tents, park
models, camping cabins, and similar equipment.
(12q) CAMP SITE. A clearly signed piece of land within a camp ground that provides a location for
camping units(s), with its location delineated on a campground site plan map.
(12r) CAMPING TRAILER. A folding structure mounted on wheels and designed to be transported and
stored in a collapsed position and opened to create usable dwelling space at a destination where it is used for
travel, recreation, vacation or other temporary uses.
(13) CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate issued by the building inspector after final
inspection, when it is found that the building, structure and/or development complies with all requirements of
this chapter, other applicable chapters of the Code, and Village approved plans.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(14) CLASS 1 OR CLASS 2 NOTICE. A notice published in accordance with the requirements of a
class 1 or class 2 notice under Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(14C) CLUSTER BOX UNIT. A U.S. Postal Service-approved centralized mail receptacle designed for
the placement of delivered mail for eight or more housing units or tenant spaces in a single building or
development.
(14J) COLLECTOR. A public street that collects and distributes internal traffic within an urban area,
such as within a residential neighborhood, providing access between local and arterial streets and limited
access for abutting land uses, including any public street designated as a collector street within the Village’s
comprehensive plan.
[Cr. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11]
(14M) COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT. Any lot or portion thereof which is designed or intended to
provide a place for the parking of automobiles, trucks, trailers, recreational vehicles, motorcycles or other
motorized vehicles while the operator thereof pursues activities away from the premises. “Commercial Parking
15-8
Lot” shall not include any parking area which is designed and used exclusively to satisfy the off street parking
requirements established by this Code.
(15) COMMON OPEN SPACE. Land that is devoid of structures, other than recreational facilities, and
that is suitable and made available for use by the general public or occupants of all occupants of a planned unit
development or other multiple-owner development, for active and passive recreational activities, exclusive of
any areas used for parking lots, street rights-of-way, front, rear and side yard setbacks, school sites, and
retention or detention ponds.
(16) COMMON OWNERSHIP. The ownership by the same individual(s) or entity(ies) of two (2) or
more adjacent lots.
(16m) COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A plan for guiding the physical growth, change, and preservation of
the Village and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, adopted and from time to time amended by the Village of
DeForest Board under the provisions and to the specifications of §66.1001, Wis. Stats., except that where the
word “town” is used before the words Comprehensive Plan, the term Comprehensive Plan means that plan
adopted by the appropriate town under §66.1001, Wis. Stats.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(17) CUL-DE-SAC. A street with a single ingress and egress, and turnaround.
(17m) DAYCARE CENTER. A place which provides care for four (4) or more persons for periods of
less than 24 hours per day under a license granted by the State of Wisconsin.
(18) DEVELOPER. Any subdivider, person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation or
other entity participating as owner, promoter or developer in the planning, platting, development or promotion
of lands which are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(19) DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Includes dogs, cats, rodents, birds, reptiles, pot-bellied pigs weighing less
than 70 pounds, and any other species of animal which is sold or retained as a household pet, but does not
include skunks, primates and other species of wild, exotic or carnivorous animals that may be further restricted
in this article chapter.
(19J) DONATION BIN. A free-standing receptacle located outside of a building that is used for the
collection of clothing, shoes, or other contributions, generally collected from persons not occupying the
premises on which the receptacle is located and with such contributions generally intended for reuse
elsewhere. The term does not include a trash container or recycling bin designed to contain waste from a
household, business, or other land use on the same premise.
[Cr. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
(20) DRIVE-IN. An establishment which is designed to provide, either wholly or in part, service to
customers while they remain in their automobiles parked upon the premises.
(21) DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. An establishment designed, in whole or in part, to take, fill, and deliver
orders of food or beverages to customers while they remain in their auto mobiles.
(22) DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, not including any mobile home, house trailer,
recreational vehicle, hotel or motel, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy and authorized
accessory uses. "Dwelling” shall include a structure manufactured after June 15, 1976 which is certified and
labeled as a manufactured home under 42 U.S.C., §§5401 to 5426 as amended, and which when placed on
site:
(a) Has any wheels, axles, and pulling apparatus removed and is fastened or attached to, a
completely enclosed foundation in accordance with §70.043(1), Wis. Stats. and Wis. Admin. Code Chapter
ILHR 21. Subchapters III, IV and V, as amended;
15-9
(b) Is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions;
(c) Is properly connected to sewer, water and electric utilities;
(d) Is a minimum of 22 feet wide; and
(e) Is covered by a permanent roof with a pitch of no less than 3:12 and a non-reflective roof covering.
(23) DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms providing living quarters for not more than one (1)
family, and having only one kitchen area.
(24) EASEMENT. A recorded, reasonably permanent, interest in land owned by another which entitles
the holder thereof to specific uses of such land without the payment of periodic rent.
(25) ELDERLY. A person who is 55 years of age or older or a family, the head of which, or that
person's spouse, is 55 years of age or older.
(26) ELDERLY HOUSING. One or more residential dwelling units intended for and occupied by the
elderly, or which is intended for and operated for occupancy by persons 55 years or older if; a) at least 80% of
the occupied units are occupied by at least one person age 55 or older, b) the facility has published and
adheres to policies and procedures demonstrating an intent to operate the facility for persons age 55 years or
older, and c) the facility complies with all rules associated with elderly housing promulgated by the Secretary of
Housing and Urban Development applicable to the facility.
(26m) ETZ AREA. The area consisting of all of the lands within Village extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction
as provided by §62.23(7a), Stats. and designated either by Village Board Resolutions 95-46 and 2007-055, or
any adopted cooperative plan under §66.0307, Stats.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08; Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
(26t) FARM. All land under common ownership that is primarily devoted to agricultural use.
[cr. 15-044; Eff. 12-24-15]
(26q) EXISTING FACILITIES. Pertaining to the wellhead protection regulations in this chapter, those
facilities, practices, or activities existing as of January 1, 2013 and in continuous operation since that date,
which may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution within the WP Wellhead Protection overlay
zoning district. Existing facilities include but are not limited to the type listed in the Department of Natural
Resources' form 3300-215, Public Water Supply Potential Contaminant Use Inventory Form, incorporated
herein as if fully set forth.
[Cr. 13-006, Eff. 4-4-13]
(27) FAST FOOD RESTAURANT. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of
pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food to the customer in a ready to consume state for consumption either
within the restaurant building or off the premises, and whose design or principal method of operation includes
two or more of the following characteristics:
(a) The elimination, in whole or in part, of table service, thus requiring customers to place orders at the
counter where the orders are filled.
(b) The food is usually served in edible containers or in paper, plastic or other disposable containers.
(c) The facilities for on premises consumption of food are insufficient for the volume of customers
served by the establishment.
(d) The restaurant provides a drive-up facility for placing and receiving food orders.
15-10
(28) FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or a group of not more than four (4) persons who
need not be related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling
unit; plus, in either case, domestic servants.
(28v) FARM OPERATOR. A person who, or a family at least one member of which, earns substantial
farm income, as defined in section 15.02(89j), from farm operations on the farm.
(28x) FARM RESIDENCE. Any of the following structures that is located on a farm:
(a) A single-family residence that is occupied by any of the following:
1. A person who is both the owner and operator of the farm.
2. A parent or child of an owner-operator of the farm.
3. An individual who earns more than 50 percent of his or her gross income from the farm.
(b) A migrant labor camp that is certified under Section 103.92, Wisconsin Statutes.
[cr. 15-044; Eff. 12-24-15]
(29) FLOOR AREA.
(a) For the purpose of determining the floor area ratio, the Floor Area of a building is the sum of the
gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls or from the center line of party walls separating two buildings. The floor area of a building shall include:
the basement floor area when more than one-half of the basement height is above the established curb level or
above the finished lot grade level where curb level has not been established, elevator shafts and stairwells at
each floor; floor space used for mechanical equipment (except equipment located on the roof), penthouses,
attic space having headroom of 7 feet 10 inches or more, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches
and floor area devoted to accessory uses. Space devoted to off-street parking or loading shall not be included
in the floor area.
(b) The floor area of structures devoted to bulk storage of materials including, but not limited to, grain
elevators and petroleum storage tanks shall be computed by counting each twelve feet (12') of height, or
fraction thereof, as being equal to one floor.
(c) For the purpose of determining the number of required off-street parking spaces and loading berths,
Floor Area shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, or portion
thereof, which are devoted to the principal use of the premises, including accessory storage areas located
within selling or working space such as counters, racks or closets, any basement floor area devoted to retailing
activities and any floor area devoted to the production or processing of goods or to business or professional
offices. For this purpose, Floor Area shall not include floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes (except
as otherwise noted herein); floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities, including aisles, ramps,
and maneuvering space; or basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, to the
production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.
(30) FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.): The floor area ratio of buildings or structures on any lot is the
percentage determined by dividing the total floor area of all such buildings or structures by the area of the lot
on which they are located or, in the case of planned developments, by the net site area.
(31) [Repealed 08-27; Eff. 8-22-08]
(32) FRONTAGE, STREET. The linear frontage(s) of a lot or parcel abutting on a private or public
street which provides principal access to, or visibility of, the premises.
15-11
(32m) GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. A commercial facility, one of the primary functions of which is
the retail sale of gasoline to motorists and which may also provide minor repair services, the sale of
convenience items and other motor vehicle fuels and supplies.
(32t) GREEN SPACE. Any area included within a lot that (a) is not defined as an impervious surface
under this section and (b) maintains living vegetation.
[Cr. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06]
(33) GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA). The total floor area, including the exterior building walls of the
several floors of a building or structure used privately or by the public as customers, patrons, clients, patients,
or members. GFA shall include all occupied areas minus the following deductions:
(a) Parking areas within the structure;
(b) Rooms occupied only by permitted specialized automatic mechanical or electrical equipment or
apparatus;
(34) GROSS LEASABLE AREA (G.L.A.). Gross leasable area is the total floor area designed for the
tenants' occupancy and exclusive use (including but not limited to basements, kitchens, restrooms, storage
rooms, private corridors, stairways, mezzanines and upper floors), expressed in square feet and measured
from the centerline of interior walls or other interior tenant partitions and from outside wall faces. G.L.A. does
not include public or common areas; i.e., public restrooms, corridors, stairwells, elevators, lobbies or mall areas
nor does it include mechanical rooms, equipment and/or machine rooms or mechanical chases.
(35) HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Flammable or explosive materials, petroleum or petroleum based
products, oil, crude oil, methane gas or synthetic gas usable for fuel, volatile organic compounds (VOCs),
radioactive materials, or hazardous toxic or dangerous waste, substance or related materials including, without
limitations, the following:
(a) Those substances, materials and wastes listed in the United States Department of Transportation
Hazardous Materials Table (49 CFR 172.101) or listed as "hazardous material" or "hazardous waste" as
defined by the Environmental Protection Agency at 40 CFR Part 302, and amendments thereto and
replacements therefore;
(b) Such substances, materials or wastes as are regulated by the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.) as amended and any successor statute or orders, regulations,
directions or requirements thereunder;
(c) Such substances, materials or wastes as are regulated by the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601, Set. seq.) as amended and any successor
statute or orders, regulations, directions or requirements thereunder (including, but not limited to PCB's,
asbestos and radon); and
(d) Such hazardous or toxic substances, materials or wastes that are regulated under any other
applicable federal, state, county, or municipal law, rule, ordinance, order or regulation.
(36) HOME OCCUPATIONS. The operation of limited commercial activities within a dwelling unit by
the occupant of the unit, as an accessory use on land principally used for residential purposes.
(37) ILLUMINATION, DIRECT. Lighting by means of an unshielded light source, including neon tubing,
which is effectively visible as a part of a sign where light travels directly from the source to the viewer's eye.
(38) ILLUMINATION, INDIRECT. Lighting by means of a light source which is directed at a reflecting
surface in such a way as to illuminate that surface.
15-12
(39) ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL. Lighting by means of a light source which is within a sign having a
translucent background, silhouetting opaque letters or designs, or which is within letters or designs which are
themselves made of a translucent material.
(40) IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any area covered by material that substantially reduces or prevents
the infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land. Impervious surface shall include, but not be
limited to buildings, driveways, parking areas, sidewalks and patios.
(40g) INSTITUTIONAL FACILITY OR USE. A type of land use or facility that provides a public service
and is operated by a governmental entity, public or private utility, public or private school, church or other
religious institution, or other tax-exempt organization.
[Cr. 08-27; Eff. 8-22-08]
(40m) JOINT COMMITTEE. The Joint Extraterritorial Zoning Committee appointed from time to time to
act on matters affecting the ETZ Area pursuant to §62.23(7a), Wis. Stats. and sec. 15.03(3a) of this Code.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(41) KENNEL. Any premises, except where accessory to an agricultural use, where domestic animals,
such as dogs and cats, are boarded, trained or bred for commercial purposes.
(42) LIGHT SOURCE. Includes neon, fluorescent or similar tube lighting, the incandescent bulb,
including the light producing elements therein, and any reflecting surface which, by reason of its construction
and/or placement, becomes, in effect, the light source.
(42g) LIVESTOCK. Domestic animals traditionally used in Wisconsin in the production of food, fiber, or
other animal products. Livestock includes bovine animals, equine animals, goats (except pigmy), poultry,
sheep, swine (except pot bellied pigs), farm-raised deer, farm-raised game birds, camelids, ratites, and farmraised
fish. [cr. 15-044; Eff. 12-24-15]
(42m) LOCAL STREET. A street designed to provide access to abutting land uses and leading into a
collector or occasionally into an arterial street, but which is not designed to carry through traffic from outside
the neighborhood where it is located.
[Cr. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11]
(43) LOT. Any individual parcel under a single form of ownership created by the most recent recorded
plat or certified survey map of the land, or any tract of land identified as a single parcel in the most recent
conveyance of the tract recorded with the Dane County Register of Deeds where no plat or certified survey has
been recorded, exclusive of any part thereof lying within a street right-of-way.
(44) LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines,
exclusive of any area within the ordinary high water mark of any navigable water or a street right-of-way.
(45) LOT, CORNER. A lot which adjoins the point of intersection of two or more street rights-of-way
and in which the interior angle formed by the street lines is 135 degrees or less. If the street lines are curved,
the Zoning Administrator shall determine the angle of intersection based on information specific to the lot.
[Am. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(46) LOT COVERAGE. The area determined by dividing that part of the lot area occupied or covered
by all buildings, covered porches, decks, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways and all other impervious
surfaces, by the total lot area.
[Am. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06]
(47) LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot adjacent and parallel to a street right-of-way. For
corner lots and other double frontage lots, the lot line along the street from which the house is addressed shall
be the front lot line, except where otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator based on circumstances
that are unique to the site.
15-13
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(48) LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is, or is most nearly,
parallel to the front lot line. If a rear lot line is less than 15 feet long, or if the lot comes to a point at the rear,
the rear lot line shall be a line at least 15 feet long, lying wholly within the lot, parallel to the front lot line.
(49) LOT LINE, INTERIOR SIDE. Any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line, a street side lot line,
or a rear lot line.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(49g) LOT LINE, STREET SIDE. For corner lots, the lot line that abuts a public or private street but
that is not the front lot line.
[Cr. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(50) LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision or land division, the plat or certified survey
map of which has been recorded in the office of the Dane County Register of Deeds.
(51) LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at the normal
minimum front yard setback line in the zoning district where the lot is located, or at some other specifically
delineated front yard setback if approved by the Village Board as part of a final plat or certified survey map.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(52) LOT, ZONING. A parcel of land composed of one or more lots of record, occupied or to be
occupied by a principal building(s), or principal use(s), along with permitted accessory buildings or uses,
meeting all the zoning requirements of the district in which it is located.
(53) NET ACREAGE. The gross acreage of a parcel of land minus the acreage devoted to street
rights-of-way, retention basins, wetlands, woodland, flood plains, stream corridors, areas with slopes greater
than twenty percent (20%), and other natural features.
(54) MARQUEE. A permanently roofed structure attached to and supported by a building, and
projecting from the building.
(55) MASTER PLAN. The use of this term is synonymous with the term “comprehensive plan,”
defined elsewhere in this section.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(56) MINERAL EXTRACTION (METALLIC). The process of removing metals or metallic ores from
beneath the surface of the ground by digging, grinding, blasting or other customary commercial means.
(57) MINERAL EXTRACTION (NON-METALLIC). The process of removing sand, gravel, rock, clay or
other inorganic material from beneath the surface of the ground by digging, grinding, blasting or other
customary commercial means.
(58) MOBILE HOME. A prefabricated unit with walls of rigid construction that is designed to be towed
as a single unit or in sections upon a highway by a motor vehicle and that is used or is intended to be used for
human habitation other than a "manufactured home" defined as a dwelling by sub. (22).
(59) MOBILE HOME PARK. A lot not less than three acres in area upon which two or more mobile
home units occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes and located regardless of whether or not a charge is
made for such accommodation.
(60) MOTEL OR HOTEL. A building or group of buildings which contain living or sleeping
accommodations for transient occupancy which may or may not have individual entrances from outside.
15-14
(60m) NATIVE WILDLIFE REHABILITATION. The treatment or rehabilitation of injured or sick native
wildlife conducted pursuant to a license or permit issued by the United States Department of Interior, Fish and
Wildlife Service and/or the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
(61) NOISE. Any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an adverse
psychological or physiological effect on human beings.
(62) NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A building or structure which was constructed
legally under the zoning regulations in effect at the time, but does not fully comply with the current standards of
this Chapter 15 that would apply to such buildings or structures.
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11]
(63) NONCONFORMING RECORDED LOT. A lot of record which does not meet the dimensional
requirements of the particular district in which it is located solely because of the enactment or amendment of
this chapter after the lawful creation of lot of record or because of the acquisition of a portion of the lot by a
governmental agency for public purposes. Does not include recorded outlots that are restricted from building
development.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(64) NONCONFORMING USE. An active and actual use of land, building(s), or structure(s) that was
lawfully established prior to enactment or amendment of this chapter, that has continued as the same use to
the present, and that does not comply with all the subsequently enacted use regulations of this chapter.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(65) NURSERY. Any land used to raise trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants for sale or for
transplanting.
(66) NURSING HOME. A home licensed by the State of Wisconsin for the aged, chronically or in
curably ill persons in which five or more such persons not of the immediate family are provided with food and
shelter or care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to
the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured.
(67) OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. The term shall
also include the building or room housing such use. For purposes of this Chapter, change of occupancy is not
intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(68) OPEN SPACE. That space which is suitable primarily for private or public use, including space
available for recreation or landscaping, which is open to the sky, free of automobile traffic, parking, outdoor
storage, or structures other than authorized recreational structures.
(69) ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK. The highest point on the bank of a navigable waterway at
which the level has been maintained or has periodically recurred for a sufficient period of time to leave a
definite mark.
(70) ORIGINAL SEALED CONTAINER. The container in which a product was originally shipped from
the manufacturer, with a capacity of not more than 55 gallons.
(71) OWNER. The person or persons holding legal title or the unconditional right to purchase land.
(72) OFF-STREET LOADING. An area or space adjacent to a building or structure which is readily
accessible to vehicular traffic from a street, alley, or other public way, and which is set aside for the exclusive
use of trucks or other vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
(73) OFF-STREET PARKING. An area readily accessible from a street, alley or other public way, that
is set aside for the exclusive use for temporary parking of automobiles and other vehicles which are fully
15-15
registered, licensed, and operative, while the owners thereof are engaging in the pursuit of any permitted use
of the property for which the parking is provided.
(73m) PARK MODEL. A camping unit that is built on a single chassis mounted on wheels and certified
by the manufacturer as complying with ANSI Standard A119.5.
(74) PENNANT. Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message
of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series and designed to move in the wind.
(74a) PORCH. A covered, but not enclosed, area adjoining an entrance to a residential building, and
designed to provide some measure of shelter from the elements.
[Am. 07-05; Eff. 02-09-07]
(74e) PORTABLE OUTDOOR STORAGE UNIT. A portable storage container with more than two
hundred and sixteen (216) cubic feet of storage space designed and used primarily for temporary storage
and/or transportation of household goods and other such materials, kept outdoors, and not affixed to a
foundation. The term does not include storage sheds constructed of wood, plastic or steel which are located on
a permanent or temporary foundation, not intended to be moved or relocated on a regular basis, and in
compliance with all Village setback and other requirements. Nor does the term include construction trailers or
temporary storage units utilized by contractors or developers incidental to the ongoing construction of
structures, public improvements or utilities or other aspects of property development.
[Cr. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10].
(75) PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. The office of a person or persons engaged in any occupation,
vocation or calling, not purely commercial, mechanical or agricultural in which a professed knowledge or skill in
some department of science or learning is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either
advising or guiding them in serving their interest or welfare through the practice of an act founded thereon.
(76) PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building held, used or controlled exclusively for public purposes by any
federal, state, county or local governmental body or a department or branch thereof, without regard to the
ownership of the building or of the land upon which it is situated.
(77) PREMISE. Land and any buildings or structures thereon.
(78) [Repealed 07-37; Eff. 12-7-07]
(79) ROADSIDE STAND. A structure having a ground area of not more than 200 square feet, not
permanently attached to the ground, readily removable in its entirety and used solely for the sale of farm and
garden product produced on the premises.
(80) RESTAURANT. An establishment designed to accommodate the preparation, sale and
consumption of food.
(80m) ROAD MACHINERY. Any moveable equipment designed for use in road building or repair or
other construction projects, including, but not limited to tractors, both wheeled and crawler types, graders, end
loaders, scrapers, bulldozers, cranes, back hoes, drag lines, “cherry pickers” and compressors designed to be
towed by a motor vehicle.
(80r) SALVAGE RECYCLING CENTER. A building or property where waste or scrap materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, recycled, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited
to, motor vehicles, farm equipment, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. The
term includes motor vehicle wrecking or dismantling yards, but does not include a solid waste recycling center
as defined in sub. (86m).
(81) SETBACK, BUILDING. The horizontal distance between the property line and any structure.
15-16
(82) SCREENING. The process or materials by which a building, structure, activity, area or object is
concealed or obscured from view.
(83) SIGN. Any object, device, display, structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors and in view of the
general public, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person,
institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, logos, symbols, fixtures, or projected images. Signs do not include the flag or emblem of any nation;
organization of nations; state; Village; or religious, fraternal, or civic organization. Signs do also not include
merchandise and pictures or models of products or services incorporated in a window display, works of art
which in no way identify a product, or scoreboards located on athletic fields. Building colors and outline lighting
which do not convey a logo or message specific to the use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, are not
considered signs. Definitions of particular functional, locational, and structural types of signs are listed in
Section 15.08. Traffic control and other public agency signs located within a right-of-way are not included
within this definition and are not regulated by the provisions of this chapter.
[Repealed and recr. 08-27; Eff. 8-22-08]
(84) SMALL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. An energy system that converts solar energy to usable
thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy, where such solar energy system is accessory to the
principal use of the lot (such as a solar panel system providing energy for a dwelling on the same lot), and
primarily supplies energy to such principal use.
[Cr. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10]
(85) SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. An energy system that converts wind energy to usable thermal,
mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy, where such wind energy system is accessory to the principal use of
the lot (such as a wind turbine system providing energy for a dwelling on the same lot), primarily supplies
energy to such principal use, and does not exceed a rated capacity of 60 kilowatts.
[Cr. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10]
(86) [Repealed 08-27; Eff. 8-22-08]
(86m) SOLID WASTE RECYCLING CENTER. A waste disposal operation at which temporary storage
and processes such as baling of paper, grinding of glass and flattening of cans are conducted on segregated
solid waste to facilitate reuse of the waste as raw materials.
(87) STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of
the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next
above it. Any portion of a story exceeding twelve feet (12') in height shall be considered as an additional story
for each twelve feet (12') or fraction thereof.
(88) STREET. A dedicated public or private right-of-way, whether denominated a street, highway,
road, boulevard, avenue, or otherwise, which affords a primary means of vehicular access to an abutting
property.
(89) STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which is permanently or temporarily affixed to the
ground.
(89A) SUBDIVISION SIGN. A sign showing the name of a subdivision placed at the entrance of the
subdivision. No commercial message permitted.
(89j) SUBSTANTIAL FARM INCOME. A minimum of $10,400 gross farm income per year for the past
three years derived from the farming operation on the farm. Rental income is not considered farm income for
this definition. [cr. 15-044; Eff. 12-24-15]
(90) TERRACE. An outdoor area, accessory to a principal building, constructed of stone, pavers,
concrete or similar impervious surface, often elevated above natural grade but applied directly on the ground in
one or more level surfaces adjacent to the principal building.
15-17
(91) TOXIC MATTER. Material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical
means when present in relatively small amounts.
(91m) TOWN. Town of Vienna, Town of Burke, Town of Windsor, or Town of Westport, as the context
requires.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08; Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
(91p) TOWNHOUSE: A townhouse consists of three to eight dwelling units, each having at least one
individual exterior entry, ground floor living space, and at least one common wall with an adjacent dwelling unit.
[Cr. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11]
(92) UNIFIED BUSINESS CENTER. A group of two or more professional, office, commercial or
industrial establishments, or any combination thereof, that are planned, developed, owned or managed as a
unit, related in location, size and type of establishments, and which provide on-site parking in definite
relationship to the types and sizes of establishments. Where freestanding buildings function as a part of a
unified business center, they shall be deemed to be a part of the center regardless of whether they are held in
common ownership.
(93) USE. Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of land is designed, arranged,
intended, maintained, occupied or employed, and any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on in
a building or other structure or on a tract of land.
(94) USE, PERMITTED. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district as designated
in the regulations governing a zoning district.
(95) USE, PRINCIPAL. A main or dominant use of land, a building or other structure as distinguished
from a subordinate or accessory use.
(96) WELL FIELD. A premise used primarily for the purpose of supplying a location for construction of a
well to supply a municipal water system.
[Cr. 13-006, Eff. 4-4-13]
(96c) WELL RECHARGE AREA. The land area that contributes water to a well by infiltration or water
into the subsurface and movement towards the well, regardless of the municipal or zoning jurisdiction of such
land area.
[Cr. 13-006, Eff. 4-4-13]
(97) VARIANCE. A departure from any provision of the zoning requirements for a specific parcel,
granted upon the demonstration of unreasonable hardship by the Board of Zoning Appeals or, as permitted by
this code, by the Village Board.
(98) VILLAGE. The Village of DeForest.
(99) YARD. The open space between a lot line and a building line in which no structure may be
located, except as provided in sec. 15.04.
(100) YARD, FRONT. The yard between the side lot lines extending from the front lot line to the
nearest part of the nearest principal building. For corner lots and other double frontage lots, the yard abutting
the street on which the lot is addressed shall be the front yard, except where otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator based on circumstances that are unique to the site.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(101) YARD, REAR. The yard between the side lot lines extending from the rear lot line to the nearest
part of the nearest principal building. In the circumstance of properties with street frontages on more than two
sides, the yard that is opposite that of the street address shall be classified as the rear yard.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
15-18
(102) YARD, INTERIOR SIDE. A yard between the front and rear lot lines extending from the interior
side lot line to the nearest part of the nearest principal building.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(102g) YARD, STREET SIDE: For each corner lot, the yard between the front and rear lot lines,
extending from the street side lot line to the nearest part of the nearest principal building.
[Cr. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(103)ZERO LOT LINE. A unit placed in such a way on a lot that one exterior wall is on a property line.
(103m) ZERO LOT LINE CONSTRUCTION. A development approach in which a building is sited on
one or more lot lines with no side yard area, except beyond the outer ends of the building.
[Cr. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06]
15.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
(1) ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
(a) Appointment. The Village Planning and Zoning Administrator shall carry out the functions of the
Zoning Administrator directly or by delegation to qualified members of his or her staff or consultants.
(b) Duties. The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated as the administrative and enforcement
officer for the provisions of this chapter. The duties of the Zoning Administrator shall be as follows:
1. Issue and, when applicable, renew all permits or certificates required by the several provisions
of this chapter.
2. Make and maintain records of all matters pertaining to zoning within the areas subject to this
chapter including, but not limited to, permit and certificate issuance, applications for zoning
amendments, variances, conditional uses, and other zoning approvals, inspections, zoning
decisions of other governmental bodies affecting the Village, signs, and all correspondence,
protests or objections pertaining to Village zoning matters.
3. Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and use of land to determine compliance with the
terms of this chapter.
4. Receive, file, and forward to the Board of Zoning Appeals all applications for appeals, variances,
and other matters on which the Board of Zoning Appeals is required to act under this chapter.
5. Render, when called upon to do so, administrative interpretations regarding the zoning of
specific properties subject to this chapter, and the effect such zoning has on the properties or
their use.
6. Advise all interested Village and other governmental agencies of pending zoning matters, and
provide required notices to property owners.
7. Serve as the Village staff planning and zoning liaison with the Village Board, Board of Zoning
Appeals, Joint Committee, and Planning and Zoning Commission, and keep those boards,
committees and commissions abreast of all zoning matters and of recent developments in the
fields of community planning and zoning.
8. Issue temporary use permits, zoning permits, certain site plan approvals, and other permits and
approvals when authorized by this chapter.
9. Issue orders and take appropriate action to enforce the provisions of this chapter as allowed by
law.
15-19
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(2) VILLAGE BOARD. The Village Board has exclusive authority under this chapter to:
(a) Approve, reject, or approve with conditions requests to rezone land within the jurisdiction of this
chapter;
(b) Enact amendments to the text of this chapter.
(c) Hear and decide appeals from the Planning and Zoning Commission and Joint Extraterritorial
Zoning Committee on their conditional use permit decisions.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(3) PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
(a) Jurisdiction. Except as provided in sec. 1.03(2)(b) and sub. (3a), the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission shall, in addition to all other powers provided by law:
1. Review and grant final approval or rejection of certain applications and appeals for site plan
approval for projects within the Village, as required by §15.05, except where the Village Board
waives or modifies such review under §15.19(6).
2. Review and render decisions on all applications for conditional use permits within the Village.
3. Review and decide applications for approval of final development plans for all Planned Unit
Developments in the Village.
4. Hold all public hearings as required under this chapter for development approval requests,
unless a hearing before another body is expressly required by statute or by other provisions of
this chapter.
(b) Required Vote. All actions by the Commission shall require a majority vote of the members present
provided that a quorum of at least four (4) members are present.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(3a) JOINT EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONING COMMITTEES.
(a) Jurisdiction. The DeForest-Vienna Joint Extraterritorial Zoning Committee shall have all of the
powers of the Planning and Zoning Commission with respect to lands subject to sec. 15.035 within that portion
of the ETZ Area that is also within the Town of Vienna. The DeForest-Burke Joint Extraterritorial Zoning
Committee shall have all of the powers of the Planning and Zoning Commission with respect to lands subject
to sec. 15.035 within that portion of the ETZ Area that is also within the Town of Burke. If established by
cooperative plan under §66.0307, Stats., the DeForest-Windsor Joint Extraterritorial Zoning Committee shall
have all the powers of the Planning and Zoning Commission with respect to lands subject to sec. 15.035 within
that portion of the ETZ Area that is also within the Town of Windsor. Each such body shall hereinafter be
referred to as the Joint Committee for the lands under its respective geographic jurisdiction.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
(b) Membership. The membership of each Joint Committee shall consist of 3 citizen members of the
Village Planning and Zoning Commission and 3 members appointed by the Board of Supervisors of the
respective town. Town supervisors shall be eligible for appointment to the Joint Committee. The method of
appointment of members shall be determined by the governing body of the respective appointing municipality.
The Joint Committee shall elect its own chairperson and may establish its rules of procedure to the extent not
in conflict with this chapter or State law.
15-20
(c) Voting. All final actions of the Joint Committee shall require a concurring vote of at least four (4)
members. Members appointed by the town boards shall be entitled to vote only on those matters which affect
lands within the boundaries of the town from which they were appointed.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(4) BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. (a) Jurisdiction. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the
power to:
1. Hear and decide all appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative officer under this chapter.
2. Grant or deny variances consistent with the procedures and standards for variances as
established in this chapter.
3. Hear and decide all other matters upon which it is required to pass under this chapter.
(b) Meetings and Rules. All meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call of the
chairman, and at such other times as the board may determine by rule. All meetings conducted by the board
shall be open to the public. Any person may appear at a hearing in person or by a duly authorized agent. The
chairman, or in his or her absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question and shall keep accurate records of its hearings and other official actions. The board may adopt
additional rules governing its proceedings not in conflict with this chapter. A copy of every rule, order, decision
or determination of the board shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
(c) Required Vote. All final actions of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall require a concurring vote of at
least four (4) members.
(5) APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.
(a) Time For Appeal. An appeal may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals by any persons, firm or
corporation, or by any officer, department, board, commission or agency of the Village or, in the case of lands
within the ETZ Area, of the town in which the affected land is located, aggrieved by any order, decision or
interpretation of an administrative officer under this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days
after the date of the order, decision or interpretation appealed from, by filing notice of such appeal on a form
provided by the Administrator and payment of the fee as established by the Village Board.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(b) Filing. A copy of the notice of appeal shall be served by the appellant on the officer whose decision
is being appealed. Such officer shall promptly transmit to the board all papers constituting the record of the
action under appeal.
(c) Stay of Proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals that, by reason of facts set forth
in the certification, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings shall
not be stayed unless a restraining order is issued by either the board or by a court of record for due cause
shown.
(d) Appeal Hearing and Findings. A public hearing on the appeal shall be conducted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days of filing. The board shall render a written decision on the appeal without
unreasonable delay. In rendering its decision, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end
shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issuance of
a permit.
15-21
(d) Finality of Decisions. All decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals under this subsection shall be
considered final administrative determinations and shall be subject to judicial review in accordance with
applicable Wisconsin Statutes.
(6) VARIANCES.
(a) Application for Variance and Hearing Notices. An application for a variance shall be filed in writing
with the Zoning Administrator. The application shall contain such information as the Board of Zoning Appeals
may from time to time by rule require. Upon receipt of a complete application and the associated fee, notice of
the time and place of a public hearing shall be provided by Class 1 notice. The published notice may be
supplemented by such additional notice as the Board of Zoning Appeals may require by rule. If the affected
property is within an ETZ Area:
1. Within five (5) working days of receipt of a complete application and fee, the Zoning
Administrator shall provide all application materials to the clerk of the affected Town with an
invitation for Town review against the standards in sub. (c), below.
2. Unless the affected Town indicates in writing that the Town will not be submitting any formal
comments, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule the public hearing no sooner than forty-five
(45) days from receipt of a complete application, to enable sufficient time for Town review and
comment. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the clerk of the affected Town of the time and
place of the public hearing as soon as practical.
3. Any recommendation from the affected Town or any other party received in advance of the
public or during such hearing shall be incorporated into the official record as testimony on the
variance application.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(b) Hearing and Decision. A public hearing pertaining to the requested variance shall be held within 90
days of the filing of the application and required fee. A decision to grant or deny the requested variance shall
be made in writing without unreasonable delay and shall set forth the findings and rationale of the board.
(c) Standards for Variances. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall grant a variance only when it has
determined, and made written findings, that all of the following standards are met:
1. That compliance with the strict letter of the zoning ordinance would unreasonably prevent the
owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or would render conformity with such
restrictions unnecessarily burdensome. It is not sufficient that a variance applicant show that the
zoning regulation(s) prevents or burdens his or her planned activity. Such applicant must show
by competent evidence that the regulation unreasonably prevents or unnecessarily burdens the
proposed activity.
2. That compliance with the strict letter of the zoning ordinance would create unnecessary
hardship due to a unique property condition, meaning a special physical feature or limitation of
the property that is not generally shared by nearby land or property within the same zoning
district. If a variance applicant fails to prove the existence of a unique property condition and a
connection between the condition and the hardship, even if the hardship is great, a variance
may not be granted.
3. That the requested variance will not be contrary to the public interest or to the intent and
purpose of this chapter as stated in §15.01(2).
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
15-22
(d) Conditions. The Board of Zoning Appeals may condition the grant of any variance on compliance
with any conditions or restrictions as it may deem reasonably necessary to comply with the standards
established in this subsection, to minimize the effect of such variance upon other property or to better carry out
the general intent of this chapter.
(e) Effect of Denial of a Variance. No application for a variance which has been denied shall be
resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of the order of denial, except on grounds of new
evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be material by the Board of Zoning Appeals. For purposes of
this paragraph, an application shall be considered a resubmission if it seeks a variance which is substantially
similar to a previous request.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(7) MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS.
(a) Authority. The regulations imposed and the districts created under this chapter may be amended
from time to time by the Village Board.
(b) Initiation of Amendment. Amendments may be proposed by any Village Trustee, a member of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, a member of the Board of Zoning Appeals, a member of the joint
extraterritorial zoning committee or any person having an ownership or leasehold interest in any property within
the Village.
(c) Application for Amendment. An application for an amendment shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator in such form and accompanied by such information as the Zoning Administrator shall specify and
the fee established by the Village Board. This paragraph shall not apply to changes proposed by any Village
board or commission or the joint extraterritorial zoning committee.
(d) Notice and Hearing. Except as provided in sec.15.035, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
conduct a public hearing on all applications for amendment. The Commission shall give notice of the time and
place of such hearing by publishing a Class 2 Notice and providing any notice to adjacent municipalities
required by §62.23(7), Stats. Said notice shall include a summary of the changes proposed.
(e) Recommendation and Report. The Planning and Zoning Commission, within 30 days after the
close of the hearing held under par. (d), shall submit a written recommendation and report to the Village Board.
In making its recommendation, the Commission shall utilize the following criteria:
1. Consistency with the Village’s Comprehensive Plan as required by §66.1001, Stats., including
but not limited to the Future Land Use map and associated policies and the Growth Phasing
map and/or policy.
2. The extent to which the proposed amendment will alleviate a condition in the zoning code which
is not conducive to proper community planning.
3. The degree to which all owners of property in the area or same zoning classification would be
affected by the proposed amendment.
4. The suitability of any property subject to a proposed district change for the currently zoned uses
and for proposed uses.
5. Any hardships created by the current text or district designation sought to be amended.
6. Whether adequate public school facilities and other public services exist or can reasonably be
provided to serve the need likely to be created by any additional dwelling units authorized to be
constructed as a result of such change.
15-23
7. Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing
public water supply and sanitary sewers in the vicinity.
8. The recent rate at which land is being developed in the Village and the anticipated effects of the
proposed amendment on development rates.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(f) Effect of Denial of Amendment. No application for an amendment which has been denied wholly or
in part by the Village Board shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of the denial, except
on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be material by the Village Board.
(g) Development Phasing Agreements. Map amendments, associated with the subdivision of property,
may be approved contingent upon the execution by the Village Board and the developer of a Development
Phasing Agreement which addresses the number and type of dwelling units which may be constructed in a
calendar year. The numbers will be calculated based on the quantity of existing developed platted lots and
platted undeveloped lots.
(h) Rezoning of Land from the A-1 Ex or A-4 Districts. No land in the A-1 Ex or A-4 districts shall be
rezoned to any district other than to the A-1 Ex or A-4 district, unless following a public hearing the Village
Board finds all of the following:
1. The land is better suited for a use not allowed in the A-1 Ex or A-4 district.
2. The rezoning is consistent with the Dane County farmland preservation plan, Village
comprehensive plan, and town comprehensive plan as applicable.
3. The rezoning will not substantially impair or limit current or future agricultural use of surrounding
parcels of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to agricultural use. [cr 15-44; Eff. 12-24-15]
(j) Reporting on Rezonings out of the A-1 Ex and A-4 districts. Per Section 91.48(2), Wisconsin
Statutes, the Zoning Administrator shall, by March 1 of each year, provide to the Department of Agriculture,
Trade and Consumer Protection and the Dane County Planning Director a report of the number of acres that
the Village has rezoned out of the A-1 Ex and A-4 districts the previous year and a map that clearly shows the
location of those areas. [cr 15-44; Eff. 12-24-15]
(8) VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
(a) Equitable Relief. In case of any violation of this chapter, the Village Board, the Zoning
Administrator, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the applicable joint extraterritorial zoning committee
where the violation relates to lands within the ETZ Area, or any property owner who would be specially
damaged by such violation, may cause appropriate action or proceeding to be instituted to enjoin the violation
or cause an unlawful structure to be vacated or removed.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(b) Forfeitures. Any person found to have violated the provisions of this chapter shall forfeit not less
than $50.00 nor more than $500 for each such violation. Each day of a continuing violation shall be
considered a separate offense.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(c) Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies and penalties provided in this section are not exclusive.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Village or any person from commencing any action, or
enforcing any remedy authorized by any other law.
15.035 EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONING ADMINISTRATION.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
15-24
(1) APPLICABILITY. This section shall apply only to zoning matters affecting lands within the ETZ
Area. The procedures in this section shall supplement the procedural provisions of sec. 15.03, but shall not be
construed to overrule those provisions unless expressly stated herein or when necessary to avoid a direct
conflict or to comply with applicable statutory requirements.
(2) TEXT AMENDMENTS. (a) Authority. The regulations imposed by this chapter as they affect lands
within the ETZ Area may be amended from time to time by the Village Board upon the affirmative
recommendation of each Joint Committee.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
(b) Notice and Hearing. The Joint Committees shall conduct a public hearing on all applications for
amendment to any regulations under this chapter jointly with the hearing held by the Planning and Zoning
Commission pursuant to sec. 15.03(7)(d), or shall each hold their own hearing. The Joint Committees shall
vote separately from the Commission on any amendment. The chairman of each Joint Committee shall
promptly report the decision of the Committee to the Village Board.
(c) Effect of Joint Committee Recommendation. Only amendments to the regulations of this chapter
that have been affirmatively recommended by the Joint Committee with jurisdiction over the part of the ETZ
Area within a particular Town shall be applicable within that Town. Any such amendment shall be codified in
such a manner as to exclude its applicability to all or part of the ETZ Area, to the extent not recommended by
the appropriate Joint Committees.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
(3) MAP AMENDMENTS.
(a) Authority. The zoning district designations of lands within the ETZ Area may be changed from time
to time by the Village Board upon the affirmative recommendation of the appropriate Joint Committee as
provided in this subsection.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
(b) Notice and Hearing. The appropriate Joint Committee shall conduct a public hearing on all
applications for zoning district changes within that Joint Committee’s jurisdiction. The committee shall give
notice of the time and place of such hearing by publishing a Class 2 Notice and providing any notice to
adjacent municipalities required by §62.23(7), Stats. In all cases, notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the
Clerk of the town in which the lands are located. Said notice shall include a summary of the changes proposed.
(c) Town Review. The Joint Committee shall cooperate with the town in which the lands are located in
providing any available information concerning the application upon request. The Joint Committee shall not
vote on the application until:
1. The Board of Supervisors for the town in which the lands are located has voted to approve or
disapprove the application as evidenced by written certification of the Town Clerk or published
minutes of a meeting reflecting such vote;
2. At least sixty (60) days have elapsed since the close of the public hearing on the application
without receipt by the Joint Committee of written certification by the Town Clerk of a decision by
the Town Board for the town in which the lands are located.
(d) Amendments to Application. In the event an application is amended, the Joint Committee shall
promptly notify the Clerk of the Town in which the lands are located of the amendment. If the amendment is
made at the public hearing, the Joint Committee shall adjourn the hearing for not less than 10 days and shall
promptly notify such Town Clerk of the amendment and of the adjourned hearing date. Amendments made
15-25
after the close of the public hearing shall require a new public hearing and pars. (b) and (c) shall apply to the
amended application.
(e) Recommendation and Report. The chairperson of the Joint Committee shall promptly report its
recommendation to the Village Board. The recommendation shall include a statement of any recommendation
made by the Town Board of the town in which the lands are located.
(f) Enactment by Village Board. The Village Board may enact an ordinance as approved by the Joint
Committee by a majority vote except that an affirmative vote of 3/4 of the members present shall be required if:
1. A protest petition is filed in accordance with §62.23(7a)(f), Stats. or
2. The Clerk of the Town in which the land is located has certified in writing to the Joint Committee or
the Village Board that the Town Board has voted to oppose the ordinance.
(g) Rezoning of Land from the A-1 Ex or A-4 Districts. No land in the A-1 Ex or A-4 districts shall be
rezoned to any district other than to the A-1 Ex or A-4 district, unless following a public hearing the Village
Board finds all of the following:
1. The land is better suited for a use not allowed in the A-1 Ex or A-4 district.
2. The rezoning is consistent with the Dane County farmland preservation plan, Village
comprehensive plan, and town comprehensive plan as applicable.
3. The rezoning will not substantially impair or limit current or future agricultural use of surrounding
parcels of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to agricultural use. [cr 15-44; Eff. 12-24-15]
(h) Reporting on Rezonings out of the A-1 Ex and A-4 districts. Per Section 91.48(2), Wisconsin
Statutes, the Zoning Administrator shall, by March 1 of each year, provide to the Department of Agriculture,
Trade and Consumer Protection and the Dane County Planning Director a report of the number of acres that
the Village has rezoned out of the A-1 Ex and A-4 districts the previous year and a map that clearly shows the
location of those areas. [cr 15-44; Eff. 12-24-15]
(4) CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
(a) General. Conditional use permit applications for land within the ETZ Area shall be subject to sec.
15.16, except the applicable Joint Committee shall function in all respects in lieu of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and subject to the limitations in subs. 4(b) and (c) below.
(b) Town Review. When any application is forwarded to the Joint Committee as provided in sec.
15.16(3)(c), the Zoning Administrator shall mail a copy thereof to the Clerk of the town in which the lands are
located. The provisions of subs. 15.16(4)(c), (d) and (e) shall apply to all conditional use applications.
(c) Appeals to Village Board. If the Clerk of the town in which the lands are located has certified to the
Joint Committee or the Village Board that the Town Board has voted to recommend rejection of the application,
the permit shall not be granted except by a 3/4 vote of the Joint Committee or Village Board on appeal.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(5) SITE PLAN REVIEW. Required site plans for developments in the ETZ Area shall be submitted
and reviewed as provided in sec. 15.05(2), except that the applicable Joint Committee shall function in lieu of
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
15.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
15-26
(1) PERMITS AND ZONING COMPLIANCE. No building permit required under Chapter 14,
conditional use permit, other permit, or certificate of occupancy required under Chapters 5 and 14 shall be
issued until compliance with the provisions of this chapter have been verified by the Zoning Administrator,
either by zoning permit or otherwise. Violators will be subject to fines and/or stop work orders.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(2) ANNEXED LAND. All land which may hereafter be annexed to the Village shall, unless otherwise
provided in the annexation ordinance, be automatically classified in the A-1 Agricultural District pending a
public hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission and adoption of an ordinance amending the district
designation by the Village Board.
(3) NUMBER OF BUILDINGS. Not more than one principal building shall be located on any lot in a
single or two-family residence district except buildings used for permitted civic, cultural or institutional uses.
Civic, cultural or institutional uses may have more than one principal building per lot, provided, however, the
minimum distance between buildings shall be not less than 15 feet and the minimum green space percentage
must be met. Multi-family (RM-4), elderly (RM-5), business, industrial, or mixed use planned unit
developments (PUD) districts approved pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may also have more than
one principal building per lot, provided, the minimum distance between buildings shall not be less than 15 feet
and the minimum green space percentage must be met. This subsection shall not apply to agricultural
accessory buildings located on lands in any agricultural zoning district.
[Am. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06]
(4) ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
(a) Conformance with Requirements For Principal Buildings. Any accessory building which is physically
attached to a principal building shall conform to all district regulations applicable to the principal building except
minimum floor area requirements.
(b) Construction Restrictions. Except where expressly permitted by the applicable district regulations or
approved as part of a site plan under §15.05, no accessory building shall be erected prior to the establishment
or construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.
(c) Size of Accessory Structures. Except as provided in subs. (10) and (24)(c), the maximum height of
non-agricultural accessory structures shall be:
1. The maximum height set forth in the applicable district regulations;
2. In the RE and RH districts – fifteen (15) feet if associated with a residential principal use;
twenty-five (25) feet, or the height authorized by conditional use permit, if associated with a
non-residential principal use;
3. In all other residential districts – twelve (12) feet if associated with a residential principal use;
twenty-five (25) feet, or the height authorized by conditional use permit, if associated with a
non-residential principal use;
4. In all other districts where the maximum accessory building height is not established as part
of the district regulations, thirty-five (35) feet.
Agricultural accessory buildings have no height limitation.
[Am. 06-06, Eff. 6-9-06; Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13; Am. 15-045, Eff. 12-24-15]
(d) Restrictions on Use as a Dwelling. Except for residential uses authorized by a conditional use
permit, no accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes.
15-27
(e) Temporary Accessory Structures. Accessory structures designed for the purpose of temporary
storage may not be located on the property for more than 120 days in a calendar year and shall meet all
accessory structure dimensional standards.
(f) Number of Accessory Buildings. Within any residentially zoned lot, there shall not be more than two
(2) detached accessory buildings at any one time, except that additional buildings may be authorized by
conditional use permit for permitted non-residential uses.
(g) Restrictions on Placement of Accessory Structures in Easements. No accessory building or
structure of any kind shall be placed or maintained in an easement designated for public or private utility, public
sewer, public water, stormwater, drainage, public access or other purpose where obstructions such as
accessory buildings or structures would interfere with the purpose of the easement in the determination of the
Public Works Director, or if in the ETZ Area the affected town board. This paragraph shall apply in addition to
all accessory building setback standards in Tables 15.10B, 15.11B, 15.12B, 15.105B, or 15.115B.
[Am. 07-05; Eff. 02-09-07; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(h) Location of Detached Accessory Buildings. No detached accessory building shall be placed closer
than five (5) feet from a principal building. Required yard setbacks for detached accessory buildings shall be
as established in Tables 15.10B, 15.11B, 15.12B, 15.105B and 15.115B.
[Cr. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(5) MOBILE HOMES. No mobile home shall be used for human occupancy unless located in an
approved mobile home park and properly connected to public sewer and water utility systems. Travel trailers
designed and used for recreational purposes may be occupied on a temporary basis other than as a primary
residence in a permitted campground.
(6) HOME OCCUPATIONS. All home occupations shall be subject to the following restrictions: (a) All
such uses must be incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and shall
not endanger the public health or safety,
(b) All such uses shall be carried on wholly within the principal building, and shall not change the
residential character of the dwelling unit or adversely affect the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(c) All such uses shall be conducted such that no evidence of the business use is perceivable from
outside of the home.
(d) Outside storage of materials, equipment or goods related to the home occupation is prohibited.
(e) No internal or external structural alterations to the dwelling unit, whether permanent or temporary,
to accommodate the home occupation may be undertaken.
(f) No home occupation may accommodate more than two (2) patrons or clients within the dwelling unit
at one time nor more than five (5) patrons or clients during any twenty-four hour period.
(g) Prohibited Home Occupations. The following activities shall not be permitted in residential areas
as, or as part of, home occupations:
1. Any repair of internal combustion engines or related equipment, including the painting or repair
of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, motorbikes, motorcycles, or lawn equipment;
2. Animal hospitals, kennels, stables, or bird keeping facilities;
3. Restaurants;
4. Adult oriented establishments;
5. Funeral chapels or homes, crematoria and mausoleums;
15-28
6. Medical or dental clinics, except the offices of sole practitioners are allowed if other home
occupation standards are met;
7. Manufacturing, producing or assembling of any products unless the home occupation operator
sells such products at retail;
8. Public places of amusement, such as theaters or video arcades;
9. The manufacturing, repair, refurbishing or assembly of firearms, ammunition, explosive materials
or toxic chemicals;
10. The storage, packaging, shipping or handling of explosive or toxic materials;
11. The sale, offering for sale or advertising for sale of explosive materials or toxic chemicals,
except those contained in ammunition for firearms, where any such products sold or offered for
sale are physically located on the residential premises at any time.
12. Warehousing, welding or machine shops.
13. Processing of domestically produced or raised animals.
[Am. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06; Am. 07-27; Eff. 7-20-07]
(7) BUILDING BULK REGULATIONS.
(a) Corner Lots and Through Lots. Where lots have street frontage on more than one side, front yard
requirements shall apply to each side adjacent to a street
(b) Minimum Lot Area. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged on
a lot which does not meet the minimum lot area and lot width prescribed by the applicable district regulations,
except as may otherwise be allowed under Section 15.02(51). Lots created prior to adoption of this chapter
are subject to Section 15.17(13).
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(c) Lot Area Following Right-of-Way Widening. The minimum lot area requirements for any lot shall be
reduced by the number of square feet acquired by federal, state or municipal agency, by condemnation or
otherwise, for the purpose of widening or otherwise altering any street abutting the lot, except that the
minimum lot area shall not be reduced by more than 25%.
(d) One Hour Firewall Required. The common wall of all duplexes, multi-family and townhouse units
shall have a one hour firewall extending from the floor of the lowest living space to the roof of the unit.
(e) Backwater Valve Required. All new construction and renovated dwelling units shall have a
backwater valve installed to prevent the reverse flow of stormwater or sewage into the drain system.
(f) New Lots Meeting Bulk Regulations. No lot shall be divided into two (2) or more lots, and no portion
of any lot shall be sold or otherwise transferred, unless all lots resulting from such division, sale, or transfer,
and all buildings on such lots, will conform with all bulk and dimensional standards applicable to the zoning
district in which the lots are located, except where a substandard lot being created is legally restricted from
building development.
[Cr. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10]
(8) PERMITTED IMPROVEMENTS IN REQUIRED BUILDING SETBACK AREAS. Except as
prohibited by sec. 15.04(4)(g), the following improvements shall be permitted in the yard setback areas
required by the district regulations:
15-29
(a) Front and Street Side Yard Setbacks:
1. Landscape features in accordance with sec. 15.06(2)(m);
2. Flag poles;
3. Freestanding yard signs;
4. Basketball backboard and hoop in any residential district;
5. Signs permitted under sec. 15.08;
6. Driveways and parking spaces, with front yard parking allowed only by conditional use in
business districts (see Table 15.11B); and
7. Utility service connections and equipment.
8. Ramps specifically designed and required for access by disabled persons.
9. Front porches, which may extend up to 10 feet into the front yard setback.
(b) Interior Side Setbacks:
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
1. All improvements permitted within front yard setbacks by pars. (a)1-8;
2. Open terraces, decks, patios and similar structures, no portion of which is covered by a roof or
other overhead structure, provided that any such improvements may extend no closer to the lot
line than allowed for accessory buildings in the applicable zoning district;
3. Play equipment as defined in 15.04(21), swimming pools and their accessory decks to the extent
permitted by sec. 15.04(14), and clotheslines and their supporting structures in any residential
district;
4. Fences and walls not exceeding ten (10) feet in height above natural grade level in industrial
zoning districts and six (6) feet in height above natural grade level in all other districts;
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 319-09]
5. Roof overhangs and gutters not extending more than 30” from the building wall; and
6. Other detached accessory buildings and structures allowed by this chapter, provided that
accessory building setbacks in the applicable zoning district are met.
(c) Rear Setbacks:
1. All improvements permitted within front or side yard setbacks by pars. (a)1-8 or (b); and
2. All open decks, detached garages, and accessory structures and uses allowed by this chapter,
provided that accessory building setbacks in the applicable zoning district are met. Fully or
partially enclosed decks, including any deck on which there is located a roofed structure, must
meet the principal building setbacks in the applicable zoning district.
[Am. 07-05; Eff. 02-09-07]
(9) FRONT FOOTAGE AND ACCESS TO LOTS. All lots shall have a minimum street frontage of no
less than forty-five feet (45').
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
15-30
(10) EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
(a) Structure height limitations set forth in the district regulations shall not apply to: agricultural
structures (exclusive of dwellings), chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire-towers, ornamental
towers and spires, church steeples, public utility poles, towers and wires, small wind energy systems,
communications antenna and communications towers, water tanks and standpipes, or necessary mechanical
appurtenances. The permitted height of communications antennae and communications towers, including
amateur radio antennae and towers, shall be determined under sub. (16).
[Am. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10]
(b) [Repealed 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10]
(11) OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING. No building or other structure shall hereafter be
erected, altered, or enlarged, nor shall any use of land be established or enlarged unless the minimum offstreet
parking and loading spaces set out in sec. 15.07 are provided or as provided for under sec.
15.11(2)(b)(4).
(12) PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. The performance standards set forth in this subsection are
applicable to all land uses and activities except where otherwise indicated, and are designed to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare and to protect, maintain, and enhance the quality of the natural environment
of the community. All uses shall be conducted in such a manner so as not to cause any significant nuisance,
hazard, or commonly recognized offensive conditions or characteristics, including significant emission of dust,
gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, particulate matter, chemical compounds, humidity, heat, cold, glare, or night
illumination or the creation of external vibration or electrical disturbance. Prior to issuance of a zoning permit,
building permit, or certificate of occupancy for any use, the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector may
require evidence that adequate controls, measures, or devices have been provided to ensure and protect the
public interest, health, comfort, convenience, safety, and general welfare from such nuisance, hazard, or
offensive condition.
(a) Noise. No land use activity shall be conducted in such a manner as to generate sound which,
because of its volume, pitch, frequency, repetitiveness, duration or other characteristics or any combination of
the foregoing, unreasonably interferes with the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties for uses lawfully
permitted thereon.
(b) Vibration. No land use activity shall be conducted in such a manner as to cause earthborn
vibrations on neighboring properties of sufficient intensity, frequency, duration, or other characteristics or any
combination of the foregoing, as to unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of such neighboring
properties for uses lawfully permitted thereon, or to cause damage to real or personal property thereon.
(c) Odor. No land use shall cause any odor that is offensive to a person of reasonable sensibilities
detectable at any lot line of any lot in a residential district for periods exceeding a total of 15 minutes of any
day.
(d) Waste Materials. No use or activity shall be so conducted as to cause the harmful discharge of any
waste materials per §§11.035(1)(c) and (6), 8.53(2)(e)-(f), 8.70, 9.07(5), 10.05(2), 11.03(7), and 11.035(6) and
other applicable sections of the Municipal Code and state and federal law.
(e) Toxic, Hazardous, And Radioactive Materials. Any land use or other activity which involves the use
of toxic, hazardous, or radioactive materials shall comply with all applicable standards set forth in State and
Federal statutes and regulations regarding the use, storage, transportation, emission, and disposal of such
materials. The operator of any such land use or activity shall obtain, maintain and comply with all necessary
licenses and permits from the appropriate State and Federal agencies. As part of any permit review process
under this chapter, the Village may require such operator to prepare and submit a process safety
management, risk management, containment, and emergency response program for approval by the Fire
Chief. In the event of any spill or other accident involving toxic, hazardous, or radioactive materials, the
responsible party shall immediately notify the Fire Department and Madison HazMat team, and shall follow
15-31
procedures specified in any approved process safety management, risk management, containment, and
emergency response program.
(f) Fire and Explosive Hazards.
1. General. All flammable solid, liquid, and gaseous substances shall be stored and used in
accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local statutes, regulations and ordinances,
including but not limited to Chapter 5 of this Code.
2. Solid Materials. In all non-residential zoning districts, the storage or use of solid materials or
products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted. In all non-residential
zoning districts, the storage or use of solid materials or products ranging from free or active
burning to intense burning is permitted, if:
a. Any building in which such materials or products are stored or used are is constructed
with no less than a two-hour fire-resistance rating on all exterior walls and is protected with
an automatic fire extinguishing system; and
b. Any area where such materials are stored or used outdoors is located no less than fifty (50)
feet from the nearest lot line.
3. Liquid and Gaseous Materials. The storage or use of flammable liquids or gasses shall be
permitted in conjunction with any non-residential use that does not share a building or site with a
non-farm residential use. Above ground storage tanks shall be limited to 25,000 gallons.
Underground storage tanks shall be limited to 100,000 gallons. When flammable gasses are
stored or used, the quantity in cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure shall not exceed
30 times the limits of the associated storage tank. The storage of finished products in original
sealed containers shall be exempt from the above requirements. Storage tanks for flammable
liquids or gasses shall further:
a. Be screened from view pursuant to Sec. 15.05(8)(i).
b. Be approved by the Zoning Administrator and the Fire Inspector or their designees prior to
installation or expansion.
c. Not be located between the principal building and any lot line abutting any residential zoning
district or use, or sixty (60) feet from the lot line abutting such residential zoning district or
use, whichever is greater.
d. If above ground, be set back from any lot line as indicated in the following chart.
Size of above
ground tank
Minimum setback from all
lot lines
Up to 5,000 gallons 20 feet
5,001 to 15,000 gallons 40 feet
15,001 to 25,000 gallons 60 feet
4. Explosive Materials. In addition to all other requirements of this section, any activity involving
the storage or use of materials or products which decompose by detonation is prohibited in all
districts, except where specifically licensed by the local governing body. Such materials
include, but are not limited to: all primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate,
fulminates, and tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN, and picric acid;
15-32
propellants and components thereof such as nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides,
hydrazine, and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder,
potassium chlorate, and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and
nitroglycerine; unstable organic compounds such as acetylides, tetrazoles, and perchloric acid;
per chlorates; chlorates; hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than 35 percent; and
nuclear fuels, fissionable materials, and products and reactor elements such as Uranium 235
and Plutonium 239.
(g) Lighting & Glare. No land use activity shall be conducted so that direct and indirect illumination
from a source of light shall cause illumination in excess of 0.5 foot-candles, as measured horizontally at any
point on a lot line abutting or within a residential district or in excess of 2.0 foot-candles in non-residential
districts, except that when street lighting produces illumination in excess of one foot-candle at a particular point
in a residential district, light sources from property in a non-residential district at the same point may add up to
50% percent of the street lighting. Flickering or flashing lights shall be controlled or shielded so as not to cross
lot lines.
(h) Heat. Every land use and activity shall be operated such that it does not emit heat beyond the
boundary of the lot on which it is located below the highest point of any building located on any other lot.
(i) Electromagnetic Interference. No land use shall be permitted which creates any electromagnetic
interference that adversely affects the operation of any equipment other than that belonging to the creator of
such interference, or that does not conform with all Federal Communications Commission regulations.
(j) Storage of Vehicles. Storage of more than ten (10) vehicles as an accessory use, other than
inventory of permitted vehicular sales lots, employee, or guest parking, or service vehicle or trailer parking,
within designated parking stalls or loading areas, shall be subject to the following standards and conditions,
unless expressly determined by the site plan or conditional use approval authority to be unnecessary to carry
out the intent and purpose of this chapter:
1. Such use shall be prohibited unless the conditional use or site plan application adequately
demonstrates that the inside storage of the permitted vehicles is impractical.
2. The location(s) of the outdoor storage area shall be selected to minimize its visual impact
beyond the property line.
3. No outdoor storage area shall be used for the storage of vehicles prior to completion of
construction of a principal building on the lot.
4. The outdoor storage area shall be completely screened by an opaque wall or fence, a portion of
a building, or some combination of the foregoing. No fence or wall shall exceed ten (10) feet in
height above natural grade level.
5. The land between any fence or wall forming the outer boundary of the outdoor storage area and
the nearest property line shall be landscaped in order to buffer the appearance of the fence or
wall as required by §§15.05(8)(i) and 15.06(9)(d).
6. The outdoor storage area shall be designed and maintained in such a manner that one or more
drive aisles are available to access each motor vehicle that is temporarily stored within the area
at all times and to maintain access at all times to all portions of the lot for emergency vehicles.
7. All space within the outdoor storage area to be used for temporary vehicle storage shall be
paved with a hard, all-weather surface or graveled.
8. In no case shall more than three (3) vehicles regulated by this paragraph be stored outside of
the enclosed outdoor storage area at any one time.
15-33
9. A spill prevention and control plan approved by the Zoning Administrator shall be maintained in
effect and complied throughout the duration of the vehicle storage use. All stored vehicles shall
either be inspected to ensure that they are not leaking fuel, oil, or other toxic or hazardous
liquids, or drained of all such liquids.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(13) FENCES AND HEDGES.
(a) Fences Defined. For the purpose of this section, “fence” means an enclosed barrier consisting of
vegetation, wood, stone, metal or other material intended to prevent ingress or egress.
(b) Height and Materials Regulated.
1. Residential Districts. In any residence district, no fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery shall be
erected, constructed, maintained, or grown to a height exceeding three (3) feet above the street
grade nearest thereto, within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of any street lines or of
street lines projected. Fences may be erected, constructed, maintained, or grown to a height not
to exceed six (6) feet along side and rear lot lines, but shall not extend into the front setback
area, provided, however, that landscape features not exceeding four (4) feet in height and which
do not impede ingress or egress to the property may be erected within the front set back area.
2. Security Fences. Security fences are permitted along the property lines in all non-residential
districts, but shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height and shall be of open type similar to woven
wire or wrought iron fencing. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve security
fencing in residential districts for permitted civic, cultural and institutional uses if the Commission
finds that such fencing is necessary for security or safety reasons.
3. All manufactured or constructed fences shall be oriented with posts or other visible supports
toward the inside of the subject property and the finished side facing neighboring properties or
public rights-of-way.
(c) Prohibited Fences. Except in the agricultural districts, no fence may be constructed which conducts
electricity or is designed to transmit an electrical shock. No fence containing barbed wire shall be constructed
other than within the agricultural districts; provided, however, that barbed wire may be used in the industrial
districts if the devices securing the barbed wire to the fence are ten (10) feet above the ground or higher and
project toward the fenced property and away from any public area.
(d) Vision Clearance.
1. On corner lots in all zoning districts, no fence, wall, hedge, planting or structure shall be erected,
placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to obstruct vision between a height of
two and one-half (2 1/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades within a vision
corner. As used in this paragraph, "vision corner" means the area within a triangle formed by
connecting the point of intersection of the rights-of-way of any two streets or of any street with
any railroad right-of-way with the following:
a. If either of the intersecting rights-of-way is a collector or arterial street, points located fifty
feet (50’) from such point of intersection along each of the intersecting right-of-way lines; or
b. If neither of the intersecting rights-of-way is of a collector or arterial street, points located
twenty-five feet (25’) from such point of intersection, along each of the intersecting rights-of-way.
[Am 04-13; Eff. 5-20-04; Am 14-007; Eff. 3-27-14]
(e) Fence Maintenance. All fences shall be maintained and kept safe and in a state of good repair,
and the finished side or decorative side of a fence shall face adjoining property.
15-34
(f) Temporary Fences. Fences erected for the protection of plantings, or to warn or construction
hazards, or for similar purposes, shall be clearly visible or marked with colored streamers or other such
warning devices at four (4)-foot intervals. A building permit shall not be necessary for temporary fences as
described herein, but said fences shall not be erected for more than forty-five (45) days.
(14) SWIMMING POOLS.
(a) Definition. A private or residential swimming pool is an outdoor accessory structure containing or
designed to contain water in a receptacle or other container located above or below the surface of ground
elevation, used or intended to be used solely by the owner, operator or lessee thereof and his or her invitees
for swimming, diving or similar water activities, and includes all structural facilities, appliances and
appurtenances, equipment and other items used and intended to be used for the operation and maintenance of
the swimming pool.
(b) Permit Required. A permit is required for all in-ground and above-ground pools which require a
permanent or hardwired connection to any public utilities. Before work is commenced on the construction or
erection of a private or residential swimming pool, a building permit shall be obtained from the Building
Inspector. Plans and specifications and pertinent explanatory data shall be submitted to the Building Inspector
at the time of application.
(c) Construction Requirements. The Building Inspector shall not issue a permit for construction as
provided for in sub. (b), unless the following construction requirements are observed:
1. All materials and methods of construction in the construction, alteration, addition, remodeling or
other improvements and pool installation shall be in accord with all state regulations and codes
and with any and all local ordinances.
2. All plumbing work shall be in accordance with all applicable ordinances and state codes. Every
private or residential swimming pool shall be provided with a suitable draining method, and in no
case shall chemically treated waters from any pool be drained into the storm sewer system, nor
onto lands or other properties adjacent to that on which the pool is located.
3. All electrical installations, including but not limited to lighting and heating, which are provided for,
installed, and used in conjunction with a private swimming pool, shall be in conformity with the
state laws and local ordinances regulating electrical installations.
(d) Exempt Pools. Storable swimming or wading pools that are so constructed that they may be
readily disassembled for storage and reassembled to their original integrity, are exempt from the provisions of
par (e). Spas and hot tubs are also exempt.
(e) Pool Safety Measures. Except as provided in par. (d), all swimming pools that are not enclosed
with a permanent building, shall have at least one of the following:
1. A fence or wall of sufficient strength to prevent access to the pool. Such fence or wall shall not
be less than four (4) feet in height, except the Building Inspector may require a minimum of six
(6) feet in height upon a determination that the selected fence design will facilitate climbing.
Such fence shall be so constructed as not to have voids, holes, or openings larger than four (4)
inches in one dimension. Gates or doors shall be of similar height to the remainder of the fence
and shall be kept locked while the pool is not in actual use.
2. A raised deck around the entire pool perimeter with an attached enclosed railing a minimum of
thirty-six (36) inches high on the top and secured access to such deck.
15-35
3. A pool cover or other protective device of such a design and material of sufficient strength to
prevent access to the pool. Such cover or protective device shall be securely fastened in place
at all times when the swimming pool is not in actual use for swimming or bathing purposes.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(f) Setbacks and Locational Requirements.
1. All swimming pools, exempt and non-exempt, shall be erected or constructed only on the rear
or side yards of lots occupied by a principal building.
2. No swimming pool shall be located, constructed or maintained closer to any side or rear lot
line than is permitted in the zoning code for an accessory structure.
[Am. 04-13; Eff. 5-20-04]
(15) SIMILAR COMPATIBLE USES.
(a) Permitted Uses. Uses not specified in this chapter as either permitted or conditional in any district
but which are found by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or relevant Joint Committee as appropriate, to
be sufficiently similar to specified permitted uses within the district and which are clearly compatible with the
other uses permitted in the district shall be deemed permitted. The Commission or relevant Joint Committee
shall make specific findings reflected in their minutes indicating the permitted use found to be similar and
compatible.
(b) Conditional Uses. Uses not specified in this chapter as either permitted or conditional in any district
which are not found sufficiently similar and compatible to a permitted use as provided in par. (a), but which are
similar to and compatible with a specified conditional uses permitted in the district may be permitted as
conditional uses by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Joint Committee in accordance with sec. 15.16.
The Commission or Joint Committee shall make specific findings reflected in their minutes demonstrating that
the conditional use is found to be similar and compatible.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(c) [Repealed 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(16) REGULATION OF SATELLITE EARTH STATIONS AND COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA AND
COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS.
(a) Permit Required. No person shall erect, install, construct, or place any type of satellite earth station,
communications tower or communications antenna on any lot or structure until a building permit has been
obtained from the Building Inspector, except for residential television receiving antennae and for satellite
dishes not exceeding 24" in diameter. The Building Inspector shall not issue a building permit until a
conditional use permit is approved under the provisions of this chapter, except that where the installation of
additional antennae and associated equipment will not cause a substantial modification to an existing
communications tower or other existing support structure, the Village will not require approval of a new
conditional use permit or conditional use permit amendment for such installation. The terms “substantial
modification” and “support structure” shall be as defined in §66.0404(2)(b), Stats. Also, in such instances, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine whether site plan review under §15.05 will be required, based on the
impact to the public and adjacent land owners of such additional installation.
(b) Definitions:
1. Amateur Radio Antenna means any combination of materials or equipment located outside of a
principal structure on a premises used exclusively for the purpose of sending and/or receiving
electromagnetic waves for amateur radio service, including any towers, support structures, guy
wires, foundations or similar components of a support structure.
15-36
2. Amateur Radio Service means the transmission and reception of electromagnetic signals for
non-commercial purposes, by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission.
3. Satellite Earth Station is an apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or
a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. Satellite earth stations include those structures
commonly referred to as disks, satellite communications systems or home earth satellite
stations.
4. Commercial Communications Antenna is equipment used for transmitting or receiving radio
frequency signals which is attached to a tower, building or other structure, usually consisting of
a series of directional panels, microwave or satellite dishes, but does not include an amateur
radio antenna governed by par. (e).
5. Commercial Communications Tower is any pole, spire, structure or combination thereof to which
antenna could be attached, or which is designed for an antenna to be attached and a supporting
lines, cables, wire and braces, other than a structure exclusively used to support an amateur
radio antenna.
6. Accessory Equipment Structure is a building or cabinet-like structure located adjacent to or in the
immediate vicinity of a commercial communication tower and antenna to house equipment
customarily incidental to the receiving or transmitting of wireless signals, broadcasts, cellular
telephone or voice messaging paging services.
(c) Application. Application for a conditional use permit to install a satellite earth station, commercial
communications tower, or commercial communications antenna (where applicable) shall be made in writing to
the Building Inspector and be accompanied by a current fee and a set of plans and specifications, showing the
location of the proposed structure with respect to existing structures and property lines, and meeting other
submittal requirements in §66.0404(2)(b), Stats.
(d) Installation Restrictions.
1. Number of Units. Only one ground-mounted satellite earth station and one ground-mounted
television or amateur radio antenna support tower shall be permitted per dwelling unit on any
residential lot.
2. Co-location of Commercial Communications Antennas. To minimize the number of tower sites,
existing towers shall be utilized whenever feasible for the co-location of commercial
communications antenna. A conditional use permit for a new communications tower may be
denied if applicant refuses to evaluate the feasibility of collocation within the applicant's search
ring and provide the sworn statement described under §66.0404(2)(b)6, Stats. The Village shall,
unless it is shown to be unreasonable, condition the granting of a conditional use permit for
each new commercial communications tower upon the applicant placing or constructing the
communications tower to accommodate the collocation of two additional antenna arrays similar
in size and function to that placed on the tower by the applicant. The holder of the conditional
use permit shall make the collocation sites required hereunder available for the placement of
technologically compatible antenna arrays and equipment upon contractual provisions that are
standard in the industry and at prevailing market rates allowing the permit holder to recoup the
cost of providing the collocation sites and a fair return on investment.
3. Location and Setbacks. Ground-mounted satellite earth stations, communications towers, and
communications antennas shall meet all location and setback requirements for principal
structures for the specific zoning district in which they are located.
15-37
4. Mounting. Wall- or roof-mounted satellite earth stations or communications towers and
communications antenna shall be attached only to a structure which is constructed to carry the
imposed loading. All satellite earth stations, communications towers and communications
antenna shall be permanently mounted in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and to
meet a minimum wind load design velocity of eighty (80) m.p.h.
5. Height. In all districts, ground-mounted satellite earth stations or communications antenna and
communications towers may not exceed twenty (20) feet in height or the minimum height
necessary to effectively receive and transmit communications, whichever is greater. Wall- or
roof-mounted units, in residential districts, shall not extend more than eight (8) feet, or the
minimum height necessary to effectively receive and transmit communications, whichever is
greater, above the roof line as measured from the lowest point of the existing roof. Wall- or roofmounted
units in all other districts shall not extend more than twenty (20) feet above the median
roof line or the minimum height necessary to adequately receive communications.
6. Electrical Installations. All electrical work performed in connection with the installation of satellite
earth stations or communications tower or communications antenna, including grounding of the
system, shall be in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code, Wisconsin State
Electrical Code, and the instructions of the manufacturer. In case of conflict the stricter
requirement shall govern. All cable used to conduct current or signals from the satellite earth
station or communications tower or communications antenna to the receiver shall be installed
underground and the location of all underground lines shall be shown on the permit application.
All such units shall be adequately grounded against direct lighting strikes.
7. Advertising. No form of advertising or identification, sign, or mural is allowed on any
communications tower or communications antenna other than a manufacturer’s identification
plate and any warning labels or similar communications affixed to the unit by the manufacturer.
8. Color. The color of any satellite dish or television or radio antenna tower and their support
structures shall be neutral.
10. Removal. The applicant for a conditional use permit for any commercial communications tower
shall provide a written agreement stating that if the tower, antennas, or transmitters are unused
for a period exceeding 12 months, the applicant shall remove the tower, antennas, or
transmitters upon written request from the Zoning Administrator at no cost to the Village within
60 days of such request. If such listed items are not removed within 60 days of such notification,
the Village may remove the items at the expense of the holder of the conditional use permit.
Within 30 days of the date on which the tower use ceases, the permit holder shall provide the
commission written notice of the cessation of use. A performance bond of $20,000.00 shall be
required to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements for removal of the commercial
communications tower and equipment.
(e) Special Regulations for Amateur Radio Antennae.
1. The purpose of this paragraph is to recognize and accommodate the federal and state declared
interest in promoting and preserving amateur radio operations while protecting the legitimate
interests of the general public including:
a. Minimizing the unnecessary detriment to the aesthetic quality of the Village and its
extraterritorial zoning area;
b. Preserving the character of various neighborhoods within the Village and the values of
properties within the Village and its extraterritorial zoning area;
15-38
c. Providing for adequate review of designs and installation of facilities which pose substantial
risk of collapse if improperly designed or installed;
d. Protecting the owner and operator of an amateur radio antenna and neighboring property
owners and the public in general from unreasonable risks of injury or property damage from
the collapse of a communications tower or communications antenna or from electrical
charges generated or conducted by such facilities;
e. Assuring that all amateur radio operators have a reasonable opportunity to construct and
maintain the equipment and facilities necessary to effectively participate in amateur radio
operations.
2. In acting on conditional use permit applications for amateur radio antennae, the Planning and
Zoning Commission or Joint Committee shall make reasonable efforts to formulate reasonable
conditions and the minimal practical restrictions that will allow for the approval of such facilities
and shall recommend denial only if it finds that the requested use, if installed and operated in
accordance with all reasonable conditions and restrictions, will cause a significant danger to the
public safety or welfare. In doing so the Commission or Committee may waive, in whole or in
part, any of the provisions of par. (d) if it determines that the purposes of such regulations can
be met through other means that can be enforced through appropriate conditions.
3. It shall be a condition to all permits issued under this paragraph that the amateur radio antennae
and the operation of the amateur radio service using such antennae shall at all times be
maintained in compliance with the applicable regulations and permit conditions issued by the
Federal Communications Commission.
[Am. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(17) DRIVEWAYS. All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced, or extended shall meet the
applicable requirements of §15.07.
[Repd & Recr. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11]
(18) STORAGE AND PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES. (a) Definitions. For purposes of
this section, the following definitions shall apply:
1. Recreational Vehicle. Recreational vehicle means any of the following described equipment:
a. a “Travel Trailer,” defined as a non-motorized, portable, rigid structure built on a chassis and
on wheels that is designated to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation,
vacation or other temporary uses and towed by a motor vehicle. The term includes so-called
fifth-wheel units.
b. a “Pick-up Coach” defined as a structure designed to be mounted on or within the bed of a
pick-up truck for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation or other
temporary uses.
c. a “Motor Home” defined as a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation,
vacation, or other temporary uses, constructed as an integral part of, or permanently
attached to, a self-propelled vehicle.
d. a “Camping Trailer” defined as a folding structure mounted on wheels and designed to be
transported and stored in a collapsed position and opened to create usable dwelling space at
a destination where it is used for travel, recreation, vacation or other temporary uses.
e. a “Converted Van” or “Converted Bus” defined as a recreational structure created by altering
or changing an existing auto van or bus to make it suitable for use as temporary sleeping
quarters for travel, recreation or other temporary uses.
15-39
f. a “Utility Trailer” defined as a non-motorized vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle
and used to transport one or more boats, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicle, personal water
craft, other off-road equipment or goods or materials.
g. a “Snowmobile,” defined as a small vehicle designed for travelling on snow,
[Cr. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11]
h. an “All-terrain vehicle,” defined as a small, open motorized vehicle with three or four wheels,
or track system, designed for off-road use that is not a snowmobile.
[Cr. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11]
2. Boat. Boat means every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of
transportation on water.
3. Yard, Front, has the meaning defined in §15.02(100); provided, however, that notwithstanding
§15.04(7)(a), for purposes of this subsection, a corner lot shall be deemed to have a front yard
only along the side of the lot abutting the street on which the lot has its street address, and the
sides of the lot along the lot line approximately perpendicular to such street and between the
front and rear setback lines shall be considered side yards.
(b) Permitted Parking or Storage of Recreational Vehicles and Boats. In all residential and commercial
districts the parking or storage of a recreational vehicle or boat is permitted only in the following manner:
1. Parking is permitted inside any enclosed structure which conforms to the zoning requirements of
the particular zoning district where located.
2. Parking is permitted outside in the side yard or rear yard, provided it is not nearer than five (5)
feet to any lot line, on a hard-surfaced or gravel area, provided inside parking on the premises is
not possible.
3. Parking is permitted outside in the front yard setback when inside parking is not possible, only in
accordance with the following additional restrictions:
a. The overall length of the recreational vehicle or boat, including any part of an attached trailer
or any equipment, shall not exceed twenty-two (22) feet and the overall height shall not
exceed seven (7) feet.
b. The recreational vehicle or boat shall not be located nearer than five (5) feet from any lot line.
c. All parts of the recreational vehicle or boat shall be located on a hard-surfaced or gravel area.
4. Except as provided in subpars. 7 and 8, the body of the recreational vehicle or boat must be at
least twenty (20) feet from the nearest point of the paved surface of any street.
5. Except as provided in subpars. 7 and 8, no part of the recreational vehicle or boat may extend
over any portion of a public sidewalk or other public right-of-way.
6. Parking is permitted only for storage purposes. Recreational vehicles or boats shall not be:
a. Used for dwelling purposes, except that incidental overnight sleeping for periods not
exceeding two (2) consecutive nights and not more than fourteen (14) nights in any one
calendar year is permitted when the recreational vehicle or boat is stored on the private
property of its owner outside of the public right-of-way. Cooking is not permitted at any time.
15-40
b. Permanently connected to sewer lines, water lines, or electric service. The recreational
vehicle or boat may be connected to electric service temporarily for charging batteries,
maintenance and similar purposes.
c. Used for storage of goods, materials or equipment other than those items considered to be
part of the unit or integral to the use of the recreational vehicle or boat as intended by the
manufacturer.
7. Notwithstanding subpars. 2-5, a recreational vehicle or boat may be parked anywhere at least
five (5) feet from any property line on the premises occupied by the owner, or on the public
street frontage abutting such parcel between the lot lines extended, for a period not to exceed
forty-eight (48) consecutive hours and not more than four (4) occasions in any calendar month.
Such parking shall be deemed to be on separate occasions only if separated by at least 8
consecutive hours. Parking of a recreational vehicle in the front yard setback area shall be
permitted only on a hard surface such as asphalt or concrete or on a gravel surface.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no recreational vehicle or boat shall be parked or stored in such
a manner or in such location as to impede the safe and unrestricted flow of pedestrian or
vehicular safety over any street, sidewalk, trail or other public way. No boat shall be parked on
the street unless it is attached to a trailer, and no trailer or other recreational vehicle shall be
parked on the street unless it is, or is properly attached to, a motor vehicle.
8. Except as otherwise provided by the district regulations for a commercial district, no recreational
vehicle or boat shall be parked for storage on any private property other than that owned or
occupied by the owner of the recreational vehicle or boat .
9. No recreational vehicle or boat required to be licensed or registered under state law shall be
stored outside on private property unless it is properly registered and has affixed to it a current
registration plate, sticker or other proof of registration as required for highway or other off-road
use.
[Am. 07-37; Eff. 12-7-07]
10. The restriction in subs. 2 and 3 to parking on a hard surfaced or gravel area shall not apply to
up to two (2) snowmobiles between November 1 and April 1, nor to up to two all-terrain vehicles,
on any lot.
[Cr. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11]
(19) STORAGE OF TRACTORS, SEMI-TRACTOR AND TRAILERS AND ROAD MACHINERY. No
person, firm or corporation shall park, keep or maintain on properties zoned for residential dwellings any dump
trucks, auto wreckers semi-tractor and trailers, or road machinery. Said vehicles may not be kept or parked on
said premises whether or not they are in enclosed buildings, except for the purposes of unloading or servicing
the premises.
(20) COMMUNITY AND OTHER LIVING ARRANGEMENTS. In addition to the locations permitted by
the various district regulations, community living arrangements, foster homes, treatment foster homes and
adult family homes shall be permitted as authorized in §62.23(7)(i), Wis. Stats. according to the criteria set
forth therein. In cases where §62.23(7)(i) allows a use in a particular district only by special permission, said
permission shall be available by conditional use permit as provided in sec. 15.16. The Village Board may order
the cessation of operation, or require an application for a conditional use permit, if it finds that the operation of
a community living arrangement or adult family home poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the
residents of the Village or Town in which it is located under the procedure provided by statute.
(21) CHILDREN'S PLAY EQUIPMENT. Play apparatus, including, but not limited to, playhouses, tree
houses, forts, climbing gyms, swing sets, gliders, slides and sandboxes shall be placed at a distance from the
property line equal to or greater than the setback distance required for detached accessory buildings, whether
or not they are placed in or on a foundation.
[Am. 07-05; Eff. 02-09-07]
15-41
(22) PORTABLE OUTDOOR STORAGE UNITS.
[Cr. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10]
(a) Applicability. The standards within this subsection apply to portable outdoor storage units in all
zoning districts, except that pars. (c)-(e) shall apply only in residential districts.
(b) Permitted Locations. Units may not be placed on a public right-of–way, including public sidewalks
and public terrace areas, or on other public property except by the public entity that owns the property. Units
may only be placed on property owned by the user/lessee of the storage unit. Units shall be placed on a hard,
all-weather surface, such as concrete or asphalt (with gravel allowed for institutional uses in the extraterritorial
zoning area). Units may not be placed in such a fashion as to impede or obstruct the flow of drainage or
obstruct emergency, vehicle, pedestrian, or utility access to or through the property or area.
(c) Maximum Duration of Placement. No unit shall be placed on the same lot for more than thirty (30)
consecutive days, except that the Zoning Administrator may allow an extension of no greater than ninety (90)
additional days if he or she determines that a legitimate need therefor has been established.
(d) Maximum Number. Not more than one (1) unit may be placed on any lot at any one time, nor shall
there be a unit placed on any lot more than three (3) times in any calendar year.
(e) Maximum Size per Unit: No unit placed on any lot shall exceed eight (8) feet in width, nine (9) feet in
height, or sixteen (16) feet in length.
(f) Permitted Uses of Units: Units may be used for temporary storage of personal goods and
belongings. Units may not be used for occupancy or sleeping, housing of animals, housing or storage of
hazardous, flammable, or unlawful materials or substances. Units shall be closed and secured from
unauthorized access at all times when not under the direct supervision of the lot owner or occupant.
(g) Condition of Units: All units shall be maintained in a good and clean condition, free from rust,
peeling paint, or other visible deterioration.
(23) CONSTRUCTION WASTE RECEPTACLES.
[Cr. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10]
(a) Permitted Locations. Construction waste receptacles, used to temporarily store waste or recyclable
building materials during a construction, renovation, or demolition project, shall be located entirely on the
private property where the construction project is occurring, unless written authorization is granted by the
DeForest Public Works Director in consultation with the DeForest Police Chief, or the applicable town clerk if
the proposed receptacle is located in an extraterritorial zoning area. If placed in a public roadway, orange
construction cones, reflectors, or other traffic safety devices shall be placed on or near the receptacle in a
manner consistent with standard traffic engineering standards. The placement and maintenance of receptacles
in any public right-of-way shall comply with all terms and conditions of any privilege or permit issued pursuant
to §66.0425, Wis. Stats. or an applicable ordinance in conformity therewith.
(b) Maximum Duration. Construction waste receptacles shall remain only during the course of the
associated construction project, and shall be removed from the premises within forty-eight (48) hours following
the earlier of (i) completion of the associated project or (ii) the expiration or revocation of all building permits
issued for the project.
(24) SMALL SOLAR OR WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
[Cr. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10]
(a) Applicability. New small solar energy systems and small wind energy systems, as defined in sec.
15.02, are allowed as permitted accessory uses and structures, subject to the standards in this subsection.
15-42
The applicable requirements of the Wisconsin Statutes, including but not limited to §§66.0401 and 66.0403,
shall apply to all such systems.
(b) Permitted Locations. Small wind or solar energy systems shall meet all detached accessory
building setbacks in the applicable zoning district. Additionally, small wind energy systems shall not be located
in any front yard or side yard having frontage on a public street and shall be set back from the nearest property
line, public road right-of-way, nearest inhabited building other than the principal inhabitable structure served by
the small wind energy system and any public communication and electrical line by a distance of not less than
1.1 times the total height of the small wind energy system. No small wind energy system shall be sited or
operated in a manner that causes permanent or material interference with television or other communication
signals.
(c) Height. Rooftop, ground-mounted, and building-mounted small solar energy systems shall comply
with the height limits and setbacks for principal structures. For small wind energy systems located on lots up to
two (2) acres in area, the total height shall not exceed sixty (60) feet. For small wind energy systems located
on lots over two (2) acres in area, the total height shall not exceed 170 feet. The minimum height of the lowest
extent of a turbine blade shall be thirty (30) feet above the ground or thirty (30) feet above the maximum
allowable height of any structure or obstacle within 100 feet of the small wind energy system, whichever is
greater. No small wind energy system tower shall have a climbing apparatus located within twelve (12) feet of
the ground.
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11]
(d) Noise: Sound emanating from a small wind energy system shall not exceed 75 dBA as measured at
the property line or 50 dBA as measured at the nearest neighboring dwelling, not including the principal
building(s) served by the small wind energy system.
(e) Appearance and Vegetation. Small wind energy or solar system structures shall be finished in a
rust-resistant, non-obtrusive finish and color that is non-reflective. The small wind energy system structure
shall be designed as a monopole or other freestanding structure and shall not use guy wires. All electrical
connections shall be located underground or within a building. No small wind or solar energy system shall be
lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. Clearing of natural vegetation for the purposes
of installing a small wind or solar energy system shall be limited to that which is necessary for the construction,
operation and maintenance of the small wind or solar energy system and as otherwise prescribed by
applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances. No signs of any kind or nature whatsoever shall be permitted on
any small wind or solar energy system, except that the manufacturer’s identification and appropriate warning
signs are allowed.
(f) Security. All access doors or access ways to towers and electrical equipment shall be lockable.
Every small wind energy system shall be equipped with both manual and automatic overspeed controls.
(g) Application Procedures: A small wind or solar energy system shall require a building permit before
installation. Building permit applications shall include the following information in addition to that required by
the Building Code:
1. A site plan drawn to scale showing the location of the proposed small wind or solar energy
system and the locations of all existing buildings, structures, public rights-of-way, and property
lines. All distances shall be measured and labeled on the site plan.
2. Elevations of the site drawn to scale showing the height, design, and configuration of the small
solar or wind energy system and the heights of all existing structures, buildings and electrical
lines in relation to property lines and their distance from the small wind or solar energy system.
3. Standard drawings and an engineering analysis of the wind energy system’s tower, including
load-bearing and wind-bearing capacity.
4. A standard foundation design along with specifications for the soil conditions at the site.
15-43
5. Specific information on the type, size, rotor material, rated power output, performance, safety,
and noise characteristics of the system including the name and address of the manufacturer,
model, and serial number.
6. A description of emergency and normal shutdown procedures.
7. A line drawing of the electrical components of the system in sufficient detail to establish that the
installation conforms to all applicable electrical codes and this subsection.
8. Evidence that the provider of electrical service to the property has been notified of the intent to
install an interconnected electricity generator, except in cases where the system will not be
connected to the electricity grid.
9. A sound level analysis prepared by the wind turbine manufacturer or other qualified engineer.
10. Evidence of compliance with or non-applicability with Federal Aviation Administration
requirements.
(25) CENTRALIZED MAIL DELIVERY. The builder or developer of each new multiple-family
residential building or multi-unit non-residential building shall provide for one or more units for the centralized
delivery of U.S. Mail. All such units shall conform to U.S. Postal Service standards, including USPS-STD-4C
or USPC-STD-7B, or be otherwise approved by the DeForest office of the U.S. Postal Service. Such units
shall be maintained by the property owner(s) in good and working condition. Acceptable centralized mail
delivery units include:
(a) A wall-mounted centralized mail receptacle in an in-building location that is readily accessible to
U.S. Postal Service personnel, with each such receptacle containing no fewer than four parcel
delivery boxes.
(b) A cluster box unit installed in an outdoor location affixed to a concrete base, accessible to
pedestrians, containing at least eight parcel delivery boxes, or the total number of tenant spaces in
the building if less than eight, and not interfering with traffic movement or other required facilities on
a site under this Chapter.
15.05 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
(1) APPLICABILITY.
(a) Except as provided in par. (b), a site plan, prepared and approved as provided in this section, shall
be required for structures and improvements prior to the issuance of any building or zoning permits in
connection with:
1. All permitted uses in the elderly residential zoning district and their related accessory uses and
structures.
2. All permitted uses in business, office-research, recreational, and mixed use zoning district and
their related accessory uses and structures.
3. All permitted uses in multi-family residential districts and their related accessory uses and
structures.
4. All permitted uses in industrial zoning districts and their related accessory uses and structures.
15-44
5. Any alteration or amendment to the site improvements or design of a previously approved site
plan.
6. All conditional uses that include site or building improvements, regardless of zoning district.
7. All civic, cultural or government buildings, regardless of zoning district.
8. All other uses, and changes from existing uses, for which a site plan is required pursuant to the
provisions of this section or other applicable provision of this chapter.
9. Donation bins, and related uses or structures, including any change to the number, size, or
placement of donation bins or related uses or structures.
(b) Site plan approval shall not be required for remodeling or repair work which does not result in the
any of the following:
1. Any addition of or to a building or structure or any change in the size or location of any exterior
walls or roof components of an existing building or structure.
2. Any modification to exterior site improvements which were part of a previously approved site
plan.
3. Any increase in the capacity of a building, structure or lot to accommodate customers, patrons
or others, or an increase in the amount of traffic likely to be generated by the use of the lot.
4. Any change in the dimensions or location of access points to the lot or any building or structure
thereon, or
5. Any modification to, or change in the location of, any public improvements located on the site
other than those made by a governmental entity having jurisdiction over the improvements.
(c) In the case of additions, expansions, or exterior remodeling of buildings, site improvements, or both,
where pre-existing buildings or site improvements render full compliance with one or more of §§15.05(7),
15.05(8), 15.05(9), 15.06, 15.065 or 15.07(3) impractical or disproportionate to the extent of the addition,
expansion, or exterior remodeling in the determination of the site plan approval authority, such authority may
allow less-than-full compliance with such standards as part of the site plan approval process provided that the
site and building is enhanced in each of the areas covered by such ordinance sections. In the case of outdoor
recreational facilities, the approval authority may also allow less-than-full compliance with such standards as
part of the site plan approval process, provided that there are assurances that the facility will be operated by a
public or non-profit entity and be available for public use.
[Cr. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(2) APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
(a) Pre-application Conference. Prior to the official submission of an application for site plan review,
the applicant shall confer with the Zoning Administrator and is encouraged to submit a concept plan for initial
review and comment. The purpose of this step is to discuss the proposed nature of the contemplated
development project, advise on ordinance requirements, and facilitate the subsequent approval process.
(b) Application. The applicant shall submit a site plan application to the Zoning Administrator on a
form provided by the Zoning Administrator, in digital PDF and hard copy format. The site plan application shall
not be considered for action until and unless the Zoning Administrator approves the application as complete,
per the requirements of subs. (3) and (4) below.
(c) Review by Other Local Staff. Promptly upon his or her approval of a complete site plan
application, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the complete site plan application and all associated
15-45
materials to the following: Village Planner; Public Works Director; Village Engineer; Village Parks, Recreation,
and Natural Resources Director; Police Chief; Fire Inspector; Planning and Zoning Commission members if in
the Village; Clerk of the associated town if in the ETZ Area. Such persons may review the site plan application,
and if so shall provide advice and recommendations to the Zoning Administrator within ten (10) business days
of their receipt of such materials to assure consideration in the Zoning Administrator’s approval or report to the
Planning and Zoning Commission or Joint Committee.
(d) Action by Zoning Administrator; Appeal Procedure. Except as provided in par. (e), the Zoning
Administrator shall, within twenty (20) business days of a complete submittal, approve the site plan as
presented, approve the site plan with conditions, or reject the site plan indicating reasons for rejection, unless
this timeframe is extended by written agreement of the applicant. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the
applicant of such action in writing on a form designed for that purpose. Within thirty (30) days of such action,
the applicant may appeal in writing all or part of the Zoning Administrator’s decision to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. During the appeal process, the Zoning Administrator and Building Inspector are authorized to
hold the issuance of permits to enable commencement or continuation of building and other activities
authorized by the Zoning Administrator’s decision, and to issue a “stop work” order for any such activities
already commenced.
(e) The Commission may affirm, modify, or reverse the Zoning Administrator’s decision. The Zoning
Administrator shall inform the Commission of all site plans submitted, reviewed, approved, and rejected under
this sub. (d) during each Commission meeting.
(f) Action by Planning and Zoning Commission or Joint Committee. The Zoning Administrator shall
not determine a site plan application, but shall forward the complete site plan application and all associated
materials along with a report and recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission or Joint Committee
in all cases where:
1. The applicant has indicated on the application form a desire for Planning and Zoning
Commission or Joint Committee action instead of Zoning Administrator action.
2. The application is filed concurrently with a rezoning application, conditional use permit
application, or both for the same site.
3. The site plan includes a retail or commercial service building in excess of 20,000 sq. ft.
4. The site plan proposes public improvements other than driveway connections to public streets
and sanitary sewer or water lateral connections to existing public mains, or in the opinion of the
Zoning Administrator requires such improvements.
5. The Zoning Administrator is unable to determine whether one or more of the standards for
approval within subsection (8) will be met.
6. Review under subsection (2)(c) reveals differences that cannot be resolved by the Zoning
Administrator.
7. For projects in the ETZ Area, the town board has adopted a resolution requiring the associated
Joint Committee to determine site plan applications.
In the above instances, the Commission shall, between ten (10) and sixty (60) days of submittal of a complete
application, approve the site plan as presented, approve the site plan with conditions, or reject the site plan
including reasons for rejection, unless this timeframe is extended by written agreement of the applicant. The
Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of such action in writing on a form designed for this purpose.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(3) TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS.
15-46
(a) Site plans or any portion thereof involving engineering, architecture or land surveying shall be
respectively certified by an engineer, architect or land surveyor authorized by the State of Wisconsin to
practice as such.
(b) Site plans shall be prepared to a scale of one inch equals thirty feet (1" = 30') or larger, and shall
include a graphic scale to enable rough scaling upon reduction or enlargement of the original.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(c) A site plan may be prepared on one (1) or more sheets to show clearly the information required by
this section. If prepared on more than one sheet, match lines shall be provided to clearly indicate where the
several sheets join.
(4) REQUIRED SITE PLAN INFORMATION. All site plans shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator with the required application, in a number of hard copies determined by the Zoning Administrator
and PDF form, and accompanied by payment of all required review fees and escrows as set by the Village
Board from time to time. Unless the Zoning Administrator issues a waiver, all site plan applications shall
contain the following information:
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(a) General Information. The name and address of the owner or developer, the north point, date and
scale of drawing and number of sheets, and the zoning and present use of all adjoining properties.
(b) Site Information.
1. The location of the tract by an insert map at a scale of not less than one inch equals two
thousand feet (1" = 2000'), indicating such information as the names, numbers and widths of
adjoining roads, railroads, subdivisions, towns, existing and proposed easements and utilities;
watercourses and their names or other landmarks sufficient to clearly identify the location of the
property. A boundary survey of the property, including a metes and bounds or lot and block
description may be required by the site plan approval authority.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
2. Existing and proposed topography with a maximum contour interval of two (2') feet, except
where existing ground is on a slope of less than two (2%) per cent where one (1') foot contours
shall be shown.
3. A soil report prepared by or under the direction of a professional engineer experienced in soil
and foundation engineering may be required for site plans located in areas with severe building
limitations.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
4. The outer edges of all mature woodlands and parts of mature woodlands within the lot, and the
locations and specimens of all mature trees that are not located within a mature woodland, as
these terms are defined in §13.03 of the DeForest Code of Ordinances.
[Cr. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(c) Parking/Traffic Safety. A parking plan complying with the requirements of sec. 15.07.
(d) Utilities/Stormwater Management.
1. All existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer facilities, indicating all pipe sizes, types and
grades and points where connection is to be made to the Village utility system.
2. Provisions for the adequate disposition of storm water, in accordance with Chapter 24 of the
DeForest Municipal Code within the Village limits.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
15-47
3. Provisions for adequate temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures.
Where slopes exceed 12% or where a use is proposed on land having soils that are unsuitable
or marginal for development, on-site soil tests and/or construction plans shall be provided that
clearly indicate that the soil conditions are adequate to accommodate the development
contemplated or that any inherent soil condition or slope problems will be overcome by
terracing, retaining walls, oversized foundations and footings, drain tile or other special
construction techniques.
(e) Bulk Standards. The proposed location, general use, lot area, building setbacks, building height,
number of stories, the number, size and type of any proposed dwelling units or commercial facilities, the
minimum green space requirement, driveway width, landscape points and appropriate calculations.
(f) Public Improvements. The location and design specifications of all streets, sidewalks and other
public improvements required by any Village ordinance.
(g) Landscape Plan, Lighting Plan, and Potential Tree Protection and Preservation Plan. A landscape
plan complying with the requirements of sec. 15.06 and a lighting plan complying with the requirements of sec.
15.065 shall be submitted. Additionally, where the lot for which the site plan is being prepared includes one or
more mature woodlands or mature trees outside of a mature woodland, both as defined under §13.03 of the
DeForest Code of Ordinances, the applicant shall prepare a Tree Protection and Preservation Plan including
the components listed in §13.31(5) of the DeForest Code of Ordinances, except if such a plan was prepared,
approved, and implemented as part of a previous land division that included the lot.
[Am. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06; Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(h) Building Elevations and Exterior Materials. All building elevations shall be provided. Building
exterior materials shall be shown on the elevation drawings.
(i) Sufficient information to show how the physical improvements associated with the proposed
development interrelate with existing or proposed development of adjacent properties.
(j) A signage plan meeting the requirements of §15.08 to the extent determined practical by the Zoning
Administrator, plus any other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator.
[Am. 08-27; Eff. 8-22-08]
(k) Minor Site Plans. A required site plan review may be designated as a "minor site plan" by the
Zoning Administrator if the property is already developed to Village standards. The Zoning Administrator may
determine that designated requirements of this subsection need not be submitted in connection with an
application for approval of a minor site plan if not necessary to satisfy the intent of this section.
(5) AGREEMENT AND SURETY. No site plan approval shall become effective until the developer
provides an executed agreement to construct all required physical or public improvements as are:
(a) Located within public rights-of-way or easements, or
(b) Connected to any public facility as approved by the Village, or
(c) Necessary to repair or restore any public improvements or facilities or any other property not owned
by the developer which is likely to be damaged or destroyed as a result of the proposed development activities.
Such agreement shall be accompanied by a letter of credit, bond or other surety in the amount of the estimated
cost of the required improvements, guaranteeing the completion of all work covered thereby within the time
allowed by the Zoning Administrator, which time may be extended for good cause by the Planning and Zoning
Commission upon written application by the owner or developer. The adequacy and amount of any surety and
the form of the agreement shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator.
15-48
(6) VALIDITY AND REVISIONS. Approval of a site plan under this section shall expire one (1) year
after the date of approval, unless within said period a building or zoning permit has been issued for
construction in accordance therewith or the approval authority has, within said period, approved an extension.
Amendments to an approved site plan and extension requests shall be approved in the same manner as the
originally approved site plan, per the procedures in sub (2). A plan amendment shall not be deemed to alter
the expiration date of the originally approved site plan, unless explicitly so provided in the approval authority’s
decision.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(7) REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS. Every site plan shall provide that the developer will accomplish all
of the following:
(a) Construction of pedestrian walkways for use by occupants and patrons to walk from each
occupancy unit to any other within the site and to adjacent sites. Wherever possible, connection shall be made
to existing walkways in adjacent developments or shall be aligned with proposed future walkways. Pedestrian
walkways shall be not less than six (6) feet in width wherever adjacent vehicular parking may allow for
encroachment by parked vehicles over or upon any portion of the sidewalk.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(b) Construction of curb and gutter along all public streets within the Village, and around all parking,
driveway, and other vehicular access areas and landscaped islands and peninsulas within the Village and the
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction. The site plan approval authority may modify this standard to facilitate a
unique stormwater management approach or condition, for lightly traveled service drives, at the edges of a
phase of development of a parking area, or for storage areas. Pervious parking lots are encouraged as part of
a submitted stormwater management plan.
[Am. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06; Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(c) Installation of an adequate drainage system for the disposition of storm water, and provision of
appropriately sized and located areas for snow storage.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(d) Installation of adequate temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures.
(e) Installation of all public utility facilities necessary to provide utility services to the property. All
utilities shall be installed underground except:
1. Equipment such as the electric distribution transformers, electric transmission lines carrying
40,000 volts or more, switchgear, meter pedestals and telephone pedestals which are normally
installed above ground may continue to be so installed, in accordance with accepted utility
practices, for underground distribution where they are adequately screened from view;
2. Meters, service connections and similar equipment normally attached to the outside wall of the
premises they serve may be so installed;
3. Temporary overhead facilities required for construction purposes shall be permitted;
(f) Vegetation removal and replacement in conformance with the requirements of sec. 15.06.
(g) All other improvements required by the Village ordinances according to established Village
standards.
(8) STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL. The site plan approval authority shall approve a site plan
submitted in accordance with this section only if it finds that the development of the property as provided in the
site plan and any related agreements, will satisfy all applicable requirements of this chapter including all of the
following standards:
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
15-49
(a) The need and opportunity for dangerous traffic movements and increased traffic congestion will be
minimized and adequate provisions have been made to assure safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian
traffic flow to, from and within the site;
(b) Each use permitted on the property can be efficiently provided with all necessary public utilities and
the full development as permitted according to the plan will not create an unreasonable burden on any public
services or utilities;
(c) Storm water and erosion will be managed in accordance with Chapter 24 of the Municipal Code;
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(d) All areas designated as wetlands, flood plains, flood ways or habitats for endangered wildlife will be
preserved, or will be properly mitigated as approved by the approval authority and by any state or federal
agency with jurisdiction over such areas;
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(e) Mature woodlands and individual mature trees shall be preserved per the direction of an approved
Tree Protection and Preservation Plan, where such a plan is required.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(f) Disruption of existing natural features will be avoided to the greatest extent practicable and such
features will be incorporated into the design to the extent feasible;
(g) The number of curb cuts and other points of access to public streets shall be minimized and all
such curb cuts or access points shall be located as far from street intersections as practicable and meet the
applicable standards of §15.07(7);
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11]
(h) Sufficient access shall be provided to all structures on the parcel for emergency vehicles and
adequate facilities for fire protection shall be provided;
(i) Outdoor trash storage and compaction areas, storage for more than ten (10) vehicles, truck parking,
HVAC equipment, above ground flammable liquid or gas storage tanks, and loading docks are screened,
recessed, or enclosed from view. Enclosure or screening shall be accomplished by the use of berms,
landscaping plants, a fence or wall, an adjoining building, or some combination thereof as may be required
under this chapter. If a fence or wall is used for screening, the materials used shall be similar to those used on
the principal structure. Fences or walls for the purposes of this paragraph shall be set back at least eight (8)
feet from any property line and such 8-foot setback area shall be used for the planting and maintenance of
decorative landscaping between the wall or fence and the property line. The approval authority may approve a
reduction or waiver of fence or wall setback, screening, or material requirements for areas adjacent to property
with an existing commercial or industrial use with similar storage or loading arrangements as the proposal.
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 319-09; Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(j) All areas intended for pedestrian traffic shall be clearly distinguished from vehicular traffic areas,
adequately lighted, and handicapped accessible in compliance with state and federal standards;
(k) On any portion of any site where the current or post-development slope exceeds or will exceed
12%, adequate engineering measures have been taken to assure the stability of the site and any structures to
be located thereon;
(l) All necessary approvals have been received from any other governmental body with jurisdiction over
the property to allow for the development according to the plan, unless the site plan approval is made
contingent on such approvals being obtained by a date certain;
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
15-50
(m) All public facilities will comply with the applicable design standards established by applicable
ordinances;
(n) The development of the property in accordance with the plan will not unreasonably impair the
aesthetic appearance of the property or the general area, interfere with the reasonable use or enjoyment of
neighboring properties for uses already established or permitted thereon, significantly impair the value of other
properties in the area, impair reasonable pedestrian access and circulation, or result in an unattractive
collection of trash, rubbish, or other materials on an inappropriate site or portion of a site;
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
(o) All reasonable measures have been taken in the design of the site and the improvements thereon
to protect the safety of the occupants and frequenters of the site and the general public;
(p) The development according to the plan will not violate any applicable state or federal law,
regulation or order or any other applicable ordinance or conflict with any material feature of the Village Master
Plan or an applicable comprehensive plan.
(q) Compliance with applicable design standards for commercial uses included in the Comprehensive
Plan may be required by the approval authority. All structures in the B-1, B-2, B-3, RM-B, and O-R districts
shall have at least 35% of the combined area of their exterior walls covered by brick, native stone, tinted or
textured concrete masonry units, windows, or other decorative material as may be approved by the approval
authority. The area of “exterior walls” shall be calculated as the total amount of wall area below the roof line
that is visible from grade level views on each side of the structure, and such calculations shall be included in
the application materials. If the amount of decorative material on the exterior walls of principal building is in
excess of 35%, then the approval authority may credit the excess amount against the requirement otherwise
applicable to the exterior walls of accessory buildings on the same lot.
[Am. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06; Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08;[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(r) Wherever possible, commercial development shall front on adjacent streets.
(s) Site plans shall minimize the impact of parking lots and structures on the streetscape to the extent
possible.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(t) In districts zoned B-2 or B-3, where ever possible, less than 50% of off-street parking for the entire
property shall be located between the front facade of the principal building and the primary abutting street.
(u) Each facade greater than 100 feet in length shall employ structural or decorative elements to
reduce the apparent size and scale of the building, such as varying building setbacks, varying heights, varying
roof treatments or slopes, doorway openings, window openings, awnings, or decorative lighting. [Am. 13-021, Eff.
10-10-13]
(v) Compliance with design standards for multiple family housing included in the Comprehensive Plan
may be required by the approval authority. All structures in the RM-3, RM-4, and RM-5 districts shall have at
least 35% of the combined area of their exterior walls covered by brick, native stone, tinted or textured
concrete masonry units, windows, or other similar decorative material as may be approved by the approval
authority. “Exterior” shall be calculated as the total amount of wall area below the roof line that is visible from
grade level views on each side of the structure, and such calculations shall be included in the application
materials. If the amount of decorative material on the exterior walls of principal building is in excess of 35%,
then the approval authority may credit the excess amount against the requirement otherwise applicable to the
exterior walls of accessory buildings on the same lot.
[Am. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06; Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13; Am. 15-036, Eff. 7-30-15]
(w) Compliance with applicable design standards for industrial uses included in the Comprehensive
Plan may be required by the approval authority. All structures in the M-1, M-2, and M-3 districts shall have at
least 15% of the combined area of their exterior walls covered by brick, native stone, tinted or textured
concrete masonry units, windows, or other similar decorative material as approved by the approval authority.
15-51
“Exterior” shall be calculated as the total amount of wall area below the roof line that is visible from grade level
views on each side of the structure, and such calculations shall be included in the application materials. Any
amount of decorative material on the exterior walls of principal building in excess of the required percentage
may be credited against the requirement applicable to accessory buildings on the same lot.
[Am. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06; Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08; Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(x) In the event that the a fence along a lot line is approved, the applicant shall submit to the Zoning
Administrator a perpetual agreement or covenant specifying adequate provisions for ongoing maintenance of
such fence. Prior to the installation of such fence, such agreement or covenant shall be approved by the
Zoning Administrator and recorded by the applicant against the affected properties.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(y) The site plan shall conform to all Environmental Standards established in Section 15.04(12).
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(z) Where applicable under Section 15.04(25), the site or building plans shall designate a location for
centralized mail delivery.
(9) SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LARGE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS. In addition to all other
provisions of this section, the following provisions shall apply to all site plans which include a retail or
commercial service building in excess of 20,000 ft2 gross floor area. In any case where the provisions of this
subsection conflict with, or are more restrictive than any general requirements provided elsewhere in this
Code, the requirements of this subsection shall apply.
(a) Building Location. Where buildings are proposed to be located more than 200 feet from a public
street, the overall development design shall include smaller buildings on pads or outlots between such
buildings and the street. Placement and orientation of buildings shall facilitate appropriate land use transitions
and appropriate traffic flow to adjoining roads and neighboring commercial areas, and neighborhoods, and
must forward community character objectives as described in the Village’s Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Building Materials. Exterior building materials shall be of comparable aesthetic quality on all sides.
Building materials such as glass, brick, tinted and decorative concrete block, wood, stucco, and exterior
insulation and finish systems (EIFS) shall be used, as determined appropriate by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Decorative architectural metal with concealed fasteners or decorative tilt-up concrete panels
may be approved if incorporated into the overall design of the building.
(c) Building Design. The building exterior shall complement other buildings in the vicinity, and shall be
of a design determined appropriate by the Plan Commission. In addition to the standards of Section
15.05(8)(a), the more restrictive of the following shall apply:
1. The building shall employ varying setbacks, heights, roof treatments, doorways, window
openings, and other structural or decorative elements to reduce apparent size and scale of the
building.
2. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the structure’s façades that are visible from a public street
shall employ actual protrusions or recesses with a depth of at least six feet. No uninterrupted
façade shall extend more than 100 feet.
3. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of all of the combined linear roof eave or parapet lines of the
structure shall employ differences in height, with such differences being six (6) feet or more as
measured eave to eave or parapet to parapet.
4. Roofs with particular slopes may be required by the Planning & Zoning Commission to
complement existing buildings or otherwise establish a particular aesthetic objective.
15-52
5. Ground floor facades that face public streets shall have arcades (a series of outdoor spaces
located under a roof or overhang and supported by columns or arches), display windows, entry
areas, awnings, or other such features along no less than fifty (50) percent of their horizontal
length. The integration of windows into building design is required, and such windows shall be
of transparent glass or tinted to no more than 50% transparency between three (3) to eight (8)
feet above the walkway along any façades facing a public street. The use of blinds may be
approved where the Planning & Zoning Commission determines that the use thereof will
aesthetically enhance the building facade.
6. Building facades shall include a repeating pattern that includes no less than three (3) of the
following elements: (i) color change, (ii) texture change, (iii) material modular change, (iv)
expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than twenty four
(24) inches in width, such as an offset, reveal or projecting rib. At least one of these elements
shall repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than thirty (30) feet,
either horizontally or vertically.
(d) Building Entrances. Public building entryways shall be clearly defined and highly visible on the
building’s exterior design, and shall be emphasized by on-site traffic flow patterns. Two (2) or more of the
following design features shall be incorporated into all public building entryways: canopies or porticos,
overhangs, projections, arcades, peaked roof forms, arches, outdoor patios, display windows, distinct
architectural details. Where additional stores will be located in the principal building, each such store shall have
at least one exterior customer entrance that shall conform to the above requirements.
(e) Building Color. Building facade colors shall be non-reflective, subtle, neutral, or earth tone. The
use of high intensity colors, metallic colors, fluorescent colors or black on facades is prohibited. Building trim
and architectural accent elements may feature bright colors or black, but such colors shall be muted, not
metallic, not fluorescent, and not specific to particular uses or tenants. Standard corporate and trademark
colors shall be permitted only on signage.
(f) Screening. In addition to the standards of Section 15.05(8)(i), the more restrictive of the following
shall apply:
1. All ground-mounted and wall-mounted mechanical equipment, refuse containers and any
permitted outdoor storage shall be fully concealed from on-site and off-site ground level views,
with materials identical to those used on the building exterior.
2. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened by parapets, upper stories, or other areas of
exterior walls or roofs so as to not be visible from public streets adjacent or within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the subject property. Fences or similar rooftop screening devices may not be
used to meet this requirement.
3. Loading docks shall be completely screened from surrounding roads and properties. Said
screening may be accomplished through loading areas internal to buildings, screen walls, which
match the building exterior in materials and design, fully opaque landscaping at time of planting,
or combinations of the above.
4. Gates and fencing may be used for security and access, but not for screening, and they shall be
of high aesthetic quality. Decorative metal picket fencing and screening is acceptable.
Decorative, heavy-duty wood gates may be used. Chain link, wire mesh or wood fencing shall
not be used.
(g) Traffic Impact. In addition to the standards of Section 15.05(8)(a), the more restrictive of the
following shall apply:
15-53
1. All projects shall have direct access to an arterial street, or to a collector level street deemed
appropriate by the Plan Commission.
2. Vehicle access shall be designed to accommodate peak on-site traffic volumes without
disrupting traffic on public streets or impairing pedestrian safety. This shall be accomplished
through adequate parking lot design and capacity; access drive entry throat length, width,
design, location, and number; and traffic control devices; and sidewalks.
3. The site design shall provide direct connections to adjacent land uses if determined necessary
by the Planning & Zoning Commission to optimize safety and convenience in traffic and
pedestrian movements. Prior to approval of developments over 40,000 square feet, the
applicant shall provide adequate funding to the Village to hire a traffic engineer of the Village’s
choice to complete and present a Traffic Impact Analysis following Wisconsin Department of
Transportation District One guidelines. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall consider the parking
lot 100% full for level of service analysis. Where the project will cause off-site public roads,
intersections, or interchanges to function below Level of Service C, as defined by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, the Village may deny the application, require a size reduction in the
proposed development, or require that the developer construct and/or pay for required off-site
improvements.
(h) Parking. In addition to the standards of Section 15.07 and 15.06(10), the more restrictive of the
following will apply:
1. Parking lots in which the number of spaces is 20% or greater than the minimum number of
parking spaces required in Section 15.07(4), shall be permitted only if the Planning & Zoning
Commission finds specific and reasonable justification therefore.
2. Parking lot design shall employ interior, curbed landscaped islands at all parking aisle ends. In
addition, the project shall provide landscaped islands within each parking aisle spaced at
intervals no greater than one island per every twenty (20) spaces in that aisle. Islands at the
ends of aisles shall count toward meeting this requirement.
3. Landscaped and curbed medians, a minimum of ten (10) feet in width from back-of-curb to
back-of-curb, shall be used to create distinct parking areas of no more than 120 parking stalls.
(i) Bicycle and Pedestrian Facilities.
1. The entire development shall provide for safe pedestrian and bicycle access to all uses within
the development, connections to existing and planned public pedestrian and bicycle facilities,
and connections to adjacent properties.
2. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided from all building entrances to existing or planned public
sidewalks or pedestrian/bike facilities. The minimum width for sidewalks adjacent to buildings
shall be ten (10) feet; and the minimum width for sidewalks elsewhere in the development shall
be five (5) feet.
3. Sidewalks other than street sidewalks or building aprons shall have adjoining landscaping along
at least fifty (50) percent of their length. Such landscaping shall match the landscaping used for
the street frontages.
4. Crosswalks shall be clearly distinguished from driving surfaces to enhance pedestrian safety by
using different pavement materials, pavement color or pavement textures in addition to signage.
5. The development shall provide secure, integrated bicycle parking at a rate of one bicycle rack
space for every fifty (50) vehicle parking spaces.
15-54
6. The development shall provide exterior pedestrian furniture in appropriate locations at a
minimum rate of one seat for every 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
7. The development shall provide interior pedestrian furniture in appropriate locations at a
minimum rate of one (1) bench seat for every 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. Seating in
food service areas, or other areas where food or merchandise purchasing activities occur shall
not be counted in determining compliance with this requirement. A minimum of four (4) seats
shall be located within the store, with a clear view through exit doors to a passenger pick-up or
drop-off area.
(j) Central Areas and Features. Each development exceeding eighty thousand (80,000) square feet in
total gross floor area shall provide central area(s) or feature(s) such as a patio/seating area, pedestrian plaza
with benches, outdoor playground area, water feature, and/or other such deliberately designated areas or focal
points that adequately enhance the development and Village. All such areas shall be openly accessible to the
public, connected to the public and private sidewalk system, designed with materials compatible with the
building and remainder of the site, and shall be maintained over the life of the building project.
(ja) Emergency Services and Security Plan. Each project that includes a retail or commercial service
building of 20,000 square feet or greater shall be subject to preparation of an Emergency Services and
Security Plan (ESSP) by the applicant, submittal of that ESSP with the site plan review application, approval of
the ESSP by both the fire and police chiefs, and implementation and ongoing maintenance of the approved
ESSP by the property owner. Each ESSP for such projects shall include the following components, except if
one or more components is waived by both the fire and police chiefs:
1. Summary of overall approval to emergency services and security, including training, personnel,
equipment, site and building design, and ongoing maintenance.
2. Working drawings with all required hydraulic calculations and specifications prepared by the
installing contractor for an automatic fire sprinkler system, which shall be designed and
monitored in accordance with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) guidelines; specify
sprinkler control rooms located with adequate access for Fire Department, sprinkler
maintenance, and inspection personnel and at least forty (40) feet from all gas meters, electrical
meters and transformers; allow direct access from the building exterior to the sprinkler control
valve; specify hydraulic designs based on 90% available water supply (10% safety margin shall
be maintained); and be based on the most current approved water flow test conducted in
accordance with NFPA 291.
3. A program and plan for the street addressing of all buildings, and all separate business
ownerships within the buildings, consisting of street numbers, not less than six (6) inches in
height, placed on the exterior wall of the building(s) facing the street, service drive, or parking lot
providing primary access to the building(s) and located adjacent to any primary entrance door.
The plan shall also specify that all rear service doors shall also be clearly and permanently
labeled with the occupant names and street address.
4. Specifications for a fire alarm system, fire access roads, fire lanes, fire hydrants, fire department
standpipes (for buildings of over two stories), and access boxes that meet minimum
specifications maintained and from time to time amended by the Fire Department.
5. A plan and provisions for a centrally located security room that will be accessible and used by
the Village departments responsible for public safety.
6. A program for emergency and disaster incident preparedness and response.
15-55
7. Plans and specifications for an exterior digital security imaging system (DSIS) for security
surveillance purposes. The DSIS shall provide for complete surveillance of all exterior building
perimeters, rear and side areas, walkways, other common areas and parking lots within the
project. Such systems shall function continuously, whether the businesses are open or closed,
and shall provide visible surveillance to the above-described areas during hours of darkness.
All digital video recorded by such system shall be archived on the project site for a period of not
less than two (2) weeks, and shall be available to the Village for public safety purposes directly
through Internet Protocol (IP) transmission via the Village’s area wide data network and shall
also provide a “real time”, “live look” surveillance capability via that same network. Equipment
deployed under this requirement shall conform to minimum standards available from the
DeForest Police Department. All parcels on which such equipment is operated shall have
conspicuously posted at each entrance thereto a sign providing notice that video surveillance
equipment is in use.
8. Provisions for the ongoing maintenance and, where necessary, replacement of systems
described in this subsection in perpetuity. The project shall be required to provide, install and
maintain in good working order all systems described in this subsection, and grant necessary
easements to the Village allowing access and maintenance rights to all such systems, devices,
and areas. If the development consists of multiple buildings, tenant spaces and/or phases, all
systems described above shall be installed and fully operational for the applicable building upon
the occupancy of that building or portion of that building.
[Par (j) as created by 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08, renumbered by revisor]
(k) Cart Returns. A minimum of one (1) two hundred (200) square foot cart return area shall be
provided for every one hundred (100) parking spaces. Cart corrals shall be of durable, non-rusting, all season
construction, and shall be designed and colored to be compatible with the building and parking lot light
standards. Cart return areas shall be reasonably distributed throughout the parking area but no exterior cart
return or cart storage areas shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the building.
(l) Outdoor Display Areas. Exterior display areas shall be permitted only where clearly depicted on the
approved site plan. All exterior display areas shall be separated from motor vehicle routes by a physical
barrier visible to drivers and pedestrians, and by a minimum of ten (10) feet. Display areas on building aprons
shall maintain a minimum walkway width of ten (10) feet between the display items and any vehicle drives.
(m) Outdoor Storage Uses and Areas. Exterior storage structures or uses, including the parking or
storage of service vehicles, trailers, equipment, containers, crates, pallets, merchandise, materials, fork lifts,
trash, recyclables, and all other items shall be permitted only where clearly depicted and labeled on the
approved site plan, such outdoor storage uses and areas shall be appropriately screened as required by
Section 15.06(9).
(n) Landscaping. In addition to the standards of Section 15.06, the following, where more restrictive,
shall apply. On-site landscaping shall be provided at time of building occupancy and maintained per the
following landscaping requirements:
1. Landscaping plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval, as part of the site
plan.
2. Building foundation landscaping is required for all building elevations in order to provide visual
breaks in the mass of the building. Such foundation landscaping shall be placed along thirty
(30) percent of the building’s total perimeter, predominately near and along customer facades
and entrances facing public streets. One (1) ornamental tree with a minimum 1.5” caliper or one
(1) minimum 6-foot tall tree (“whips” not permitted), and four (4) shrubs at a minimum height of
18” tall shall be planted for every 10 linear feet of building foundation planting area. One (1)
street tree at a minimum of 2.0” caliper shall be planted at fifty (50) foot intervals along, and
within ten (10) feet of, all public and private streets and drives, including parking lot connections
and circulation drives, and loading areas. Such tree plantings shall be planted in tree wells
15-56
along the circulation drives adjacent to the sides of the building that face a public or private
street, along both sides of internal drives, and along the outside edge of loading areas. See
Section 15.06 for appropriate tree species variety.
3. One (1) shade tree at a minimum of 2.0” caliper shall be planted on each parking lot peninsula
and island. See Section 15.06 for appropriate tree species variety.
4. Tree wells shall be a minimum of thirty-six (36) square feet. All other landscaped areas shall be
at least ten (10) feet wide in their smallest dimension.
5. All parcels of land with buildings exceeding forty thousand (40,000) square feet in total gross
floor area shall be separated from any abutting area zoned or planned for residential,
institutional, or office use, by a berm not less than six (6) feet in height. The berm shall be
planted with a double row of white, green or blue spruce plantings, or similar species and
varieties approved by the Zoning Administrator, spaced fifteen (15) feet on center.
(o) Lighting. In addition to the standards of Section 15.04(12)(f), the following, where more restrictive,
shall apply:
1. Total cut-off luminaries with angles of less than ninety (90) degrees shall be required for all pole
and building security lighting to ensure no fugitive up-lighting occurs.
2. At a minimum, as measured over ambient lighting conditions on a clear night, exterior lighting
shall not exceed more than 0.5 foot-candles above ambient levels along all property lines, and
shall not exceed an average illumination level of 3.6 foot-candles nor provide less than 0.9 footcandles
in public parking and pedestrian areas.
3. The color and design of pole lighting standards shall be compatible with the building and the
Village’s public lighting in the area, and shall be uniform throughout the entire development site.
The maximum height for all poles shall be twenty (20) feet.
(p) Signage. In addition to the standards contained in Section 15.08, the following, where more
restrictive, shall apply.
1. The plan for exterior signage shall provide for modest, coordinated, and complimentary
exterior sign locations, configurations, and color throughout the development, including
outlots.
2. All freestanding signage within the development shall complement on-building signage.
3. Monument style ground signs are required, and shall not exceed a height of eight (8) feet.
4. Consolidated signs for multiple users may be required instead of multiple individual signs.
5. The Planning & Zoning Commission may require the use of muted corporate colors on signage
if proposed colors are not compatible with the Village’s design objectives for the area.
6. The use of logos, slogans, symbols, patterns, striping and other markings, and colors associated
with a franchise or chain is permitted, and shall be considered as contributing to the number and
area of permitted signs.
(q) Natural Resources Protection. Each project shall meet the Erosion Control and Stormwater
Management standards found in Chapter 24 of this Code. In general, existing natural features shall be
integrated into the site design as a site amenity. Storm water detention or conveyance features shall be
adequately maintained by the developer/owner unless dedicated to, and accepted by, the Village.
15-57
(r) Outlots. All buildings on outlots shall be of architectural quality comparable to the primary structure
as determined by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
[Cr. 05-10, Eff. 4-4-05]
(10) EMERGENCY SERVICES AND SECURITY PLAN. Each site plan submittal including one or
more buildings of greater than 40 feet in building height shall include an Emergency Services and Security
Plan (ESSP). Such ESSP will be subject to approval by both the fire and police chiefs. The property owner
shall be responsible for implementation and ongoing maintenance of the approved ESSP. Each ESSP for
such buildings shall include the components listed in §15.05(9)(j), except if one or more components is waived
by both the fire and police chiefs.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(11) SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CAMPGROUNDS. In addition to all other applicable provisions
of this section, the following provisions shall apply to all new campgrounds, along with expansions to
campgrounds legally established as of January 1, 2015.
(a) A site plan approval application for a new or expanded campground shall include the following
information:
1. A written description of the proposed operation, including proposed months of operation;
desired number, types, and characteristics of different desired camping units; other ancillary
uses existing or proposed for the site; operational procedures (e.g., noise and nuisance control,
clean-up); emergency access and evacuation plan; and assurances that the campground will be
developed and operated in accordance with all approved plans.
2. A campground plan map, drawn to scale, and including the existing and proposed layout;
location of camp sites and camping units, roads, parking areas, and site boundaries; existing
and proposed topography (grading); minimum required yards; existing and proposed buildings
and other structures; common recreational facilities; emergency/tornado shelter; water supplies;
sanitary waste disposal systems; stormwater management system meeting the requirements of
Chapter 24 as applicable; covered refuse storage areas enclosed by opaque walls or fences;
existing natural features including waterways, wetlands, floodplains, shoreland-wetland, and
shoreland areas; and existing and proposed vegetation and recreation areas.
(b) No single camping unit shall be occupied by the same party for a period of time longer than nine
continuous months in any 12 month period, except as may be further limited by state statutes or administrative
rules.
(c) The campground shall have clear, legal access to a public road. The campground shall have at
least two ways to access and depart the site in emergency situations. All driveways shall be at least 12 feet in
width and have curves to support recreational vehicle use.
(d) Camp sites and access roads shall be located, graded, and maintained so as to provide each
site with positive site drainage.
(e) Maximum gross density shall be eight individual camp sites or camping units per acre of active
camping area. Active camping area consists of camp sites and land supporting the camp sites including
access roads, recreational facilities, and other permanent campground infrastructure.
(f) Each individual camp site shall be at least 1,200 square feet in area, and there shall be a
minimum separation of 10 feet between camping units.
(g) Each camp site shall be clearly marked with an alpha or numeric symbol on a sign which is
clearly visible from an access road. All camp sites shall be labeled on a map, which shall be provided to each
campground occupant; local police, fire, and emergency service provider; and 911 dispatch center.
15-58
(h) Each campground shall provide common recreational space of suitable size, location, and
amenities for the expected patrons.
(i) Each campground may provide places to procure food, drink, sundries, or souvenirs to patrons,
provided that sales to those who are not patrons of the campground do not exceed 25 percent of total sales.
(j) Each campground shall be maintained under a single ownership.
(k) The number of camping cabins within a campground shall not exceed 25 percent of the total
number of camping units in the campground at any time.
(l) Each campground may contain one full-time residence for an owner or caretaker of the
campground.
(m) Each campground shall comply with all state regulations applicable to campgrounds, except as
may be permitted through other licenses or approvals from the state.
15.06 LANDSCAPE PLANS.
(1) LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIRED. A landscape plan prepared by an individual experienced in
landscape design shall be submitted as part of all applications for site plan review under §15.05. In the event
that a proposed addition would bring the total building size or paved area to 50% or greater of the original
building or paved area size, all quantitative landscaping standards in this section shall be met. Smaller building
or paved area additions shall require the site to be brought into compliance with the quantitative landscaping
standards in proportion to the size of the addition as compared to the original building or paved area to the
extent the site plan approval authority determines practical.
[Am. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(2) DEFINITIONS AS USED IN THIS SECTION. For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(a) Berm: A hill or contour of land that acts as a visual barrier between a lot and adjacent property,
alley, or street.
(b) Caliper: A measurement of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk measured six (6") inches above
natural grade for trees less than or equal to four (4") inches in diameter at such point; and measured twelve
(12") inches above grade for all other trees.
(c) Diameter at Breast Height or D.B.H. The diameter of a tree measured at four and one-half feet (4-
1/2') above the existing grade at the base of the tree.
(d) Deciduous: A plant which sheds its foliage at the end of each growing season.
(e) Evergreen. A tree or shrub whose foliage persists year round. The plant may be a cone and
needle bearing plant (i.e., pine, spruce, etc.) or a broadleaf plant (i.e., a rhododendron, holly, etc.)
(f) Opaque: When describing a landscape buffer means a dense, solid mass of plantings completely
obstructing the view of uses on the other side of the buffer.
(g) Parkway: Means the area between the street/curb and the property-line.
(h) Remove or Removal: Means the causing or accomplishing of the actual physical removal of a tree,
or the effective removal through severe pruning, damaging, poisoning, or other direct or indirect action
resulting in, or likely to result in, the death of a tree.
15-59
(i) Shrub: Deciduous or evergreen woody plant with an expected mature height of generally not more
than fifteen (15') feet, with single or multiple trunks or multiple leaders.
(j) Swale: A topographical indentation which channels periodic water runoff.
(k) Tree, Canopy: A deciduous, woody plant with an expected mature height of thirty feet or more and
possessing either a single trunk or multiple trunks, except those species listed in sec. 15.06(5)(a)1 or 2.
(l) Woodland: An area or stand of trees not being grown for commercial purposes whose total
combined canopy covers an area of one-half (1/2) acre or more and at least fifty percent (50%) of which is
composed of canopies of trees having a caliper of at least eight (8) inches, or any grove consisting of eight (8)
or more individual trees having a caliper of at least ten (10) inches whose combined canopies cover at least
fifty percent (50%) of the area encompassed by the grove.
(m) Landscape Features. A distinctive area or element intended to aesthetically enhance the site, such
as a rock garden, split rail fence, fountain, or bermed planting area. Landscape features may be located within
the setbacks, but shall not be located within the street right of way area or vision corner. Landscape features
located within the front yard setback shall not exceed four (4) feet in height.
(3) FORM AND CONTENT OF PLANS. All landscape plans shall be titled in the form of: “Landscape
Plan, [name and location of project]” shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than 1" = 20' and shall include the
following information:
(a) The name and address of the project developer, the location and names of abutting streets and
rights of way, a graphic and written scale, the date of the plan and any subsequent revision;
(b) The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed property lines, buildings, structures,
parking lots and driveways, roadways and rights-of-way, easements, sidewalks, bicycle paths, refuse disposal
areas, fences, freestanding electrical equipment, light fixtures, other surface utility structures, signs and other
freestanding structural features, recreational facilities, setbacks and easements.
(c) The location, quantity, installation size, mature size, and both scientific and common names of all
proposed plant materials.
(d) Existing and proposed contours, including the location, slope ratios (horizontal/vertical) of all
proposed berming, at two foot (2') contour intervals.
(e) The location, dimensions, general elevations and slope ratios of all detention and retention areas
and drainage ways.
(f) Details and elevations at the top and bottom of all proposed retaining and screening walls and all
fences.
(g) The designation, location, species and size of all existing trees eight inches (8") and larger in
diameter measured four feet (4') above natural grade with any trees to be removed clearly identified. In the
event a significant number of trees exist in concentrated areas on the site, only the boundaries of the tree
grove/forest or woodland area need be shown.
(h) The number and total area in square feet of parking areas, the percentage and area in square feet
of all interior parking lot landscape areas, the total linear length of buffer yards, the quantities of various plants
to be provided within buffer yards, and the area in square feet of the proposed interior open space on the
property.
(i) Additional elevations, cross sections and other site or construction details determined to be
necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
15-60
(4) LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS. The following standards shall apply in determining
the landscaping improvements required to be installed as part of the development of land requiring site plan
approval:
(a) The development, redevelopment, expansion, or substantial modification of buildings or site
improvements or substantial changes in use subject to the provisions of this chapter shall include at least the
minimum amount of landscaping described in this section and in the district regulations. Landscaping
materials which meet the minimum installation sizes shown below shall earn landscaping points per plant as
indicated in the following table. The classifications of individual plant species shall correspond to the
classification used in the publication entitled: A Guide To Selecting Landscape Plants For Wisconsin, E. R.
Hasselkus, U. W. Extension Publication: A2865 which shall be maintained on file with the Zoning Administrator
for public inspection.
a. LANDSCAPING POINTS AND INSTALLATION SIZES
PLANT CATEGORY
*
LANDSCAPING POINTS PER
PLANT
MINIMUM INSTALLATION SIZE
Canopy Tree
75
2" Caliper
Tall Deciduous Tree
30
1 ½” Caliper
Medium Deciduous Tree
15
6' Tall
Low Deciduous Tree
10
4' Tall
Tall Evergreen Tree
40
5' Tall
Medium Evergreen Tree
20
4' Tall
Low Evergreen Tree
12
3' Tall
Tall Deciduous Shrub
5
36" Tall
Medium Deciduous Shrub
3
24" Tall
Low Deciduous Shrub
1
18" Tall
Medium Evergreen Shrub
5
18" Tall/Wide
Low Evergreen Shrub
3
12" Tall/Wide
Bio-Retention Swales/Rain Gardens/Green Roofs (when deliberately planted with
appropriate, non-turf species per industry standards)
Landscaping Points per
100 Square Feet in Area
(not to exceed 300 total
points)
20
Maximum Spacing
Between Plantings
12”
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(b) Method to Determine Future Use of Vacant Land. For the purposes of determining landscaping
and buffering requirements of this section, whenever a site is adjacent to vacant or undeveloped land, the
method to be used to determine the future use of the adjacent land shall be as follows:
1. Incorporated Lands. The future use of land within the corporate limits of the Village of DeForest
shall be that shown on the Village's Zoning Map.
15-61
2. Unincorporated Lands. For properties not within the corporate limits of the Village of DeForest,
the future use of land shall be that shown in the applicable town Comprehensive Plan.
[08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
3. Plant Variety. The plan shall provide for a variety of species of trees and shrubs on each parcel
to provide visual and seasonal diversity and to reduce the likelihood of extensive loss as a result
of insect infestation or the spread of disease within a given species. The required number of
different species shall be as follows:
Size of Parcel
Qty. of Tree Species
Qty. of Shrub Species
0 up to but not including 1.5 acres.
N/A
N/A
1.5 acre up to but not including 5 acres
2
3
5 acres up to but not including 15
acres
4
5
15 acres or more
5
7
(5) SELECTION OF SPECIES.
(a) In the preparation of landscape plans under this section, the planting of the following trees is
prohibited in the public right-of-way, and shall be minimized within 15 feet of any lot line and parking
lot:
1. Ailanthus (Tree of Heaven)
2. Box Elder (acer nuegundo)
3. Catalpa
4. Cottonwood (populus deltoids)
5. European Mountain Ash
6 European White Birch
7. Fruit-bearing Trees (except that Crabapples and trees where the fruit is intended for harvest
shall per permitted)
8. Lombardy Poplar
9. Mulberry
10. Siberian Elm
11. Silver Maple (acer saccharinum)
12. Walnut
13. Willow (except along water edges)
14. Evergreen trees (prohibited in the public right-of-way, discouraged in parking lot islands, not
discouraged in other locations).
15. American Elm (almus american)
16. Black Locust (robinia pseudacelia)
17. Hickory (carya)
18. Other weak-wooded or trees which deposit significant number of twigs, seed pods, fruits, nuts
or other debris as determined by order of the Zoning Administrator.
(b) Several shrubs and trees, which are not native to Wisconsin, have an established history of
spreading to nearby parks and conservancy areas. These non-native plants tend to become overly abundant
and ultimately eliminate many desirable native species. In addition, some native species are undesirable due
to the threat of invasive insects. The control and eradication of these unsuitable plants create a costly
management problem. The following species of plant material are prohibited for use as landscape plants:
15-62
1. Honeysuckle: Lonicerax-bella, Lonicera marrawi, Lonicera tatarica
2. Buckthorn (common): Rhamnus cathartica, Rhamnus frangula (tall hedge)
3. Russian Olive: Elaeagnus angustifolia
4. Norway Maple: Acer platanoides
5. Native Ash
6. Paper Birch
(c) The following trees are overused along public roadways in the Village. Therefore, their planting in
public rights-of-way shall be allowed only where specifically approved by the Director of Parks, Recreation, and
Natural Resources:
1. Maple (acer)
2. Linden and Basswood (tilia)
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(6) SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PLANT MATERIALS.
(a) Plant Quality.
1. Planting materials used to comply with this section shall be of specimen quality, shall have been
grown in the same hardiness zone as central Wisconsin, and be capable of withstanding
extremes of individual site microclimates.
2. Trees selected for planting shall be healthy, free of insects, diseases and damage that would
threaten the viability of the plant. Parkway trees and parking lot trees shall have a minimum
branching height of six (6) feet above the ground to allow adequate visual and physical
clearance.
3. All plant material shall comply with the provisions set forth by the American Standard for Nursery
Stock, ANSI Z60.1-1980.
(b) Installation. All landscaping shall be installed according to the following requirements:
1. All plantings shall be installed in accordance with the Wisconsin Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
2. All unpaved areas within a street right-of-way and all swales forming the drainage system for a
parcel shall be sodded or seeded. In all commercial, office and industrial districts, a water
supply for maintaining adequate moisture levels in the parkways shall be provided within one
hundred (100') feet of all points within the parkway.
3. The branches of deciduous trees and shrubs may be selectively thinned by up to 1/3 at the time
of planting to reduce stress from transplanting in accordance with good horticultural practice. In
no case shall trimming result in reducing the overall height of the plant below that specified on
the approved landscape plan.
4. All trees and shrubs shall be mulched with a minimum four (4") inch depth and all flower and
groundcover beds shall be mulched with a minimum two (2") inch depth of shredded hardwood
bark or other generally accepted commercial mulch.
5. Landscape materials shall be selected and located so as to avoid obstructing visual or physical
access to fire hydrants. Trees shall not be located closer than ten (10') feet and shrubs shall
not be located closer than five (5') feet to fire hydrants, transformers or other utility fixtures.
15-63
6. All trees and shrubs shall be located in such a way that they do not obstruct views of vehicles
operators and pedestrians at intersections, alleys, driveways, parking lots and sidewalks.
(c) Maintenance.
1. Responsibility of Owner. The owner of any property, whether or not subject to an approved
landscape plan required by this section, shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair,
weeding, and replacement of all landscaping materials and barriers as may be required by this
section. All plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition, and a
neat and orderly appearance. Plants shall be replaced as necessary, and shall be kept free of
refuse, weeds and debris. Fences, walls, and other barriers, whether or not required by the
landscape plan, shall be maintained in good condition and appearance. The owner shall control
weeds in accordance with Chapters 11, 12 and 27, and with any subdivider’s agreement
applicable to the property.
[Am. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06]
2. Noncompliance with Maintenance Standards. Property owners notified by the Village that their
landscaping violates the provisions of this section shall be required to restore or replace said
plant material within one growing season. Restoration or replacement of fences, walls and/or
other barriers shall be completed within nine months of notice by the Village. If any violation is
not corrected within the required period of time, the property owner shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in sec. 15.03.
(7) PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Applicability. Where a parcel abuts a dedicated public right-of-way, landscaping shall be provided
in accordance with this subsection. The requirements of this subsection are in addition to the minimum
landscape points required elsewhere in this section and by the district regulations.
(b) Parkway Trees (or “Street Trees”):
1. Location. Trees shall be planted in the parkway along all streets no closer than ten (10) feet
from any intersecting driveway or walkway, fire hydrant, back of street sign, or sewer or water
lateral, twenty-five (25) feet from any streetlight, front of street sign, or right-of-way of an
intersecting local street; and fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way of an intersecting arterial or
collector street. Such distances may be reduced by the Director of Public Works if public safety
and services are not compromised. Parkway trees shall be installed midway between the
sidewalk (existing or planned) and the street curb, unless underground utility installations or
other factors require the shifting of the trees within the width of the parkway.
2. Number. Parkway trees shall be planted such that the total number of trees shall equal or
exceed the ratio of one (1) for each fifty (50) feet of street frontage.
3. Size, Species, and Layout. Parkway trees shall be two (2) inches in diameter at breast height,
and selected with reference to the Village’s Tree/Shrub Species Recommendations and
Prohibitions List. Prior to installation, parkway tree species and layout shall be subject to the
approval of the Director of Parks, Recreation, and Natural Resources or designee.
4. Replacement. All parkway trees shall be guaranteed and replaced if necessary during the first
two (2) full growing seasons. A complete growing season shall be defined as the dates in any
given year between the last and the first frosts, except that if parkway trees are installed by
June 1 of any year, that year shall be considered one (1) complete growing season for purposes
of this section.
15-64
(c) Modifications and Exceptions: The Zoning Administrator may approve modifications and
exceptions to the quantity, placement, and spacing of parkway trees, including their placement in other
locations on the subject property, in the following circumstances:
1. The parkway is not wide enough to support tree growth.
2. The location of utilities under or above the parkway area would conflict with tree planting.
3. Traffic visibility would be unreasonably impaired.
4. If within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction, the associated Town Board has approved a
motion or resolution indicating that the Town does not desire trees within parkway areas.
[Am. 13-001]
(8) MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS. All multifamily residential sites
shall comply with this subsection. The requirements of this subsection are in addition to the minimum
landscape points required by the district regulations.
(a) All yards shall be seeded or sodded.
(b) All front and exterior side yards on corner lots shall contain a minimum of one (1) canopy tree per
fifty (50) lineal feet of street frontage.
[Subd 1 repealed. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(c) All interior side and rear yards shall contain a mix of canopy, evergreen and other trees equivalent
to at least one (1) per fifty (50') lineal feet, and including large shrubs along at least thirty (30%) percent of the
interior side and rear property lines. Shrubs shall be spaced at no more than four (4') feet on center. The
trees and shrubs may be clustered.
(9) NON RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS. All non-residential sites shall comply with
this subsection.
(a) All yards not covered by buildings, parking lots, or other hard surfaces shall be sodded, seeded or
otherwise improved with some combination of turf, a native vegetative ground cover, or a decorative
landscaping or erosion control feature.
(b) Foundation plantings shall be provided on those sides of a building that face a public right-of-way in
a planting bed with a minimum width of five (5) feet adjacent to the entire building length, except where
sidewalks and driveways leading directly into the building are provided for ingress and egress or where
otherwise part of an approved site plan under §15.05.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(c) Service yards, loading docks and exterior work areas on lots adjacent to non-industrial uses shall be
screened from view from adjacent non-industrial properties and the public right-of-way, public lands, and public
access easements. The screening shall consist of an opaque fence or wall constructed of commercial-grade
wood; masonry; architectural-grade, decorative metal; or such other decorative material as may be part of an
approved site plan under §15.05.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13; Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
(d) Outdoor storage yards shall be screened from adjacent non-industrial properties and public rightsof-
way, public lands, and public access easements by opaque walls or fences (including opaque doors or
gates, if applicable) with a height at least equal to the height of material to be stored or eight (8) feet,
whichever is less. Where stored materials exceed eight (8’) feet in height, plantings shall be provided along the
outside perimeter of all portions of the fence or wall visible from an adjacent property, public right-of-way or
other public lands or access easements. The mature height of the plantings shall be not less than the height of
the materials being screened, and fast growing species shall be used where practical.
15-65
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
(e) Plans for parking areas shall include a description of snow removal methods and indicate snow
storage areas. Plan shall provide sufficient detail to demonstrate that plantings will not be damaged or
destroyed by snow removal and storage activities.
Table 15.06A: Minimum landscaping points required by zoning district.
Minimum Landscaping Points1 (Add for total points
required2) Zoning District
For Business Zoning Districts B-1 B-2 B-3 A-B
per 100 Linear Ft. of Building Foundation 0 50 50 20
per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area 0 20 20 5
per 100 Linear Ft. of Street Frontage 0 50 50 20
per 10,000 sq. ft. of Paved Area or every 20 parking stalls4 20 90 90 40
For Industrial Zoning Districts M-1 M-2 M-3
per 100 Linear Ft. of Building Foundation3 40 40 40
per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area3 20 20 20
per 100 Linear Ft. of Street Frontage 40 40 40
per 10,000 sq. ft. of Paved Area or every 20 parking stalls4 70 70 70
For Other Non-Residential Zoning Districts RM-B O-R REC
per 100 Linear Ft. of Building Foundation 40 50 20
per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area 20 20 5
per 100 Linear Ft. of Street Frontage 40 50 20
per 10,000 sq. ft. of Paved Area or every 20 parking stalls4 70 90 40
[Sub. (9) Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11; Am. 15-036; Eff. 7-30-15]
Notes:
1 Plantings required under this table may be used to meet other landscaping and screening requirements
within this chapter, except that parkway tree requirements in Section 15.06(7) and parking lot screening
where required under Section 15.06(10)(b) are in addition to the minimum landscaping points in this table.
2 By approval of the applicable site plan approval authority, required landscaping points may be shifted
between areas represented in this table (e.g., from paved areas to building foundations).
3 For every 100 lineal feet over 1,000 lineal feet, the landscape point requirement associated with building
foundation length shall be reduced to 10 points per 100 lineal feet. For every 1,000 square feet over 50,000
sq. ft. of gross floor area, the landscape point requirement associated with gross floor area shall be reduced
to 5 points per 1,000 sq. ft.
4 The greater of the two calculations shall be the required point standard.
(10) OFF STREET PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS. In addition to the requirements
established in sub. (9), all required off-street parking areas designed to accommodate four (4) or more vehicles
in any zone shall be landscaped according to the standards in this subsection.
(a) Canopy Tree and Island Requirements. All off-street vehicular parking areas shall be provided
with canopy trees and tree islands as provided in this paragraph. Plantings required under Sections 15.06(8)
15-66
or (9) may be used to satisfy the requirements of this paragraph.
1. Canopy Trees Standards. Canopy trees shall be located in tree islands or within ten feet of
the periphery of the parking area surface. Existing trees with a caliper of at least 2" meeting the
location requirements of this paragraph may be applied toward the canopy tree requirements.
2. Tree Islands. Parking spaces shall be separated by a tree island or peninsula at the rate of
one (1) tree island or peninsula for each linear row of twelve (12) parking spaces for single row
configurations, or for each twenty-four (24) parking spaces in double row configurations. All tree
islands and peninsulas shall have a minimum width of four feet (4') as measured from the inside of
the curb and a minimum length of 10 feet. Each tree island or peninsula shall contain at least one
tree, unless in the determination of the Zoning Administrator the tree would unduly interfere with site
lighting or utilities.
(b) Parking Area Screening. Where any part of an off-street parking area designed for four (4) or
more vehicles is located within 25 feet of a residentially zoned parcel, or is located such that a nearby
residentially zoned property would be affected by noise or headlight glare, a screening barrier shall be provided
on the parcel where the parking area is located. The effective height of the barrier shall be at least three and
one-half (3½) feet above the parking surface. The barrier may consist of wood or masonry fencing, walls,
berms, or plant material. Where plant materials are used for screening, they shall be in addition to the
plantings required under Sections 15.06(8) or (9) and be of suitable size and density to accomplish the
screening objective within three years from the time of planting.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(11) MISCELLANEOUS LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Retention and Detention Ponds. Landscaping shall be provided around the perimeter of
retention and detention ponds generally above the high water level. Only plants which are adapted to
temporary flooding may be planted below high water level.
(b) Ground Level Air Conditioning Units and Mechanical Equipment. Ground level air conditioning
units and other mechanical equipment shall be landscaped on all sides visible from the public right-of-way to a
minimum height of thirty (30) inches. The plants used shall have a mature height which will meet or exceed
the height of the equipment which it is screening.
(c) Ground Signs and Ground Lights. The area immediately surrounding the foundation of ground
signs shall be planted with shrubs, groundcover, or perennial flowers. Plants shall be selected for a mature
height which will not exceed the bottom of the sign's message. Ground lights for signs shall be screened from
view from the public rights-of-way with evergreen shrubs or groundcover to a minimum height equal to that of
the light(s).
(d) Refuse Receptacles. Refuse receptacles and waste removal areas shall be screened from view on
the three sides most visible from public right-of-ways or adjacent properties. The screening shall consist of a
solid fence constructed of masonry, or commercial-grade wood fencing materials and shall be a minimum of
six (6') feet and a maximum of eight (8') feet tall. Shrubs and/or groundcover shall be planted along such
screens to help soften their appearance. Refuse receptacles shall be enclosed on the fourth side with a gate
to contain trash or other debris. The gate side of the waste receptacle shall be oriented toward the interior of
the site.
(12) SUBSTITUTIONS AND CHANGES.
(a) Minor Revisions. Once a landscape plan has been approved and a building permit issued, minor
revisions to the approved landscape plan, including the substitution of equivalent plantings and ground covers
may be approved by the Zoning Administrator where such revisions do not diminish the benefits of the
approved landscape plan. All such approvals shall be in writing and be accompanied by revised landscape
plans. A revision shall be considered minor when there is no reduction in the quantity of plant material, no
15-67
significant change in size or location of plant material, and substitute plants are of the same category (i.e.,
canopy trees, evergreen trees, large or small shrubs, groundcover, etc.) and have approximately the same
design characteristics (mature size, spread, density) as the materials being replaced.
(b) Plan Amendment. Any amendments to the approved landscape plan other than those described in
sub. (12)(a) shall be approved in the same manner, and in accordance with the same standards, upon which
the original approval was given.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(13) ACCEPTANCE OF LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS.
(a) Inspection and Approval. Upon completion of the installation of landscaping on a development site,
the Zoning Administrator shall inspect the site for conformance with the adopted landscape plan. Except as
provided in par (b), the Zoning Administrator shall approve the installation prior to issuance of any certificate of
occupancy required under Chapter 14.
(b) Exception. If inclement weather prohibits completion of the landscaping during a given planting
season, prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, an applicant may post a bond or establish a cash
escrow for the value of the outstanding plant material and cost of labor to install such landscaping. Such bond
or escrow shall be held by the Village until such planting is completed to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator. In the event the required plantings are not completed within a reasonable time as determined by
the Administrator, the Administrator shall cause the planting to be completed and draw on the escrow account
to pay costs incurred in connection with such work.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
15.065 LIGHTING PLANS AND STANDARDS.
[Cr. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06]
(1) PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to regulate the spill-over of light and glare on operators
of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses in the vicinity of a light source in order to promote traffic safety
and prevent the creation of nuisances. A further purpose of this section is to regulate outdoor night lighting
fixtures to preserve and enhance the area’s dark sky while promoting safety, conserving energy and preserving
the environment for astronomy.
(2) APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS. The requirements of this section apply to all private exterior
lighting within the jurisdiction of this chapter, except for lighting within public rights-of-way and/or lighting
located on public property. For the purpose of this section, “exterior lighting” means an outdoor artificial
illuminating device, whether permanent or portable, used for illumination or advertisement, including general
lighting fixtures, searchlights, spotlights and floodlights, whether for architectural lighting, parking lot lighting,
landscape lighting, signage or other purposes. “Shielded” means a fixture that is shielded in such a manner
that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected at
least fifteen degrees below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is
emitted.
(3) DEPICTION ON OR WITH REQUIRED SITE PLAN: Any and all exterior lighting shall be depicted
as to its location, orientation and configuration on or with any site plan required for the development of the
subject property under §15.05.
(4) REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Orientation of Fixture. All exterior lighting shall be shielded, except for fixtures with light output
equivalent to a 150 Watt incandescent fixture or less. No exterior lighting fixture of greater than 150 Watt
incandescent equivalent output shall be oriented so that the lighting element (or a transparent shield) is visible
from a property located within a residential zoning district other than from the property on which the fixture is
located.
15-68
(b) Fixture Height. Except as provided in par. (j), the height of any light fixture shall not exceed 25 feet
in any residential zoning district and 35 feet in any other zoning district.
(c) Intensity of Illumination and Filtering. Maximum average lighting levels within parking, circulation,
and loading areas shall not exceed 2.5 footcandles within non-residential zoning districts and 1.5 footcandles
within residential zoning districts. In no instance shall the amount of illumination attributable to exterior lighting,
as measured at the property line, exceed 0.50 footcandles above ambient lighting conditions on a cloudless
night. All metal halide fixtures shall be filtered by a translucent glass or acrylic enclosure. Quartz glass shall
not be sufficient to satisfy this requirement.
(d) Flashing, Flickering and other Distracting Lighting. Flashing, flickering and/or other lighting which
may distract motorists are prohibited. This paragraph shall not be construed to prohibit flashing bulbs in a
seasonal decorative display provided that such bulbs do not exceed 5 Watts each.
(e) Minimum Lighting Standards. All areas designated on required site plans for customer vehicular
parking, loading, or circulation and used for any such purpose after sunset shall provide artificial illumination in
such areas at a minimum intensity of 0.2 footcandles. Private driveways not intended for customer vehicular
parking, loading, or circulation are exempt from this minimum lighting standard.
(f) Nonconforming Lighting. All lighting fixtures existing prior to June 9, 2006 shall be considered as
legal conforming structures (see §15.17). All replacement fixtures shall fully comply with the requirements of
this section.
(g) Display Lot Lighting. Display lot lighting shall be extinguished within thirty (30) minutes after closing
of the business. Under no circumstances shall the illumination of display lots be permitted between 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. except that an average exterior lighting intensity for security purposes not exceeding 1.0
footcandle shall be permitted.
(h) Architectural Lighting. All architectural lighting shall be of 150 Watts or less if incandescent, and
shall be of 70 Watts or less for other lighting sources. A minimum of 90 percent of the illumination from
architectural lighting shall fall on the illuminated structure.
(i) Use of Mercury Vapor Fixtures. No new mercury vapor exterior lighting fixtures shall be installed.
(j) Special Exceptions. The site plan approval authority under §15.05(2) may grant exceptions to the
requirements of §15.065(4) in one or more of the following circumstances:
1. For outdoor recreation use and assembly areas such as athletic fields.
2. Under gas station pump island canopies and for other intensive activity areas in which motor
vehicles and pedestrians routinely operate in close proximity with one another. Use of recessed
canopy lighting to minimize off-site impacts shall be required.
3. In cases where the applicant provides documentation to demonstrate that the overall lighting
program being proposed provides a reasonable alternative approach to fully meeting the
purpose of §15.065.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13; Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11]
15.07 OFF-STREET PARKING, ACCESS, LOADING.
(1) OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIRED. Off street parking shall be provided within the various zoning
districts as provided in this section. All required spaces shall be unobstructed and available for use for parking
by employees, occupants, patrons or other invitees of the premises. The number of required parking spaces
shall be determined as follows:
15-69
(a) General. The number of spaces provided shall not be less than that designated for a specified use
as set forth in sub (4).
(b) Computation. When any calculation of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this
section results in a fractional number, the result shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
(c) Collective Provisions. Off-street parking facilities for separate uses may be provided collectively if
the total number of spaces is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use.
Modification of total number of collective spaces serving mixed uses may be granted by the Village Board as
part of approval of a Planned Unit Development or any part thereof.
(d) Employee Parking. Parking space requirements based on number of employees shall be calculated
on the maximum total number of employees on duty or residing on the premises at any one time.
(e) Maximum Residential Spaces. The total number of accessory parking spaces provided for a
single-family, duplex, or multiple-family dwelling shall be not more than 50% or four spaces, whichever is
greater, more than the minimum number required.
(2) DESIGN STANDARDS. Each required parking space shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Dimensions. A required off-street parking space shall be at least nine (9') feet wide and at least
eighteen (18') feet long, twenty-three (23) feet long for parallel spaces, exclusive of access drives or aisles,
ramps, columns, or work areas and shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven (7') feet.
(b) Access. Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for one way traffic shall be as follows:
Aisles shall be not less than twenty-four (24) feet wide for ninety (90) degree parking, fifteen (15) wide for fortyfive
degree parking (angle shall be measured between centerline of parking space and centerline of aisle), and
twelve (12) feet wide for parallel parking. No parking of more than two (2) spaces shall be designed as to
require any vehicle to back into a public street.
(c) Surfacing. All required off-street parking and traffic circulation areas shall be properly graded and
paved with asphalt, concrete, pavers, or a similar hard surface, except that gravel or another all-weather,
dustless material may be permitted within the ETZ Area if approved by the Joint Committee, for public park
sites in which the approved park master plan advises a more rural finish, or for temporary parking associated
with a temporary use permitted under §15.16(7). In no case shall any minimum required parking space be
provided outside of hard-surfaced or graveled areas.
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(d) Landscaping. All parking areas for four or more vehicles shall be landscaped and screened as
provided in sec. 15.06.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(e) Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from
residential properties and from public rights-of-way as not to interfere with the residential use or vehicular
safety.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(f) Location. All required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building or use
served, or on adjacent parcels within five hundred (500) feet of the main entrance to the use served, provided,
however that:
1. No parking facilities for a business or industrial use shall be located in a residential zoning
district.
2. In any case where required off-street parking is being provided on a different parcel than the use
it is intended to serve and/or if two or more parcels share a common parking facility, and such
parking in either case is necessary to satisfy the minimum parking requirements of this chapter,
15-70
a joint parking agreement or easement defining the obligations of each party with respect to the
use and maintenance of the parking facility shall be prepared by the applicant, approved by the
Zoning Administrator, and executed and recorded against the off-site parcel(s) on which parking
is being provided. Such recording shall occur with the Dane County Register of Deeds prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy permit. The easement or agreement shall include
language that prohibits its termination or amendment without prior approval of the Village of
DeForest to ensure that users on all affected parcels are able to maintain adequate parking to
serve the specified uses and are able to legally access that parking.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(3) LOADING FACILITIES. Loading facilities as required by sub (4) shall comply with this subsection.
(a) Location. All required loading spaces or berths shall be located on the same lot as the use served.
All loading berths, off-street access thereto and vehicles parked adjacent to them at any location which is
adjacent to a residential district shall be completely screened therefrom as required by sec. 15.06. No
permitted or required loading space or berth shall be located within forty (40') feet of the nearest point of
intersection of any two streets or highways. No loading space or berth shall be located in a required front or
side yard, and any loading space or berth located in a required rear yard shall be open to the sky.
(b) Calculation. Where the number of loading spaces required by sub. (4) is based upon the area of a
building or parcel, the stated number of spaces shall be the minimum provided for each increment of area or
any fraction thereof.
(c) Dimensions. Unless otherwise specified, a required off-street loading space or berth shall be ten
(10') feet wide and at least forty-five (45') feet long, exclusive of aisles and maneuvering space and shall have
a vertical clearance of at least fifteen (15') feet.
(d) Access. Each required off-street loading space or berth shall be design with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street, highway or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movement.
(e) Surfacing. All open off-street loading spaces shall be improved with a compacted select gravel
base, not less than seven inches thick, and surfaced with an all-weather, dustless material.
(f) Utilization. Space allocated for any off-street loading berth shall not be used to satisfy any
requirement for off-street parking facilities.
(g) Facilities. Uses for which off-street loading facilities are required by this section but which are
located in buildings that have a gross floor area of less than 1,000 square feet shall be exempt from the
requirements of this subsection if the building is otherwise provided with adequate receiving facilities approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission or, for properties within the ETZ Area, by the Joint Committee, which
are accessible by motor vehicle from any adjacent alley or service drive on the same lot.
(4) NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED.
(a) General. Except as provided in sub.(b), the required number of off-street parking and off-street
loading spaces shall be as set forth in the following table:
[08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
USE
PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
LOADING SPACES REQUIRED
RESIDENTIAL
Single Family, or
Townhouse Dwelling
Unit
2 per Dwelling Unit
None
15-71
USE
PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
LOADING SPACES REQUIRED
Multi-Family Dwelling
Unit:
Studio
1 Bedroom
2 Bedroom or more
None Required
2 per Dwelling Unit
2 per Dwelling Unit
2+ Bedroom - 2 per Dwelling Unit
One parking space per unit must be
located underground or below living
quarters for buildings larger than four
units.
None required for the first 25 units;
thereafter, 1 space for every 100
dwelling units or fraction thereof per
building.
Elderly Housing
1 per Dwelling unit plus 1 space for
each employee at peak shift
None
Accessory Dwelling Unit
1 per Dwelling Unit
None
Commercial Indoor
Lodging
1 per Sleeping room or unit plus 1
space for each employee plus any
spaces required for restaurant/lounge,
banquet areas and meeting rooms
As required for restaurant/lounge
square footage
Group, Congregate,
Assisted Living, &
Nursing Homes
1 per 6 patient beds plus 1 for each
employee at peak shift
One
Child Day Care Center
One space per employee plus 0.1
space per person of licensed
capacity.
None
Hospital
1 space per 3 beds plus 0.4 spaces
per employee plus 1 space per 5
average daily out-patient visits plus 1
space per 10 emergency room
treatments
1 per 100,000 sq ft GFA up to
500,000 sq ft plus 1 per 200,000 sq
ft thereafter.
NON-RESIDENTIAL
Indoor Retail Sales of
Goods, Shopping
Centers
4 per 1,000 sq ft of Gross Leasable
Area (GLA)
1 per 50,000 sq ft GLA up to
100,000 plus 1 per 100,000 sq ft up
to 500,000 sq ft plus 1 per 200,000
sq ft thereafter.
15-72
USE
PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
LOADING SPACES REQUIRED
Service Retail 2.5 per 1,000 sq ft of GLA Same as Indoor Retail Sales of
Goods
Personal Services
2 per treatment station but not less
than 4 per 1,000 square feet GFA
None
Motor Vehicle Sales
2.5 per 1000 sq ft of GFA plus interior
sales space; 1.5 per 1000 sq ft of
external display (does not include
stock areas closed to the public)
Same as industrial
Motor Vehicle Service
4 stalls per service bay plus 1 stall per
each 500 sq ft exceeding 1,000 sq ft
of indoor floor area.
Same as industrial
Mortuary or Funeral
Parlor
7 spaces for each room used as a
chapel plus one for each funeral
vehicle.
One
Other Retail/Service
Uses
As determined by the Zoning
Administrator
Same as Indoor Retail Sales of
Goods
Restaurant, Lounge or
Bar
10 per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor
Area (GFA)
With indoor seating area, one; with
no seating, none
General Offices and
Financial Institutions
3 per 1,000 sq ft of GFA
None for the first 30,000 sq ft; 1 per
each 100,000 sq ft thereafter
Medical Offices
3 per medical staff employed
None
Industrial
1 per employee of peak shift plus 1
per vehicle operated by the business;
plus 1 per 500 sq ft of office space
designated as visitor parking
1 per 25,000 sq ft up to 50,000 sq ft;
plus 1 for the next 50,000 sq ft plus
1 per 100,000 sq ft thereafter.
Storage/Wholesale/Utility
0.5 per 1,000 sq ft GFA plus any
required spaces for office, sales, etc.
One for the first 50,000 sq ft GFA
plus one space per 100,000 sq ft
thereafter
15-73
USE
PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
LOADING SPACES REQUIRED
Mini Warehouse 3 spaces at the office None
Government
3 per 1000 sq ft of GFA (excluding
garage space)
As determined by the Zoning
Administrator
Elementary/Middle
Schools
1.5 per classroom/teaching room plus
1 per employee
1 per 100,000 sq ft GFA
Secondary/College
1 per employee plus 1 per four
students of building design capacity
1 per 100,000. sq ft GFA
Public Assembly
.25 per person in permitted capacity
1 per 100,000 sq ft GFA
Campground or Other
Outdoor Recreational
1 per campsite (including RV space)
or per expected numer of patrons for
other recreational use
None
(b) Deferred Improvement. The site plan approval authority under §15.05(2) may allow up to twentyfive
percent (25%) of the parking spaces required for any business or professional use to remain unimproved
and unavailable for parking, subject to the following conditions:
1. The applicant may be required to provide a parking demand analysis prepared by a qualified
parking and traffic consultant substantiating the lack of a present need for the required number
of spaces.
2. The approval authority may revoke the permission for deferral and require the property owner or
his/her successor, to increase the number of paved parking spaces, up to the number required
by this section. Such revocation shall be preceded by notice to the applicant and findings by the
approval authority after a public hearing that:
a. The amount of vehicular traffic actually generated by the use located on the property is
greater than the amount anticipated at the time of initial approval as evidenced by the
original submissions made by the applicant;
b. The use of the property includes, or is proposed by the owner to include, a different or
additional use from that proposed by the applicant at the time of approval.
c. The building(s) or use(s) on the property have been expanded or the number of vehicles
parking on the property have increased since the initiation of the use.
d. The use of the property has resulted in an increase in traffic congestion or on-street parking
in the vicinity of the property which would be eliminated or reduced if the remaining required
off-street parking spaces were improved and made available.
3. A site plan application accompanying a request for deferred improvement of parking spaces
shall include a detailed parking plan that shows both the full number of improved parking spaces
15-74
required by this section as well as the parking spaces proposed for deferred improvement,
along with compatible landscaping treatments for the areas of the unimproved parking spaces.
4. The applicant shall file with the Village Zoning Administrator an unconditional agreement and
covenant that areas reserved for future parking shall be maintained as landscaped open space
according to the plan submitted, until and unless required to be improved and made available for
off-street parking as provided in the site plan approval or pursuant to subpar. 2.
5. The agreement and covenant, shall be in recordable form approved by the Zoning
Administrator and recorded with the Register of Deeds for Dane County, Wisconsin.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(5) HANDICAPPED ACCESSIBLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
(a) General. In any self-park facility, accessible parking spaces shall be set aside for wheel chair
access in proportion to the total number of spaces provided as follows:
Total Spaces
Minimum Accessible Spaces
1 to 25
1
26 to 50
2
51 to 75
3
76 to 100
4
101 to 150
5
151 to 200
6
201 to 300
7
301 to 400
8
401 to 500
9
Total Spaces
Minimum Accessible Spaces
501 to 1000
2% of the total
1001 & over
20 plus 1% of the total over 1000 spaces
(b) Notwithstanding par. (a) in parking facilities serving medical care facilities:
1. Not less than 10% of total spaces shall be accessible.
2. Not less than 20% of the total spaces shall be accessible at any facility specifically operated for
treatment of the mobility impaired.
(c) Accessible Parking Space Defined. A parking space shall be deemed accessible only if it meets
the following dimensional standards and all of the requirements of pars. (d) and (e) of this subsection:
1. Each space shall be at least sixteen feet (16') wide. One in every eight (8) accessible spaces,
but not less than one, shall be served by an adjacent access aisle eight feet (8') wide minimum
and shall be designated "van accessible" as provided in the applicable ADA guidelines. All
other adjacent access aisles shall be five feet (5') wide minimum.
15-75
2. Along at least one aisle to and from each accessible space a minimum vertical clearance of
eight feet two inches (8' 2") is provided.
(d) Location of Accessible Spaces
1. Accessible parking spaces shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel to an
accessible entrance to the building served.
2. Accessible parking spaces need not be provided in each parking structure serving a specific
property if equivalent or greater accessibility in terms of distance from an accessible entrance is
provided through other accessible spaces serving the same building.
3. Accessible parking spaces may be provided on a single level of a multi-level parking structure.
(e) Accessible Route.
1. At least one accessible route with a continuous minimum lateral clearance of thirty-six (36")
inches shall be provided from accessible parking spaces to the nearest accessible pedestrian
entrance.
2. If an accessible route has less than sixty (60") inches clear width, passing spaces at least 60
inches by 60 inches shall be located at reasonable intervals not to exceed every 200 feet.
3. The floor slope along an accessible route shall not exceed 1:12 with a maximum rise of thirty
(30") inches for any run.
4. A level landing shall be provided at the bottom and top of each ramp run. The width of the
landing shall be at least as wide as the ramp run and at least sixty (60") inches long. At
changes in direction a 60 inch by 60 inch landing shall be provided.
5. The cross slope of ramps shall not exceed 1:50.
6. The floor slope at loading zones shall not exceed 1:50.
7. Whenever practicable, an accessible route shall be provided at the front of parking stalls and
shall not cross lanes of vehicular travel. When crossing vehicular travel lanes is necessary, the
route of travel shall be designated and clearly marked by a crosswalk.
(6) MODIFICATIONS TO OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
(a) The approval authority may, as part of its approval of a site plan, planned unit development or
conditional use permit, grant a complete or partial waiver of off-street parking requirements for uses within the
Business zoning districts to the extent that public off-street parking is available and sufficient to satisfy the
demand for parking created by such use.
(b) As part of its approval of a site plan, conditional use permit, or planned unit development, the
approval authority may allow for modifications from the parking standards established by this section where, as
evidenced by acceptable parking studies, such a modification is in the best interest of the development and will
not create parking, circulation or traffic congestion problems for existing or potential uses of other properties.
In such cases, the approval authority may require a plan and provisions for deferred improvement of parking
spaces per §15.07(4)(b).
(c) As part of its approval of a site plan, conditional use permit, or planned unit development for a
commercial service or retail development project within an area demonstrated to experience heavy tourist
traffic and/or trucking activity, the approval authority may require that up to five (5) of the required parking
15-76
spaces under this section be sized to accommodate recreational vehicles, passenger trucks with trailing
campers or boats, and/or semi-truck/trailer combinations.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(7) DRIVEWAYS, ACCESS CONTROL, AND VEHICULAR SIGHT DISTANCE.
(a) Driveway Access Location Approval. The location of all private driveway access points onto public
streets shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator, or as part of an approved site plan if one is required
under §15.05. No new or expanded driveway shall be access a public street (including but not limited to a culde-
sac bulb) in such a manner that, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, would inhibit the efficient
storage of plowed snow or other required municipal functions in the public right-of-way.
(b) Maximum Number of Vehicular Access Points Per Lot. There shall be only one driveway access
onto a public street for each lot in the RH-1, RE-1, RE-2, RN-1, RN-2, RN-2A, and RM-6 residential districts,
except by conditional use permit. Within all other zoning districts, a maximum of one vehicular access point per
lot shall be permitted to abutting arterial and collector streets, where abutting street frontage is less than 350
feet. Where abutting arterial or collector street frontage is 350 feet or greater, one additional private vehicular
access point shall be permitted. In cases where one of the proposed vehicular access points is shared
between two adjoining lots serving two or more separate uses not located in the aforementioned residential
districts, the Planning and Zoning Commission may permit one additional vehicular access point beyond the
otherwise applicable limit.
(c) Spacing Between Driveways and Lot Lines. Within the B-2, B-3, and industrial zoning districts, all
driveways shall be located at least four (4) feet from all lot lines, except where lesser or no distances are
required to allow safe access to the public street or where a shared driveway or cross access driveway is
included on an approved site plan under §15.05. In all other zoning districts, all driveways shall be at least two
(2) feet from such lot lines, except where lesser or no distances are required to allow safe access to the public
street or where a shared driveway or cross access driveway is included on an approved site plan under
§15.05.
(d) Minimum Spacing Between Vehicular Access Points. Along arterial and collector streets, there shall
be not less than the following minimum distance between vehicular access points on the same side of the
street:
1. 100 feet where the speed limit on the abutting street is less than 40 m.p.h., or
2. 200 feet where speed limit on the abutting street is 40 m.p.h. or greater,
except where such spacing is impracticable due to preexisting development patterns.
(e) Access Points Near Arterial and Collector Street Intersections and Roundabouts.
1. No new direct vehicular access shall be permitted from private land directly to an arterial or
collector street within 200 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines between such street
and another arterial or collector street.
2. The Director of Public Works shall determine where direct vehicular access points shall be
permitted onto a public street near a roundabout intersection, based on Village design
guidelines, standard specifications, and/or factors including roundabout design, signage,
intensity of adjacent land uses, traffic volumes, and number of access points requested.
(f) Access Points Across the Street From One Another. Local streets and private access points along
both sides of an intersecting public street shall be aligned directly across the street from one another, or placed
no less than 150 feet apart from one another if an alignment directly across the street is not practical in the
determination of the Director of Public Works.
15-77
(g) Minimum Sight Distance at Access Points. Along arterial and collector streets, private access points
shall be located and designed in such a manner to ensure driver sight distance in both directions along the
intersecting street a minimum distance of 300 feet or, if the speed limit on the abutting street is less than 40
m.p.h., 200 feet.
(h) Maximum Driveway Widths. Maximum driveway openings at lot lines and curb lines are as
provided in Tables 15.10B, 15.11B, and 15.12B, except that the Planning and Zoning Commission or
appropriate Joint Committee if in the ETZ Area may approve a driveway of greater width as part of an
approved site plan under §15.05 if the applicant can demonstrate the need via engineering or turning radius
exhibits.
(i) Driveway Approach Surfacing.
1. Except in the A-1X, A-1, A-2, or RH-1 districts and whenever connecting to streets with a rural
cross section, all approaches for new driveways, between the road edge or back of curb and the
right-of-way line, shall be surfaced with concrete. Where new driveways are constructed in the
A-1X, A-1, A-2, or RH-1 districts or where new driveways adjoin streets with a rural cross
section, the apron areas shall be hard-surfaced if within the Village and surfaced in accordance
with Town driveway regulations if within the ETZ Area. All hard-surfacing shall be complete prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy unless otherwise approved in writing by the Zoning
Administrator. The Administrator may allow driveway approach construction to be delayed to the
following spring if weather conditions do not permit hard-surfacing in the current year. In the
case of the resurfacing or reconstruction of existing driveways within the Village, the approach
may be bituminous pavement or other hard-surfacing if the former driveway approach was a
non-concrete surface or if the approach adjoins a street with a rural cross section.
2. Where concrete approaches are required per paragraph 1. above, residential driveway
approaches shall be constructed with a minimum of six (6) inches of concrete over a minimum
of four (4) inches of compacted crushed limestone or with a minimum of two and one half (2 ½)
inches of bituminous surface material or concrete over a minimum of six (6) inches of
compacted crushed stone. All measurements are after compaction.
3. Where concrete approaches are required per paragraph 1. above, non-residential driveway
approaches shall consist of a minimum of eight (8) inches poured concrete over a minimum of
four (4) inches compacted crushed stone. Measurements are after compaction.
(j) Maximum Driveway Slope. The slope, measured at any point between the property line and garage
entrance, shall not exceed twelve percent (12%).
[Sub. (7) Cr. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
15.08 SIGN PERMITS.
[Recr. 08-27; Eff. 8-22-08]
(1) PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to establish standards for the fabrication, erection, and
use of signs for all properties within the Village of DeForest and the ETZ Area. This section regulates the
location, type, size, and height of signage based on the finding that such regulation furthers the following
compelling governmental interests, while still being narrowly defined so as to limit any prohibitions on
commercial speech on exterior signage:
(a) To promote the public welfare, health, and safety of all persons using the public thoroughfares and
right-of-ways as to the signage displayed thereon, or overhanging, or projecting into such public spaces;
(b) To advance aesthetic goals throughout the community, and to ensure the effectiveness and
flexibility in the design of, and the creativity of, the use of such devices without creating detriment to the
general public;
15-78
(c) To aid in the proper development and promotion of business and industry;
(d) To recognize that different zoning districts and different geographic areas of the community have
different characteristics, and that sign regulations should vary based in part on those differences;
(e) To implement the community vision, goals and objectives, and signage recommendations
contained within the Comprehensive Plan.
(2) SIGN PERMITS.
(a) General Requirements. Except as otherwise provided in §15.08(2)(i), no sign shall hereafter be
located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered without a sign
permit. This section shall apply and be construed to require a permit for a change of copy on any sign or for
any conversions or changes in the sign structure. This section shall not apply to repainting with the same sign
copy, cleaning, repair, or other normal maintenance of the sign or sign structure. No new permit is required for
signs which are in place as of the date of the adoption of this section and which no permit was previously
issued, and such signs may remain as legal nonconforming structures. Any alteration or relocation of such
signs shall conform with the requirements of this section.
(b) Permit Requirements. Any sign permit granted hereunder may not be assigned or transferred to
any other sign or modified sign face or sign structure.
1. Only those permanent or temporary signs which have been granted a permit from the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with the provisions of this section may be erected, installed,
constructed or maintained, except those signs specifically exempted from permit requirements
in §15.08(2)(i), below.
2. The owner or tenant may include all such signs at one premise under one permit.
(c) Application Procedure. Each initial application for a sign permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator on a form provided by that office, prior to installation of a new sign or modification of an existing
sign face or sign structure. Each application shall include:
1. The name and address of the permit applicant.
2. The approved site plan for the subject property, per §15.05, or if not previously approved, a site
plan for the subject property showing, at a minimum, the location of the proposed sign; the
location of all existing signs on the subject property; all property lines and buildings in the
subject property; and parking areas, driveways, public roads, and buildings within fifty (50) feet
of the proposed sign.
3. A diagram of the proposed sign, drawn to a recognized scale, and listing and depicting the
height, width, total square footage and square footage of each sign component, method of
attachment, structural support, method of illumination, and sign materials.
4. The subject property’s zoning designation.
5. A summary of existing signage on the property, including quantity, location, type, and area of all
signs on the subject property both before and after the installation of the proposed sign.
6. Proof of payment of the appropriate sign permit fee, as established from time to time by the
Village Board.
15-79
7. Any other item of information that may be reasonably required by the Zoning Administrator for
the purpose of application evaluation.
(d) Granting and Issuance.
1. The Zoning Administrator shall review the submitted application for compliance with the
requirements of §15.08(2)(c). The application shall not be considered complete until all of the
requirements of §15.08(2)(c) are satisfied.
2. Upon the receipt of a complete application, in cases where the requested sign does not require
an approval or recommendation from another body under another requirement of this chapter,
the Zoning Administrator shall review said application for compliance with the requirements of
the remainder of this section, and shall, in writing, approve or deny a sign permit based on the
submitted application within ten (10) working days of the acceptance of the complete application
and payment of the required fee.
3. Upon the receipt of a complete application, and in cases where the requested sign requires an
approval or recommendation from another body under another requirement of this chapter, such
as a conditional use permit approval, the Zoning Administrator shall review said application for
compliance with the requirements of the remainder of this section, and shall within ten (10)
working days of the acceptance of the complete application and payment of the required fee
notify the applicant of such additional recommendation or approval and schedule the item on
appropriate meeting agenda(s). Following all necessary approvals, the Zoning Administrator
shall then, in writing, approve or deny a sign permit based on the submitted application and
such additional body’s recommendation or action within ten (10) working days of action by the
final body with approval or recommending authority.
4. Denial of a sign permit shall not result in total or partial reimbursement of permit fees paid.
(e) Basis for Granting. In deciding whether or not to grant a sign permit, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine whether the proposed sign is in compliance with the provisions of this section; whether the sign is in
compliance with all provisions of the DeForest Municipal Code, including those related to traffic safety, traffic
visibility, sign setbacks, and structural integrity; whether a conditional use permit or other Village approval has
or has not be granted for the sign, if such approval is required under this chapter; and, to the extent not in
conflict with any of the above factors, the recommendation of any other local governmental body or interested
party.
(f) Enforcement and Revocation.
1. Upon Class I notice and after a public hearing conducted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, any permit may be revoked by the Planning and Zoning Commission in the event
that the applicant has failed to comply with the provisions of this section or any conditions that
may have accompanied the permit at the time of granting.
2. Any sign permit granted by the Zoning Administrator shall be null and void and automatically
revoked in the event that construction, installation, or manufacture of the sign has not been
commenced within 180 days from the date of the issuance of such permit. If work authorized by
such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days any time after the work is
commenced, the original permit shall become null and void. A new permit shall first be obtained
to complete the work, and a new permit fee shall be required.
3. The sign(s) subject to any revoked permits shall be removed by the licensee, sign owner, or
property owner within 45 days of such revocation.
4. Revocation shall not result in total or partial reimbursement of permit fees paid.
15-80
(g) Appeals. Any person affected by a decision of the Zoning Administrator may petition for a hearing
before the Board of Zoning Appeals under the provisions of §15.03(5). The filing of such petition automatically
stays removal of any sign involved and already legally erected until the Board of Zoning Appeals decides
whether to sustain, modify or withdraw the notice.
(h) Removal of Defective or Dangerous Signs by the Village.
1. If the Zoning Administrator determines that any sign exists in violation of this section, then the
Zoning Administrator shall notify the sign permit holder or the owner of the property on which the
sign is located that such violation must be corrected within ten (10) days of receipt of such
notice on penalty of automatic revocation of any sign permit previously granted and summary
removal of the sign by the Village at the expense of the owner of the property.
2. If the Zoning Administrator causes such notice to be sent and the violation is not corrected within
ten (10) days, the Zoning Administrator shall revoke any sign permit for the defective or
dangerous sign and it shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to remove such sign. The
expense of removing such sign shall be charged to the owner of the property on which the sign
is located. If the owner fails to pay such expense within one (1) month of being billed therefore,
or has not made arrangement for payment satisfactory to the Village Attorney, then such
expense shall become a lien on the property and shall be placed upon the tax roll.
(i) Signs Allowed without Permit. The following signs are permitted in all zoning districts without the
need for a sign permit. Such signs shall not count as part of the maximum permitted number of signs on a
property in the zoning district in which they are located. The title for each of the following categories is neither
a requirement nor restriction on the content of any sign.
1. Addresses. Address numerals and other sign information required to identify a location by law
or governmental order, rule or regulation provided that such sign does not exceed one (1)
square foot in area per officially assigned address, or the size required by any law, order, rule or
regulation, whichever is greater.
2. Interior Signs. Signs which are located on the interior of a premise and which are primarily
oriented to persons within that premises.
3. Regulatory and Government Signs. Signs erected by or on behalf of a duly constituted
governmental body on public right of ways, parks and other public property.
4. Signs on Residential Properties. Signs on residential properties, with a maximum number of two
(2) signs not exceeding an area total of twelve (12) square feet, for each residential unit on said
property. A residential unit is a single family home, a townhome, an assisted living unit, a
condominium unit, or an apartment unit.
During the time period commencing four (4) months prior to any public election for any local,
state or federal office, or any vote on any public referendum, and ending two weeks after said
election or referendum vote, the maximum number of signs is increased to six (6) signs not
exceeding an area total of thirty-six (36) square feet, with no individual sign being of greater size
than twelve (12) square feet, for each residential unit on said property.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, for multi-unit residential properties with more than four (4)
residential units, the maximum number of signs and sign area permitted in this paragraph (i)(4)
is the same as those permitted for a four (4) unit residential property.
15-81
Other permitted signs in this subsection (i) shall not count against the number of signs permitted
under this paragraph (i)(4). All signs that exceed the number and area requirements in this
subsection (i)(4) shall be subject to sign permit requirements and other number, area, and other
requirements associated with signs requiring a permit.
5. Signs on Non-Residential Properties. Signs on non-residential properties, with a maximum
number of two (2) signs not exceeding an area total of twelve (12) square feet per property.
During the time period commencing four (4) months prior to any public election for any local,
state or federal office, or any vote on any public referendum, and ending two weeks after said
election or referendum vote, the maximum number of signs is increased to six (6) signs not
exceeding an area total of thirty-six (36) square feet, with no individual sign being of greater size
than twelve (12) square feet, on each property. Other permitted signs in this subsection (i) shall
not count against the number of signs permitted under this paragraph (i)(5). All signs that
exceed the number and area requirements in this subsection (i)(5) shall be subject to sign
permit requirements and other number, area, and other requirements associated with signs
requiring a permit.
6. Required Signs. Signs required by state or federal statute or regulation which do not exceed
110% of the minimum legal size requirements.
7. Sandwich Board. Only within zoning districts specified under §15.08(6)(b)(1), and subject to the
requirements of §15.08(6)(b)(1)b.iii.
8. Window signs. Signs affixed to the inside of a window, provided that the total of all signs in the
window area, including temporary and permanently mounted signs, does not exceed twenty-five
(25) percent of the area of any one window.
(3) GENERAL SIGNAGE STANDARDS. The following standards and terms shall be used in this
section to assist in the establishment of clear signage regulations. The general definition of a sign is as
provided in §15.02(83).
(a) Advertising and Business signs.
1. Off-Premise Advertising sign. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service,
or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign
is displayed. No new off-premise advertising signs and no new billboard signs shall be allowed
or permitted except as provided in sec. 15.08(7).
2. On-Premise Business sign. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or
entertainment conducted, sold, offered, or manufactured upon the premises where the sign is
located.
(b) Sign Configurations.
2. Advertising vehicle sign. A vehicle or trailer shall be parked on public rights-of-way or on
private property so as to be seen from a public right-of-way, which attached to or located
thereon is any sign or advertising device for the basic purpose of providing advertisement of
products or directing people to a business activity located on the same or nearby property or
any other premise. Business vehicles which contain typical business signage and which are
actively used for business purposes are not considered advertising vehicle signs.
15-82
3. Arm/post sign. A type of small scale freestanding sign mounted on a post or posts, either with a
bracket extending outward to support a hanging sign, with the sign attached directly to the side
of the post, or with the sign mounted between two posts.
4. Awning sign. A sign mounted to an awning or canopy which is mounted to the facade of a
building, shall be counted as a projecting sign for purposes of determining allowable numbers or
types of signs, shall be limited to twelve (12) inch tall script, and shall not exceed ten (10)
percent of the awning/canopy area.
5. Freestanding sign. A self-supporting sign resting on or supported by means of poles,
standards, or any other type of base on the ground. This type of sign includes arm/post signs,
monument signs, and pylon signs. The sign shall not be erected so that it impedes visibility for
safe pedestrian and/or vehicular circulation. The base or support(s) of freestanding signs shall
be securely anchored to a concrete base or footing, except for public and institutional street and
directional signs installed in public rights-of-way. The footing and related supporting structure of
a freestanding sign including bolts, flanges, and brackets shall be concealed by the sign exterior
and shall be landscaped per §15.06(11)(c).
6. Marquee sign. A type of sign that is often, but not necessarily, a projecting, on-building sign
sheltering the entrance and/or entrance approaches of a theater, auditorium, fairground,
museum or other use, and may include only manually changeable letters or messages. For the
purposes of this chapter, all non-electronic/non-digital signs with manually changeable letters or
messages shall be considered marquee signs.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
7. Mobile sign. A sign mounted on a frame or chassis designed to be easily relocated, including
vehicles and/or trailers.
8. Monument sign. A type of freestanding sign with a bottom edge located within one foot of a
ground-mounted pedestal.
9. On-building sign. A type of sign permanently affixed to an outside wall of a building.
10. Projecting sign. A type of on-building sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached directly to a
building facade, is not greater than twelve (12) square feet in area, and projects not more than
four (4) feet from a building facade.
11. Pylon sign. A type of freestanding sign erected upon one or more pylon, pole, or post, general
of a scale that is larger than an arm/post sign.
12. Sandwich board sign. A sign designed to be a self-supporting by means of an easel
construction, displayed on a hard-surfaced area of the ground, and removable on a daily basis.
13. Wall sign. A type of on-building sign mounted parallel to and directly on a building facade or
other vertical building surface. Wall signs shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches
beyond the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted. The top of the sign
shall extend no higher than the roof above the nearest portion of the building to which it is
mounted.
14. Window sign. A type of sign mounted on or within an exterior window and visible from the
exterior.
15. Variable message sign (VMS). An electronic or digital sign which displays words, lines, logos,
graphic images, or symbols that can change automatically to provide different information, and
which includes computer signs, LCD and other video display signs, and time and temperature
signs.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
15-83
(c) Sign Measurement.
1. Sign height. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the average ground level
adjacent to the sign to the top of the sign or from the centerline grade of the nearest adjacent
public road, if such information is supplied with the permit application and confirmed by the
Zoning Administrator, whichever is higher. The average ground level is defined as the average
elevation of the ground upon which the sign supports are placed, except when the sign supports
rest upon a berm or other area elevated above the surrounding ground. In such cases, the
average elevation of the base of such berm or other area shall be considered as the ground
level.
2. Sign area. Sign area shall be measured in the following manner and as depicted in Figure
15.08A:
a. In the case of a sign placed within a frame, a marquee sign, or other structure, sign area
consists of the entire surface area of the sign on which copy could be placed. The supporting
structure or bracing of a sign, including the supports of monument signs not used for copy,
shall not be counted as a part of the sign face area unless such structure or bracing is made
a part of the sign's message. Where a freestanding sign (monument or pylon) has two or
more display faces, the total area of all of the display faces which can be viewed from any
single location shall be considered the sign area.
b. In the case of a sign on which the message is fabricated together with the background which
borders or frames that message, sign area shall be the total area of the entire background.
c. In the case of a sign on which message is applied to a background which provides no border
or frame (such as individual letters to a building face or awning), sign area shall be the
combined areas of the smallest rectangles which can encompass each word, letter, figure,
emblem, and other element of the sign message.
15-84
Figure 15.08A: Measurement of Sign Area
(4) GENERAL SIGNAGE REGULATIONS. The regulations contained in this subsection apply to all
signs in all zoning districts, including both signs requiring a permit and signs allowed without a permit.
(a) Sign Prohibitions and Limitations.
1. No sign shall be erected at any location where it may, by reason of its position, shape, color or
design, interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal
or device, nor shall such sign make use of words such as "stop", "look", "drive-in", "danger", or
any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or
confuse users of streets or highways.
2. No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from
any door, window, or fire escape, and no sign shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
3. No private sign shall be attached to or painted on any natural feature (e.g. tree or rock), fence,
public utility pole, public light pole or traffic regulatory structure.
4. No undulating, swinging, rotating, or otherwise moving signs shall be allowed or permitted;
however, flags, pennants and feather banners are permitted.
5. No illuminated flashing signs shall be allowed or permitted. Variable message signs meeting the
definition and requirements of this section shall not be considered illuminated flashing signs.
6. No sign, other than a government erected sign, shall be allowed or permitted within or extending
into a public right-of-way, except as follows:
i. Projecting and awning signs in the B-1 Central Business District or RM-B
Residential Mix-Business District as long as traffic movement is not affected; or,
ii. As provided in §15.08(4)( b)3.
15-85
7. No illuminated sign shall be allowed or permitted unless the illumination of the sign is so
designed that the lighting element (except for neon signs) is not visible from any property within
a residential zoning district.
8. No mobile signs shall be allowed or permitted.
9. No inflatable signs shall be allowed or permitted.
10. No advertising vehicle signs shall be allowed or permitted.
11. No off-premise advertising signs shall be allowed or permitted, except as provided in §15.08(7).
Existing legal off-premise advertising signs made nonconforming by this section shall be
permitted to continue as legal, nonconforming structures, subject to the requirements of §15.17.
This prohibition leaves ample and adequate channels of commercial speech communication for
the messages typically portrayed on such advertising signage—including but not limited to print
media, broadcast media, and point-of-purchase display.
12. Window obstruction by interior signs shall not exceed more than twenty-five (25) percent for any
one window.
(b) Sign Location Requirements.
1. No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where by reason of its position, wording,
illumination, size, shape, or color it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or
be confused with, any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device. Freestanding signs may
not locate within required vision corners under §15.04(13)(d) or Chapter 13, nor otherwise
impede traffic or pedestrian visibility.
2. No sign shall be mounted or displayed on, or extend above the roof, if attached to the building,
except as permitted in §15.08(8)(g). [Am. 15-42; Eff. 8-20-15]
3. Temporary private signs shall be allowed within public road right-of-way lines only by approval of
the Zoning Administrator, in consideration of the advice of the Director of Public Works and the
appropriate Village, Town, County, and State authorities, and based on the relationship to
pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement and safety, the Village’s adopted aesthetic standards
for the area, and Village and utility use and operations within the right-of-way.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
4. Signs less than three (3) feet tall shall be located a minimum of one foot from a property line.
The permitted locations of all other freestanding signs shall be as otherwise indicated in this
section.
5. All pylon and projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance from grade of ten (10) feet to the
bottom of the sign and shall not project into any vehicle circulation area, beyond any public
street curb line, or beyond any public street pavement edge if no curb is present.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(c) Variable Message Signs (VMS). VMS are allowed by permit only. [Am. 15-42; Eff. 8-20-15]
1. Length of Cycle. The total length of the scrolling time from start to finish of message of a VMS
shall not be shorter than three (3) seconds nor longer than ten (10) seconds. Items of
information may not be repeated at intervals that are short enough to cause a VMS to have the
effect of a flashing sign.
15-86
2. Brightness Adjustment. All VMS shall be equipped with and shall utilize photosensitive
equipment which automatically adjusts the brightness and contrast of the sign in direct relation
to the ambient outdoor illumination. Illumination levels shall not exceed those permitted under
§15.065(4)(c).
3. Included Area. The illuminated or message display area of the VMS is subject to the same
height and area requirements as other permitted business signs in the zoning district. All VMS
shall be included in the calculation of total permitted sign area for the type of business sign
(e.g., wall, freestanding) and the zoning district in which the sign is located.
4. Maintenance. All VMS shall be maintained so as to be able to display messages in a complete
and legible manner.
5. Location. Except by conditional use permit, no VMS shall be allowed within any agricultural or
C-1 zoning district; on any residential lot regardless of zoning district; or positioned to be visible
and within 100 feet from any permitted residential building if located within the B-1 Central
Business District or 200 feet in any other district.
(d) Window Signs.
1. Area. The total of all signs in the window area, including temporary and permanently mounted
signs, shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the area of each window.
2. Installation. Window signs shall be confined within the transparent glazed area of the window
and shall not encroach upon the frame, mullions, or other supporting features of the glass. All
permanent window signs that have their lettering or graphic elements directly on the glazing
shall be painted, metal leafed, vinyl transferred, or in some other manner permanently applied
to the exterior building window or door.
3. Maintenance. All window signs shall be maintained so as to be able to display messages in a
complete and legible manner.
4. Location. No window signs shall be allowed within residential zoning districts.
(5) REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. In residential zoning districts listed in §15.09(1)
except for the RM-B district, signage shall be permitted per the requirements of §15.08(1) to §15.08(4),
§15.08(8) to §15.08(10), and the following:
(a) Main Sign.
1. For one-family and two-family dwelling:
a. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign.
b. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One.
c. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Two square feet.
2. For single multiple-family dwelling of three or more units on a lot:
a. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign or Monument Sign.
b. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One monument or one wall.
c. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Twelve square feet.
15-87
3. For multi-building residential development, subdivision, or institutional use:
a. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign or Monument Sign.
b. Maximum Permitted Number: One per public street or driveway entrance, up to a maximum
of three per lot.
c. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Thirty-two square feet.
d. The Village Board, following a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission,
may approve a request for an institutional sign(s) in a residential district of an alternative
type, number, area, and/or location than specified under this Section 15.08, provided that
such sign(s) conforms with the purpose of the Village's sign regulations in Section 15.08(1),
visibility requirements within this section, Section 15.04(13)(d), and all applicable standards
in §15.16(3)(f).
[Cr. 12-25, Eff. 9-28-12]
(b) Secondary Sign:
1. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign or Freestanding Sign.
2. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: Two.
3. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Two square feet.
(c) Properties with parking lots. For properties with parking lots with five or more spaces, these signs
are in addition to any other signs permitted signs:
1. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign or Monument Sign.
2. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One sign for each vehicular entrance, one sign for each
vehicular exit, and one sign for each parking area.
3. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Four square feet by each vehicular entrance and vehicular
exit, and nine square feet in each parking area.
(d) Business Sign. As allowed for legal, non-conforming business only, signs shall comply with the
provisions of §15.08(6)(b).
(6) REGULATIONS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. In all nonresidential and mixed use zoning
districts (the RM-B district plus all zoning districts not listed in §15.09(1)(a)), signage shall be permitted per the
requirements of §15.08(1) to §15.08(4), §15.08(8) to §15.08(10), §15.05(9)(p) for large retail establishments,
and the following:
(a) Signage for Residential Uses. Signage for all residential and institutional land uses, including
churches, schools, and government buildings, within non-residential zoning districts shall comply with
provisions of §15.08(5).
(b) Signage for Nonresidential (Office, Commercial, Institutional, and Industrial) Uses.
1. On-Premise Business Signs. (also see Figure 15.08C).
a. For C-1 Conservancy and A-1, A-1Ex, and A-2 Zoning Districts:
15-88
i. Permitted Sign Type: On-Building (Wall) Sign.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: One square foot of signage for every linear foot
of exposed exterior wall length on that supporting wall, or 48 square feet per building,
whichever is greater.
ii. Permitted Sign Type: Freestanding (Monument) Sign.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: 32 square feet for all combined sign faces seen
at one time.
(c) Maximum Permitted Sign Height: 8 feet.
(d) Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: The greater of actual sign
height or 3 feet. The Zoning Administrator may approve lesser sign setbacks for
monument signs that are at least 8 feet from any vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
travel way, based on the relationship to pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement
and safety, the Village’s adopted aesthetic standards for the area, and Village and
utility use and operations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve other
requested setback adjustments via site plan approval.
b. For B-1 Central Business Zoning District:
i. Permitted Sign Type: On-Building (Wall, Awning or Projecting) Sign.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: Two per each business located on the
lot, except that for businesses with frontage on only one public street, not
more than one sign may be a wall, awning, or projecting sign type.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area: 32 square feet per business with frontage on only
one public street; 64 square feet per business with frontage on more than one
public street.
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-15-11]
ii. Permitted Sign Type: Freestanding (Monument or Arm/Post) Sign.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One per each business located on the lot.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area Per Sign: 42 square feet for all combined sign faces seen
at one time.
(c) Maximum Permitted Sign Height: 8 feet. [Am. 15-42; Eff. 8-20-15]
(d) Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: 3 feet.
[Am. 12-25, Eff. 9-28-12].
iii. Permitted Sign Type: Sandwich Board. One sandwich board is allowed per business per
street frontage adjacent to the business location, with a maximum of two (2) sandwich
boards per business only if each sign is placed on a separate street frontage that is
adjacent to the business location. Each sandwich board sign shall not exceed nine (9)
square feet in area and four (4) feet in height. They may be displayed outside the building
15-89
only during business hours, may be located between the curb and sidewalk per sec.
15.08(4)(b)3, shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation and visibility, shall be
placed directly in front of the business using them, may not obstruct snow storage, and
shall be placed directly on the ground or a hard surface.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
iv. Permitted Sign Location: Building mounted signs shall not be located on any portion of
upper stories. The location of signs shall be integrated with, and not cover, architectural
elements and details. Figure 15.08 B shows permitted building mounted sign locations.
Figure 15.08 B: Permitted Building Mounted Sign Locations in B-1 District
c. For RM-B Residential Mix - Business Zoning District:
i. Permitted Sign Type: On-Building (Wall, Awning or Projecting) Sign.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One per each business located on the lot,
except for corner lots, for which two on-building signs shall be permitted if mounted
on separate walls.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area. 48 square feet for any one business, except by
conditional use permit.
ii. Permitted Sign Type: Freestanding (Monument or Arm/Post) Sign.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area Per Sign: 48 square feet for all combined sign faces seen
at one time.
(c) Maximum Permitted Sign Height: 8 feet.
(d) Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: The greater of actual sign
height or 3 feet. The Zoning Administrator may approve lesser sign setbacks for
monument signs that are at least 8 feet from any vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
travel way, based on the relationship to pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement
and safety, the Village’s adopted aesthetic standards for the area, and Village and
15-90
utility use and operations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve other
requested setback adjustments via site plan approval.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
iii. Permitted Sign Type: Sandwich Board. One sandwich board is allowed per business per
street frontage adjacent to the business location, with a maximum of two (2) sandwich
boards per business only if each sign is placed on a separate street frontage that is
adjacent to the business location. Each sandwich board sign shall not exceed nine (9)
square feet in area and four (4) feet in height. They may be out only during business
hours, shall be positioned in a way which does not obstruct pedestrian circulation, and
may only be placed directly in front of the business using them.
iv. Permitted Sign Location: Building mounted signs shall not be located on any portion of
upper stories. The location of signs shall be integrated with, and not cover, architectural
elements and details.
d. For B-2 General Business, O-R Office and Research, A-B Agricultural Business, and REC
Recreational Zoning Districts:
i. Permitted Sign Type: On-Building (Wall, Projecting, Awning, or Marquee) Sign.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One per each unique business operation on a
lot, where each such business operation has a separate building entrance that is
related to that operation’s location within the building. Corner lots shall be allowed
one additional on-building sign, if not mounted on the same wall as the other onbuilding
sign(s).
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: For the first sign on each wall, one and one-half
(1 ½ ) square feet of signage for every one linear foot of exposed exterior wall length
on that supporting wall, with a maximum sign area for that first sign not to exceed
300 square feet. No other sign on the same wall shall exceed 64 square feet in area.
The assignment of permitted sign area to individual businesses within the same
building will be at the discretion of the property owner.
(c) Permitted Location: On any facade which is visible from a public street, except
facades which are adjacent to a residentially zoned property or entirely residential
component of a planned unit development.
ii. Permitted Sign Type: Freestanding (Monument or Pylon) Sign, for sign placement within
2,000 feet of an interstate highway or 1,300 feet of State Highway 19 or U.S. Highway
51.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign (for combination of all sign faces seen at one
time): 200 square if within 2,000 feet of the interstate and/or 1,300 feet of Highway
19; 100 square feet if within 1,300 feet of Highway 51 but not also within the
specified distances from the interstate and/or Highway 19.
(c) Maximum Permitted Sign Height: 40 feet if within 2,000 feet of the interstate and/or
1,300 feet of Highway 19; 25 feet if within 1,300 feet of Highway 51 but not also
within the specified distances from the interstate and/or Highway 19.
(d) Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: The greater of actual sign
height or 3 feet. The Zoning Administrator may approve lesser sign setbacks for
monument signs that are at least 8 feet from any vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
15-91
travel way, based on the relationship to pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement
and safety, the Village’s adopted aesthetic standards for the area, and Village and
utility use and operations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve other
requested setback adjustments via site plan approval.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
iii. Permitted Sign Type: Freestanding (Monument or Pylon) Sign, for sign placement
beyond 2,000 feet of an interstate highway, and beyond 1,300 feet of State Highway 19
or U.S. Highway 51.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: 64 square feet for all combined sign faces seen
at one time.
(c) Maximum Permitted Sign Height: 15 feet.
(d) Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: The greater of actual sign
height or 3 feet. The Zoning Administrator may approve lesser sign setbacks for
monument signs that are at least 8 feet from any vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
travel way, based on the relationship to pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement
and safety, the Village’s adopted aesthetic standards for the area, and Village and
utility use and operations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve other
requested setback adjustments via site plan approval.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
iv. Permitted Sign Type: Unified Business Center Sign. For properties that are a Unified
Business Center as defined under §15.02(92):
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Unified Business Center: One per every 10 acres
or fraction thereof in the unified business center, in addition to the signs permitted for
each separate occupant within the unified business center. There shall be no more
than one (1) free-standing sign along each public street on which the unified
business center has frontage.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: 200 square feet for all combined sign faces
seen at one time. The assignment of permitted sign area to individual businesses
within the same unified business center will be at the discretion of the property
owner.
(c) Maximum Permitted Sign Height: If a freestanding sign, maximum height shall be 30
feet if located at least 2,000 feet from an interstate highway and 1,300 feet of State
Highway 19, and 40 feet within 2,000 feet of an interstate highway or 1,300 feet of
State Highway 19.
(d) Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: The greater of actual sign
height or 3 feet. The Zoning Administrator may approve lesser sign setbacks for
monument signs that are at least 8 feet from any vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
travel way, based on the relationship to pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement
and safety, the Village’s adopted aesthetic standards for the area, and Village and
utility use and operations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve other
requested setback adjustments via site plan approval.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
v. Permitted Sign Type: Sandwich Board. One sandwich board is allowed per business per
street frontage adjacent to the business location, with a maximum of two (2) sandwich
15-92
boards per business only if each sign is placed on a separate street frontage that is
adjacent to the business location. Each sandwich board sign shall not exceed nine (9)
square feet in area and four (4) feet in height. They may be out only during business
hours, shall be positioned in a way which does not obstruct pedestrian circulation, and
may only be placed directly in front of the business using them. Sandwich board signs
are not allowed in the A-B district.
e. For B-3 Highway Business Zoning District:
i. Permitted Sign Type: On-Building (Wall, Marquee or Awning) Sign.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: Two per each business located on the lot, with
no more than one sign per business per facade.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: One and one-half square feet of signage for
every one linear foot of exposed exterior wall length on that supporting wall. The
assignment of permitted sign area to individual businesses within the same building
will be at the discretion of the property owner.
(c) Permitted Location: On any facade which is visible from a public street, except
facades which are adjacent to a residentially zoned property or an entirely residential
component of a planned unit development.
ii. Permitted Sign Type: Freestanding Sign, for sign placement within 2,000 feet of an
interstate highway or 1,300 feet of State Highway 19 or U.S. Highway 51.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign (for combination of all sign faces seen at one
time): 200 square if within 2,000 feet of the interstate and/or 1,300 feet of Highway
19; 100 square feet if within 1,300 feet of Highway 51 but not also within the
specified distances from the interstate and/or Highway 19.
(c) Maximum Permitted Sign Height: 45 feet if within 2,000 feet of the interstate and/or
1,300 feet of Highway 19; 25 feet if within 1,300 feet of Highway 51 but not also
within the specified distances from the interstate and/or Highway 19
(d) Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: The greater of actual sign
height or 3 feet. The Zoning Administrator may approve lesser sign setbacks for
monument signs that are at least 8 feet from any vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
travel way, based on the relationship to pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement
and safety, the Village’s adopted aesthetic standards for the area, and Village and
utility use and operations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve other
requested setback adjustments via site plan approval.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
iii. Permitted Sign Type: Freestanding Sign, for sign placement beyond 2,000 feet of an
interstate highway and beyond 1,300 feet of State Highway 19 or U.S. Highway 51.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: 64 square feet for all combined sign faces seen
at one time.
(c) Maximum Permitted Sign Height: 15 feet.
15-93
(d) Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: The greater of actual sign
height or 3 feet. The Zoning Administrator may approve lesser sign setbacks for
monument signs that are at least 8 feet from any vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
travel way, based on the relationship to pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement
and safety, the Village’s adopted aesthetic standards for the area, and Village and
utility use and operations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve other
requested setback adjustments via site plan approval.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
iv. Permitted Sign Type: Unified Business Center Sign. For properties that are a Unified
Business Center as defined under §15.02(92):
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Unified Business Center: One per every 10 acres
or fraction thereof in the unified business center, in addition to the signs permitted for
each separate occupant within the unified business center. There shall be no more
than one (1) free-standing sign along each public street on which the unified
business center has frontage.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: 200 square feet for all combined sign faces
seen at one time. The assignment of permitted sign area to individual businesses
within the same unified business center will be at the discretion of the property
owner.
(c) Maximum Permitted Sign Height: If a freestanding sign, maximum height shall be 30
feet if located at least 2,000 feet from an interstate highway and 1,300 feet of State
Highway 19, and 45 feet if located within 2,000 feet of an interstate highway or 1,300
feet of State Highway 19.
(d) Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: The greater of actual sign
height or 3 feet. The Zoning Administrator may approve lesser sign setbacks for
monument signs that are at least 8 feet from any vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
travel way, based on the relationship to pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement
and safety, the Village’s adopted aesthetic standards for the area, and Village and
utility use and operations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve other
requested setback adjustments via site plan approval.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
f. For M-1, M-2, M-3 Zoning Districts.
i. Permitted Sign Type: On-Building (Wall) Sign.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: Two per each business located on the lot, with
no more than one sign per business per facade.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: One and one-half square feet of signage for
every one linear foot of exposed exterior wall length on that supporting wall. The
assignment of permitted sign area to individual businesses within the same building
will be at the discretion of the property owner.
(c) Permitted Location: On any facade which is visible from a public street, except
facades which are adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
ii. Permitted Sign Type: Freestanding Sign, for a sign located within 2,000 feet of an
interstate highway or 1,300 feet of State Highway 19 or U.S. Highway 51.
15-94
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign (for combination of all sign faces seen at one
time): 400 square feet if within 2,000 feet of the interstate and/or 1,300 feet of
Highway 19; 100 square feet if within 1,300 feet of Highway 51 but not also within the
specified distances from the interstate and/or Highway 19.
(c) Maximum Permitted Sign Height: 60 feet if within 2,000 feet of the interstate and/or
1,300 feet of Highway 19; 25 feet if within 1,300 feet of Highway 51 but not also
within the specified distances from the interstate and/or Highway 19.
(d) Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: The greater of actual sign
height or 3 feet. The Zoning Administrator may approve lesser sign setbacks for
monument signs that are at least 8 feet from any vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
travel way, based on the relationship to pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement
and safety, the Village’s adopted aesthetic standards for the area, and Village and
utility use and operations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve other
requested setback adjustments via site plan approval.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
iii. Permitted Sign Type: Freestanding Sign, for a sign located beyond 2,000 feet of any
interstate highway and beyond 1,300 feet of State Highway 19 or U.S. Highway 51.
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: 48 square feet for all combined sign faces seen
at one time.
(c) Maximum Permitted Sign Height: 15 feet.
(d) Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: The greater of actual sign
height or 3 feet. The Zoning Administrator may approve lesser sign setbacks for
monument signs that are at least 8 feet from any vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
travel way, based on the relationship to pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement
and safety, the Village’s adopted aesthetic standards for the area, and Village and
utility use and operations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve other
requested setback adjustments via site plan approval.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
iv. Permitted Sign Type: Unified Business Center Sign. For properties that are a Unified
Business Center as defined under §15.02(92):
(a) Maximum Permitted Number per Unified Business Center: One per every 10 acres or
fraction thereof in the unified business center, in addition to the signs permitted for
each separate occupant within the unified business center. There shall be no more
than one (1) free-standing sign along each public street on which the unified
business center has frontage.
(b) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: 150 square feet for all combined sign faces
seen at one time. The assignment of permitted sign area to individual businesses
within the same unified business center will be at the discretion of the property
owner.
(c) Maximum Permitted Sign Height: If a freestanding sign, maximum height shall be 30
feet if located at least 2,000 feet from any interstate highway and 1,300 feet from any
15-95
other state or federal highway, and 40 feet if located within 2,000 feet of any
interstate highway or 1,300 feet of any other state or federal highway.
(d) Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: The greater of actual sign
height or 3 feet. The Zoning Administrator may approve lesser sign setbacks for
monument signs that are at least 8 feet from any vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
travel way, based on the relationship to pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement
and safety, the Village’s adopted aesthetic standards for the area, and Village and
utility use and operations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve other
requested setback adjustments via site plan approval.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
g. For PUD Zoning Districts: Permitted sign types, number, area, location and other
characteristics shall be per an approved final development plan under §15.15. No signage
which is not shown on an approved final development plan for a planned unit development
project, or an amendment thereto, shall be located on any site zoned PUD.
Figure 15.08 C: SUMMARY of Maximum On-Premise Business Sign Areas and Numbers (for
Non-Residential Uses).
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
Zoning
Districts
Maximum Sign Area/Height Maximum
On Building Signs Freestanding Signs Number of Signs
C-1, A-1,
A-1X, A-2
Wall Only:
1 sf of sign area per 1 ft of
exterior wall length on that wall
or 48 sf per building, whichever
is greater
Monument or Arm/post only:
Up to 32 sf for all combined sign
faces seen at one time
Max Height: 8 ft
1 on-building sign
and 1 freestanding
sign per lot
B-1
Wall, Awning or Projecting:
32 sf for each business in the
building with frontage on one
public street; 64 sf for each
business with frontage on more
than one public street
Monument or Arm/post:
24 sf for all combined sign faces
seen at one time
Max Height: 6 ft
2 on-building sign
per business, with
not more than 1
wall, awning, or
projecting sign
1 freestanding sign
per lot, provided
that setbacks met.
RM-B
Wall, Awning or Projecting:
48 sf for each business in the
building
Monument or Arm/post:
48 sf for all combined sign faces
seen at one time
Max Height: 8 ft
1 on-building sign
per business, 2 for
corner lots
1 freestanding sign
per lot.
B-2, O-R,
A-B, REC
Wall, Projecting, Awning, or
Marquee:
For the first sign, 1½ sf of sign
area per 1 ft of wall length on
that wall, up to a maximum of
300 sf; 64 sf for each additional
wall sign
64 sf per lot (100 sf w/i 1,300 ft of
USH 51; 200 sf w/i 2,000 ft of I-
39/90 and/or 1,300 ft of STH 19)
Max Height:
15 ft (25 ft w/i 1,300 ft of USH 51;
40 ft w/i 2,000 ft of I-39/90 and/or
1,300 ft of STH 19)
1 on-building sign
per business
operation with
separate entrance,
1 more per lot for
corner lots.
1 freestanding sign
per lot.
15-96
NOTE: This table is only a summary of the sign regulations applicable to nonresidential uses. The remainder of §15.08(6) contains
more detailed and specific requirements, including allowances for other types of signs in these districts under certain circumstances.
2. Auxiliary Signs for Non Residential Uses.
a. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign, Freestanding Sign, or sign mounted to gas canopy.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
b. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: Per approved site plan.
c. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Combined area of all auxiliary signs on any lot shall not
exceed 50% of the permitted freestanding or on-building sign area for the lot, whichever is
greater.
3. Properties with parking lots. For properties with parking lots with five or more parking spaces,
these signs are in addition to any other signs permitted signs:
a. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign or Monument Sign.
b. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One sign for each vehicular entrance, one sign for
each vehicular exit, and one sign for each parking area.
c. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Four square feet by each vehicular entrance and
vehicular exit, and nine square feet in each parking area.
(7) OFF-PREMISE ADVERTISING AND BILLBOARD SIGNS.
(a) Definitions.
1. “Adjacent area” means the area within 660 feet of the east and west edges of the right of
way lines of U.S. Highway 51.
2. “Billboard sign” means a freestanding sign located within the adjacent area of U.S. Highway
51 and that exceeds 100 square feet in area.
(b) Off-premise advertising signs and billboard signs are permitted within the adjacent area of U.S.
Highway 51 in the M-2 General Industrial and the B-2 General Business Districts, subject to the
following restrictions:
1. No off-premise advertising sign or billboard sign may be constructed prior to the issuance
of a permit from the Zoning Administrator for the proposed sign. The exceptions to the
B-3
Wall, Awning or Marquee:
1 ½ sf of sign area per 1 ft of
exterior wall length on that wall
64 sf per lot (100 sf w/i 1,300 ft of
USH 51; 200 sf w/i 2,000 ft of I-
39/90 and/or 1,300 ft of STH 19)
Max Height:
15 ft (25 ft w/i 1,300 ft of USH 51;
45 ft w/i 2,000 ft of I-39/90 and/or
1,300 ft of STH 19)
2 on-building signs
per business
1 freestanding sign
per lot.
M-1, M-2,
M-3
Wall Only:
1 ½ sf of sign area per 1 ft of
exterior wall length on that wall
48 sf per lot (100 sf w/i 1,300 ft of
USH 51; 400 sf w/i 2,000 ft of I-
39/90 and/or 1,300 ft of STH 19)
Max Height:
15 ft (25 ft w/i 1,300 ft of USH 51;
60 ft w/i 2,000 ft of I-39/90 and/or
1,300 ft of STH 19)
2 on-building signs
per business
1 freestanding sign
per lot
15-97
permit requirement provided under sec. 15.08(2)(i) do not apply to off-premise advertising
signs and billboard signs.
2. No billboard sign may be placed within 2,300 feet of another billboard sign.
3. No off-premise advertising sign or billboard sign may be placed within 1,000 feet of an
entrance or exit ramp on U.S. Highway 51, measured from the beginning or ending of the
pavement widening at the exit from or entrance to the highway.
4. No billboard sign may be placed within 660 feet of any Residential District in the Village of
DeForest, including those districts described in sec. 15.10 (2) and including residential
areas in Planned Unit Development (PUD) Districts, and designated residential areas in the
Village’s Comprehensive Plan.
5. All billboard signs and off-premise advertising signs must be designed and constructed so
that the messaging faces traffic traveling on U.S. Highway 51. Billboard signs may be
double-sided and V-shaped.
6. Electronic billboard signs must be turned off between midnight and 4:00 a.m., and shall
also comply with the restrictions related to length of cycle, brightness, and maintenance as
provided in sec. 15.08(4)(c) for Variable Message Signs (VMS).
7. Billboard signs shall be no greater than fifteen (15) feet high and fifty (50) feet wide in
dimension (750 total square feet) on any one side, inclusive of any border and trim but
excluding the base or apron, supports and other structural members.
8. Billboard signs shall not be placed at a height greater than thirty-five (35) feet above the
height of the pavement surface of U.S. Highway 51 closest to the billboard.
9. Signs may be placed up to 3 feet from the lot line shared with the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation along U.S. Highway 51, but said signs shall not encroach upon the right of
way. This provision supersedes setback requirements otherwise provided under sec.
15.08, but only with respect to the lot lines described in this paragraph.
10. Off-premise advertising signs and billboard signs shall count toward the maximum
permitted number of signs on the lot.
(8) STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS
(a) All signs shall be constructed and mounted so as to comply with State Building Codes.
(b) No sign or any part thereof, or anchor, brace, or guide rod shall be attached, fastened, or anchored
to any fire escape, fire ladder, or standpipe.
(c) No sign or any part thereof, or anchor, brace or guide rod shall he attached, erected, or maintained
which may cover or obstruct any door, doorway, or window of any building which may hinder or prevent ingress
or egress through such door, doorway, or window, or which may hinder or prevent the raising or placing of
ladders against such building in the event of fire.
(d) All signs shall in no instance create a traffic visibility or other safety hazard.
(e) No sign not designed and constructed to withstand winds during typical Wisconsin storm events
shall be erected at any location.
(f) No free-standing sign shall be erected at any location which is not designed and constructed with
footings for support of such sign which extend not less than 42 inches below the existing ground level.
15-98
(g) No sign attached to a buildings which is permitted to project away from the building wall shall be
designed and constructed in which the attachment to such wall extends above a point of bearing with the roof
rafters, except that roof parapets and roof-mounted mechanical equipment screening walls may be used as
sign installation areas if integral to the architectural design of the building as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
(h) No illuminated sign shall be erected at any location which is not designed and constructed to meet
the following requirements:
1. All signs shall be constructed and maintained to conform with State Electrical Codes and shall
bear UL labels. All sign permit applications in which electrical wiring and connections are
proposed shall be submitted to the Electrical Inspector. The Electrical Inspector shall examine
the plans and specifications submitted for the proposed sign and may require additional
information relating to the proposed electrical installation from the applicant. If the Electrical
Inspector determines that the proposed installation complies with local ordinances relating to the
electrical wiring and construction, then the Electrical Inspector shall approve the application and
submit the approved application to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may not
approve a sign permit application for an illuminated sign unless and until approval is received
from the Electrical Inspector.
2. Unless an illuminated sign bears the label of approval of a recognized testing laboratory, all
illuminated signs shall be inspected and approved by the Electrical Inspector on the site prior to
the erection of the sign. No illuminated sign, despite issuance of the sign permit, shall be
erected until the site inspection has been made or waived by the Electrical Inspector and the
sign permit initialed or stamped to show the Electrical Inspector's approval.
3. All illuminated signs shall he equipped with a watertight safety switch, located where electric
current enters the sign. All parts covering service openings to the electrical supply shall he
securely fastened.
4. No illuminated sign shall be connected to an electric power source except by an electrical
contractor, unless the only connection to the electric power source is through a grounded threeprong
heavy duty plug.
5. All free-standing illuminated signs shall be supplied power only by underground wiring.
Signage found to be in violation of the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of the
Village of DeForest Building Code and §15.08(2)(h).
(9) MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
(a) All signs and structures appurtenant thereto shall be maintained in a neat and proper state of
appearance.
(b) Proper maintenance shall be the absence of loose materials (including peeling paint, paper or other
material), the lack of excessive rust, the lack of excessive vibration or shaking, and the presence of the original
structural integrity of the sign, its frame and other supports, its mounting, and all components thereof.
(c) The repainting, changing of parts, and preventive maintenance of signs which completely conform to
the requirements of this section, and result in absolutely no change in the appearance of the sign from that
originally approved, shall not be deemed alterations requiring a sign permit.
15-99
(d) The owner, lessee, or manager of a sign, and the owner of the land on which the same is located,
shall keep grass or weeds and other growth cut and debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the lot
on which the sign is located.
(e) The base of signs shall be landscaped so as to conceal footings, mountings, brackets, and related
structural elements.
(f) A sign which is improperly maintained or is abandoned or is unsafe or otherwise exists in violation of
this ordinance, shall be removed by the sign permit holder or the owner of the property on which the sign is
located within three months from the date of disrepair, abandonment, or unsafe condition unless the sign
permit holder or owner receives actual notice from the Zoning Administrator of the problem, per the
requirements of §15.08(2)(f).
(10) NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
(a) General Provisions Regarding Nonconforming Signs.
1. Signs lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this section may be
continued although the use, size, or location does not conform with the provisions of this
section. However, it shall be deemed a nonconforming use or structure; and the provisions of
§15.17 shall apply. Nonconforming signs may be maintained. No nonconforming on-premise
sign shall be altered or moved to a new location without being brought into compliance with the
requirements of this Section. Refer also to §15.08(10)(b)(1), below.
2. Business signs on the premises of a nonconforming use or building may be continued, but new
signs for such uses shall not be allowed, nor shall expand in number, area, height, or
illumination. New signs, not to exceed the maximum allowable sign areas under this section,
may be erected only upon the complete removal of all other signs existing at the time of
adoption of this section.
3. Nonconforming signs shall be removed when the principal structure located on the premises
undergoes a change of use, or shall be removed per §15.08(10)B. Closing businesses must
remove their building signs and freestanding sign faces within 60 days of closing, or sooner if
the Zoning Administrator determines that the signs do not meet the maintenance requirements
of §15.08(9).
4. Signage not in compliance with the provisions of this section shall be subject to the provisions of
§15.08(10)B.
5. Whenever there is a change in the sign user (excluding off-premise signs), sign owner, or owner
of the property on which the sign is located, the new sign user, sign owner, or new property
owner shall forthwith notify the Zoning Administrator of the change. No new sign permit is
required unless there is modification of the sign face or sign structure. The sign will continue to
be considered nonconforming.
(b) Removal of Nonconforming Signs.
1. Alteration of Signs.
a. For the purpose of this section, alteration of a sign is considered to be any structural change
to the exterior appearance of any part of the sign, its frame, its supporting structure,
material, height, location, or any other alterations of comparable scope.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
b. Altering a sign does not include maintaining the existing appearance of the sign; replacing
the sign face or the supporting structure with identical materials, colors, and messages;
15-100
changing the message of a marquee or community information sign; or changing the face of
an off-premise advertising sign.
c. A tenant sign which comprises part of a group sign may be replaced to accommodate a new
tenant sign without triggering the need to bring the entire group sign, or any of its parts, into
compliance with the provisions of this section.
2. All non-conforming signs found not to be in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter
shall be removed within 30 days of receiving written notice of noncompliance and removal from
the Zoning Administrator, except as otherwise provided for in §15.08(2)(f).
3. The penalties of the Village of DeForest Zoning Code or Building Code may be applicable to
violations of the provisions of this section.
15.09 ZONING DISTRICTS; MAPS.
(1) ZONING DISTRICTS. In order to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter, the Village of
DeForest and the ETZ Area are hereby divided into the following districts:
(a) Residential Districts
1. RH-1 Rural Housing District
2. RE-1 Residential Estate Single Family Residence District
3. RE-2 Residential Estate Single Family Residence District
4. RN-1 Residential Neighborhood Single Family Residence District
5. RN-2 Residential Neighborhood Single Family Residence District
6. RN-2A Residential Neighborhood Single Family Residence District
7. RM-3 Residential Mix Two Family Housing District
8. RM-4 Residential Mix Multi-Family Housing District
9. RM-5 Residential Mix Elderly Housing District
10. RM-B Residential Mix - Business District
11. RM-6 Residential Mix - Traditional Housing District
(b) Business Districts
1. B-1 Central Business District
2. B-2 General Business District
3. B-3 Highway Business District
4. A-B Agricultural Business District
5. O-R Office and Research District
6. REC Recreational District
(c) Industrial Districts
1. M-1 Restricted Industrial District
2. M-2 General Industrial District
3. M-3 Intensive Industrial District
(d) Agricultural Districts
1. A-1 Agricultural District
2. A-1 Ex Exclusive Agricultural District
3. A-2 General Agricultural District
15-101
4. A-3 Agricultural Transition District
5. A-4 Small Lot Exclusive Agricultural District
(e) Other Districts
1. C-1 Conservancy District
2. PUD Planned Unit Development District
3. WP Wellhead Protection Overlay District
[Cr. 13-06, Eff. 4-4-13]
(2) ZONING MAPS. The locations and boundaries of the districts established herein are shown upon
the DeForest Zoning Map dated December 29, 2007 or as amended from time to time through actions of the
Village Board under §15.03(7) and §15.035(3), which are hereby incorporated into this chapter. The Zoning
Map, together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon, and all amendments thereto,
shall be a part of this Code and shall have the same force and effect as if the maps were fully set forth and
described herein.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(3) BOUNDARY LINES. Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any zoning district as
shown on the Zoning Maps, the following rules shall apply:
(a) Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets, alleys or similar rights-of-way, they
shall be construed as following the center lines thereof.
(b) Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall
be construed to be the boundaries.
(c) Where a single lot held at the effective date of this chapter is divided by a district boundary line, the
entire lot shall be construed to be within the less restricted district; provided, however, that this provision shall
not apply in any case where it would increase the area of the less restricted portion of the lot by more than
twenty percent (20%) nor in any case where it would reclassify any property from the A-1X district.
(d) Where the district boundary line is shown as following the shoreline of any navigable waterway, the
boundary shall continue to follow the shoreline despite changes in the location thereof due to accretion or
avulsion.
(4) CHANGES IN ZONING DISTRICT DESIGNATION. Upon the enactment of any ordinance changing
the district designation of any property, the Zoning Administrator shall make an appropriate amendment to the
Zoning Map(s) to reflect the revised zoning.
(5) SPLIT ZONING OF LOTS. No lot shall be divided into more than one zoning district, other than an
overlay district or another zoning district intentionally created with boundaries to follow land features other than
lot boundaries.
[Cr. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10]
15.10 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
(1) PURPOSE. The residential district regulations are intended to govern the location, intensity, and
method of development for the residential areas subject to this chapter. The residential districts provide for a
variety of housing types and price ranges while at the same time maintaining the character and integrity of
homogeneous residential areas and existing neighborhoods. The regulations of each district are designed to
provide protection to the character of existing developments while allowing new growth in accordance with
specific development standards and objectives. Public utility services are required as a prerequisite to
development in all residential districts located within the Village.
(2) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. The residential districts are as follows:
15-102
(a) RH-1 Rural Housing District. Min. 2 acre lot size. The RH-1 Rural Housing District serves as a rural
residential district and is intended primarily for lands within the ETZ Area.
(b) RE-1 Residential Estate Single-Family Residence District Min. 22,000 sq. ft. lot size. The RE-1
Single-Family Residence District serves as the lowest density residential district for areas not considered rural
in character.
(c) RE-2 Residential Estate Single-Family Residence District Min. 15,000 sq. ft. lot size. The RE-2
zoning classification serves as a low density, suburban residential district.
(d) RN-1 Residential Neighborhood Single-Family Residence District Min. 12,000 sq. ft. lot size. The
RN-1 Single-Family Residence District is designed to provide for relatively large lots in a neighborhood setting.
(e) RN-2 Residential Neighborhood Single-Family Residence District Min. 10,000 sq. ft. lot size. The
RN-2 zoning classification provides an urban single-family home environment.
(f) RN-2A Residential Neighborhood Single-Family Residence District Min. 7,000 sq. ft. lot size. The
purpose of the RNA Single-Family Residence District is to provide for a district which allows for a more
generally affordable single-family home.
(g) RM-3 Residential Mix Two-Family Housing District Min. 12,000 sq. ft. lot size. The RM-3 district
provides for an urban environment of medium density residential development utilizing single-family detached,
two-family dwelling units, and townhomes.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(h) RM-4 Residential Mix Multi-Family Housing District Min. 12,000 sq. ft. lot size. The RM-4 district
provides for the highest density residential development permissible.
(i) RM-5 Residential Mix Elderly Housing District. The RM-5 district is established to preserve certain
areas to accommodate elderly persons in multiple family dwellings. It is intended to provide for developments
which are specifically designed to meet the particular needs of elderly persons in accordance with all State and
Federal Laws authorizing or regulating such developments.
(j) RM-6 Residential Mix Traditional Housing District Min. 6,000 sq. ft. lot size. The RM-6 District is
intended to allow the continued use of certain existing small residential lots primarily within the area of the
Village bounded by Main Street, Yahara Street, Cleveland Avenue and Murray Street. The district provides for
an urban environment of medium density residential development utilizing single-family detached and two-flat
dwellings. A two-flat dwelling is defined as a single family home which has been converted for use as two
dwelling units; an example being a two story home with an upstairs apartment.
(3) PERMITTED USES. The permitted and allowable conditional uses in each of the residential zoning
districts shall be as set forth in Table 15.10A.
(4) BULK STANDARDS. No structure or lot shall be developed, used, or occupied unless it meets the
minimum lot width, lot area, yard requirements, height limits and other dimensional standards set forth in Table
15.10B and this subsection.
(a) Zero Lot Line Construction. In residential districts where zero lot line construction is allowed in
Table 15.10A, the following standards shall supersede any conflicting standards in Table 15.10B.
1. Lot width at minimum building setback line: The aggregate widths of both lots that a duplex
occupies shall total not less than 80 feet. No single lot width shall be less than 35 feet.
2. Lot area (each unit): Minimum 5,000 square feet.
15-103
3. Principal Building Setback—Side Yard: Zero feet on side yard(s) that includes the common
wall(s) of the structure; 8 feet on other side yards.
a. Each unit shall have a separate water lateral connection and meter. The size, type, and
installation shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Village
Public Works Committee or its designee.
5. The common wall between the units shall meet the requirements in the graphic that follows,
and shall extend from the basement floor to the top of the roof. Compliance with such
standard shall be confirmed in writing by the applicant and building inspector, before the
building permit shall be issued.
15-104
6. The developer shall provide, with the application, a draft agreement or covenant specifying
maintenance standards for the common wall, maintenance and replacement standards for
exterior surfaces of the building to maintain a neat and harmonious appearance over time,
maintenance standards for any common sewer lateral and any other common features, and
restrictions against construction of detached single family residences on any of the affected
lots in the event either or all sides of the zero lot line construction dwelling are destroyed.
Such agreement or covenant shall also provide that it may not be terminated, amended or
otherwise altered without the approval of the Village Board. Such agreement shall be
subject to Village Zoning Administrator approval, and then recorded by the developer
against all affected properties and continually maintained by the property owners before the
building permit will be issued or the conditional use permit takes effect.
[Am. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06, Am. 07-05; Eff. 02-09-07; Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11]
TABLE 15.10 A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT USES
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
Key: P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use A = Accessory Use NP = Not Permitted
TYPE OF USE
RH-1
RE-1
RE-2
RN-1
RN-2
RN-2A
RM-3
RM-4
RM-5
RM-6
Residential Uses
Single-Family
Detached Residence
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
NP
P
Two-Family Residential
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
P
P
NP
NP
Multiple-Family Residential
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
P
NP
NP
Two Flat Residential
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
P
NP
P
Residential (Elderly Only)
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
P
P
NP
Townhouse Residential
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
P
P
NP
NP
Zero Lot Line Construction
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
P
P
P
C
Day Care (1-3 persons
not including family
members)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
C
Community Living
Arrangements
(1–8 residents)
P P P P P P P P P P
Community Living
Arrangements
(9-15 residents)
C C C C C C C P C C
Community Living
Arrangements
(16 plus residents)
NP NP NP NP NP NP NP C NP NP
15-105
Temporary campground
associated with special event,
subject to §15.16(10). On lots
with pre-existing civic, cultural,
or institutional use only.
[Cr. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10; Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-
16-11]
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Business Uses
Bed and Breakfast
C
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
C
Group Day Care Center (4 or
more persons not including family
members)
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Public, Cultural and Recreation Uses
Indoor Civic, Cultural &
Institutional (Incl. Schools,
Churches, Local
Government & Emergency
Services)
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Outdoor Recreational/
Open Space (Public/ Private)
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Industrial and Higher Intensity Uses
Utilities/Communication
Towers/Transportation
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Low Mass and Low Intensity Uses
Agricultural uses w/not more than
1 livestock animal per acre of land
P
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
Agricultural-Related
Office/Research/
Laboratory
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
Accessory Uses
Home Occupation
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Residential Garage/Carport -
Detached Not to exceed 625
square feet per dwelling unit.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Accessory building of up to
200 square feet, including
sheds but not garages/carports
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
15-106
Accessory building of over 200
square feet, including sheds,
garages/carports over 625
square feet per dwelling unit,
and farm out buildings
C C C C C C C P C C
On-Site Parking Lot
NP
NP
NP
C
C
C
C
P
P
C
Small solar or wind
energy system, subject to
Section 15.04(24)
[Cr. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10].
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
TABLE 15.10B RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT BULK STANDARDS[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
[Am. 07-05; Eff. 02-09-07; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13; Am. 15-036; Eff. 7-30-15]
BULK STANDARDS
RH-1
RE-1
RE-2
RN-1
RN-2
RN-2A
RM-3
RM-4
RM-5
RM-6
Minimum Lot Width (Lineal Ft.)
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
150
100
100
100
80
**70
100
**100
**100
50
Minimum Lot Frontage on
Public Street (Lineal Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
NA
60
60
60
50
40
60
60
60
40
Minimum Lot Area (Sq. Ft.)
87,120
22,000
15,000
12,000
10,000
**7,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
6,000
Minimum Lot Area/per
Dwelling Unit (Sq. Ft.)
0
22,000
15,000
12,000
10,000
**7,000
5,000
2,500
2,000
3,000
Max. Building Height (Ft.)
Residential
35
35
35
35
35
35
35
40
40
35
Max. Building Height (Ft.)
Non-Residential
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
Max. Number of Stories
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
Minimum Floor
Area/D.U. (Sq. Ft.)
1,200/
1 story
1,800/
2+story
2,500/
1 story;
3,200/
2+story
1,700/
1 story;
2,200/
2+story
1,200/
1 story
1,800/
2 story
1,100/
1 story
1,800/
2 story
1,000/
1 story
1,400/
2 story
900/
1 story
1,400/
2 story
600/
studio
800/
1 bdrm
1,100/
2+ bdrm
600/
studio
800/
1 bdrm
1,100/
2+ bdrm
800/
1 story
1,200/
2 story
15-107
Minimum Principal Building Setbacks (See also Section 15.04(8) for permitted intrusions into setbacks)
Front and Street Side
Yard (Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
30
30
30
30
25
25
25
25
25
20
Interior Side Yard (Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
15
15
10
10
8
8
8
10
10
8
Rear Yard (Ft.)
50
40
40
30
30
25
30
30
30
25
Minimum Detached Accessory Building Setbacks
(See also Section 15.04(4), regarding restrictions for placement in easements) [Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
Front and Street Side
Yard (Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
35
35
35
30
25
25
25
25
25
20
Interior Side Yard (Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
Rear Yard (Ft)
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
Animal Housing Building
Rear Yard Setback (Ft)
50
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Minimum Green Space %
[Am. 15-045, Eff. 12-24-15]
For Residential Use
50%
60%
60%
60%
60%
50%
50%
40%
40%
40%
For Non-Residential Use
30%
30%
30%
30%
30%
25%
25%
20%
20%
20%
Maximum Driveway Opening
Residential At Property
Line/Curb Line
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
N/A
20/24
20/24
20/24
20/24
20/24
26/32
26/32
26/32
20/24
Non Residential At
Property Line/Curb Line
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13; Am. 15-
045, Eff. 12-24-15]
N/A
34/40
34/40
34/40
34/40
34/40
34/40
34/40
34/40
34/40
15-108
Minimum Landscaping Points (add for total points)
-per 100 Linear ft. of
Building Foundation
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
45
50
-per 1000 sq. ft. G.F.A.
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
-per 100 Linear ft/Street
Frontage
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
45
50
-per 10,000 sq. ft. of
Paved Area or 20 stalls
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
100
90
N/A
* One per lot of minimum acreage established by sec. 15.10(2)(b)
** Lots Platted After April 15, 1999
15-109
15.105 RESIDENTIAL MIX - BUSINESS DISTRICT.
[Renum. from 15.18 and Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(1) PURPOSE. The RM-B District is established to maintain the attractive pedestrianfriendly
scope of a naturally formed or carefully planned mixed use business and residential area
that also provides for the needs of surrounding residential areas, is the central place for many noncommercial
community activities including cultural and civic functions, and is not predominated by
the need to support automobile-oriented retailing.
(2) GENERAL STANDARDS. All buildings and uses hereafter established or enlarged
within the RM-B District shall conform to the following standards. The Village may require that a
commitment to meeting such standards will be met at the time of rezoning a particular parcel of
land to the RM-B zoning district.
(a) Off-street parking facilities must be established to alleviate traffic congestion and to
promote shopping convenience and business prosperity, in accordance with the standards in
§15.07.
(b) All commercial establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly
with customers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold on or from the premises where
produced.
(c) Except where authorized as permitted accessory or incidental functions, all business,
service, storage, and display of goods shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
(d) Garages are permitted, provided that such garages may only be used for the parking of
motor vehicles used by tenants of the premises or used by the business on the premises.
(e) New development projects shall contain a mix of commercial and residential uses on
the same lot and/or in the same building.
(3) BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN: Structures and site designs in the RM-B district shall
be as substantially as possible like those described in components of the Village’s Comprehensive
Plan that, in the determination of the Village Planning and Zoning Administrator, are applicable to
the lands zoned RM-B. Other structure or site design types may be included only by a Conditional
Use Permit.
(4) PERMITTED USES. Only those permitted principal uses or accessory uses as
designated with a "P" in Table 15.105 A shall be permitted within the RM-B District.
(5) CONDITIONAL USES. Those uses designated with a "C” in Table 15.105 A shall be
permitted only in accordance with a conditional use permit as provided in sec. 15.16.
(6) BULK STANDARDS. No structure or lot shall be developed, used or occupied unless it
meets the minimum lot width, lot area, yard requirements, height limits and other dimensional
standards set forth in Table 15.105 B. The maximum floor area for any single retail or commercial
service occupancy shall be 20,000 square feet.
(7) LANDSCAPING. Landscaping requirements can be met using adjacent open space
area. Adjacent open space will be designated at the time of site plan review. Parking lot
15-110
landscaping shall be in accordance with sec. 15.06(10) Off-Street Parking Lot Landscaping
Requirements.
(8) SITE PLAN REVIEW. All uses in the RM-B district require site plan review as per sec.
15.05.
(9) PARKING. Parking requirement can be met using adjacent streets and alleys and will
be designated for each use at the time of site plan review. Handicapped spaces shall be
designated by staff.
TABLE 15.105 A
RESIDENTIAL MIX - BUSINESS DISTRICT USES
Key: P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
RM-B
RESIDENTIAL
Single-Family Residence
C
Duplex Residential. [Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
Multiple-Family Residential
P
Multiple-Family Residential (Elderly Only)
P
Zero Lot Line Construction. [Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
Home Day Care (1-3 Persons)
P
Home Occupation (not to exceed 800 square feet in principal building)
P
On-Site Parking Lot, residential
P
Residential Garage - Attached
P
Residential Garage - Detached not to exceed 625 square feet per dwelling unit.
P
15-111
TABLE 15.105 A
RESIDENTIAL MIX - BUSINESS DISTRICT USES
Key: P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
RM-B
SERVICE RETAIL
Banks and other financial institutions.
P
Barbershops, beauty shops, and hairdressers.
P
Bed and Breakfast. [Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
Day care centers.
P
Duplicating, blueprinting, photocopying, addressing, mailing, mailing list and stenographic
services.
P
Funeral homes and undertaking facilities.
C
Garment pressing establishments, hand laundries, hat cleaning and blocking shops and coinoperated
dry cleaning establishments.
P
Gasoline service stations; provided that all gasoline pumps, storage tanks and accessory
equipment must be located at least 10 feet from any existing or proposed street line and all
storage tanks must be underground.
C
General grocery stores, fruit and vegetable stores, meat and fish stores, dairy products stores,
and miscellaneous food stores.
P
Gift, novelty and souvenir shops.
P
Hotels, motor hotels, motels and similar lodging facilities.
C
15-112
TABLE 15.105 A
RESIDENTIAL MIX - BUSINESS DISTRICT USES
Key: P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
RM-B
Laundries and retail dry-cleaning establishments, including coin operated laundries, commonly
called Laundromats.
P
Liquor stores.
C
Photographic studios and commercial photography establishments.
P
Radios, TV, high-fidelity sound equipment, electronic amplifier, stereophonic sound system,
musical instrument or other such device sales, service, repair, testing, demonstration facility.
P
Recreation, indoor including billiards and pool establishments, bowling centers, movie theater,
fitness/exercise center, skating rinks, and similar commercial facilities.
P
Restaurants and other eating places, predominant number of patrons carry out, although some
seating inside may be provided, including drive-in and drive-through type establishments. Also
includes any restaurant with sidewalk cafes and other outdoor service.
C
Restaurants and other eating places, predominant number of patrons sit down at restaurant to
eat, although some may carry out food, not including drive-in and drive-through type
establishments and sidewalk cafes or other outdoor service.
P
Retail bakers, including those which produce some or all of the products sold on the premises,
but not including establishments which manufacture bakery products primarily for sale through
outlets located elsewhere or through home service delivery.
P
Retail sales, soft goods including: antique and secondhand stores, bookstores (not including
adult books) and stationary stores, camera/photographic supply stores, candy nut or
confectionary, clothing and shoe stores, and variety stores, drug stores and pharmacies,
electrical supply stores, florist shops, jewelry, watch and clock stores including repair services,
news dealers and newsstands, sporting goods stores and bicycle shops, tobacco and smoker’s
supplies stores, home furnishings and floor coverings stores, paint and wallpaper stores.
P
15-113
TABLE 15.105 A
RESIDENTIAL MIX - BUSINESS DISTRICT USES
Key: P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
RM-B
Reupholstery and furniture repair and interior design studios.
P
Tailor shops, dressmaker shops, garment and shoe repair shops and shoe shine parlors.
P
Taverns, bars and other drinking places.
P
Telephone and telegraph offices.
P
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping firms or services.
P
Advertising agencies, consumer credit reporting, news agencies, employment agencies.
P
Computer services.
P
Engineering and architectural firms or consultants.
P
Insurance company, agent, broker, and service representative offices.
P
Law offices.
P
Newspaper, periodical or book publishing and printing establishments.
C
Offices, meeting places, and premises of professional membership associations; civic, social,
and fraternal associations; business associations, labor unions and similar labor organizations;
political; religious; charitable; or other non-profit membership organizations.
P
15-114
TABLE 15.105 A
RESIDENTIAL MIX - BUSINESS DISTRICT USES
Key: P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
RM-B
Physician/Surgeon, dentist/dental surgeon, osteopathic physician, optometrist and
chiropractor offices.
P
Real estate agents, brokers, managers and title companies.
P
Scientific, or Educational firms, agencies, offices or services, but not research laboratories or
manufacturing operations.
P
Veterinarian’s offices and facilities for domestic animals.
C
AG RELATED USES
Seasonal flower or vegetable plants, landscaping supply or similar produce sales and seasonal
sales of cut trees for holiday decorations within or adjacent to a temporary structure, and for a
duration not to exceed 90 days in a calendar year.
C
Seasonal vegetable, fruit, or other farm product sales, but not other types of products or
merchandise within a permanent sales establishment.
C
MISCELLANEOUS
Communications antennae.
C
Detached Garage shall only be used for the parking of motor vehicles used by tenants of the
premises or vehicles used by the business on the premises.
C
Government, local municipal facilities, libraries, educational institutions, police and fire stations
and post offices.
P
Group Day Care Center (4 or More Persons).
C
15-115
TABLE 15.105 A
RESIDENTIAL MIX - BUSINESS DISTRICT USES
Key: P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
RM-B
Hospital or medical center, long term nursing care facility.
C
Indoor Civic, Cultural & Institutional (Incl. Schools & Emergency Services).
P
Parking lots, parking garages, or parking structures, public.
P
Public transportation passenger stations, taxicab company offices, taxicab stands, but not
vehicle storage lots or garages.
P
Outdoor Recreational/Open Space (Public/ Private) parks and playgrounds.
C
Utilities/Transportation
C
TABLE 15.105 B
RESIDENTIAL MIX - BUSINESS DISTRICT BULK STANDARDS
DESCRIPTION
RM-B
Minimum Lot Width (Lineal Ft.)
60
Minimum Lot Area (Sq. Ft.)
6,000
Minimum Lot Area/D.U. (Sq. Ft.)
1,050
Minimum Floor Area/D.U. (Sq. Ft.)
400 studio
800 1 bedroom
1,100 2+ bedroom
Surface Parking within Minimum Front Yard for
Principal Buildings . [Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
Minimum Green Space (%) Utilizing the combination of
15%
15-116
adjacent public open space and common space, and with a
Stormwater management plan approved by the Village if in
the Village limits.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
TABLE 15.105 B
RESIDENTIAL MIX - BUSINESS DISTRICT BULK STANDARDS
Minimum Principal Building Setbacks
Front and Street Side Yard (Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
10 (Less than 10 ft. permitted as a
conditional use)
Interior Side Yard (Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
10 (Less than 10 ft. permitted as a
conditional use)
Rear Yard (Ft.)
10 (Less than 10 ft. permitted as a
conditional use)
Maximum Building Height (Ft.) - Principal
60
Maximum Garage size
625 feet, with such limit in downtown area only
Maximum Number of Stories - Principal Building
3
Maximum Driveway Opening -At Property Line
34
Maximum Driveway Opening -At Curb Line
40
Minimum Building Exterior Decorative Material
Required [Cr. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11]
35%
Minimum Landscaping Points Standard: See Section 15.06 and Table 15.06A for landscaping requirements.
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11]
*Minimum lot area per dwelling unit is the smallest amount of square feet allowed per one dwelling unit. The minimum
lot area per dwelling unit is applied once a lot is delineated and the green space has been dedicated. The remaining
lot area is used in calculating the max. number of dwelling units that could be placed on that specific lot.
15.11 BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
(1) PURPOSE. The general purposes of the Business Districts are, among other things:
(a) To promote the most desirable use of land so that adequate space is provided in
appropriate locations for the various types of business uses, thereby protecting and strengthening
the economic base of the community.
15-117
(b) To place in separate districts those businesses which may create noise, odors, hazards
or unsightliness, or which may generate substantial vehicular traffic.
(c) To permit selected business uses in districts where adjacency to residential areas has
sufficient elements of service or convenience to such areas to offset the disadvantages, and to
allow, where appropriate, the introduction of residential uses within certain business districts where
such uses will be both compatible and mutually supportive.
(d) To encourage the grouping in appropriate locations of compatible business uses which
will tend to draw trade that is mutually interchangeable and so promote public convenience and
business prosperity and minimize traffic and pedestrian congestion.
(e) To provide for the establishment of off-street parking facilities to alleviate traffic
congestion and to promote shopping convenience and business prosperity.
(2) B-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
(a) Purpose. The B-1 District is established to maintain the attractive pedestrian-friendly
scope of a naturally formed community business area that provides for the needs of surrounding
residential areas, is the central place for many non-commercial community activities including
cultural and civic functions, and is not predominated by the need to support automobile-oriented
retailing. The trade area for a B-1 District may include the entire Village and, for tourism oriented
activities, the region.
(b) General Standards. All buildings and uses hereafter established or enlarged within the
B-1 Central Business District shall conform to the following standards:
1. Except as conditional uses authorized under par. (d), no part of the first or ground
floor of any building shall be used for residential purposes.
2. All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly
with customers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold on or from the
premises where produced.
3. Except where authorized as permitted accessory or incidental functions, all
business, service, storage, and display of goods shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings.
4. Parking requirements in the B-1 district may be satisfied, in whole or in part, by
spaces available on adjacent public streets and alleys as determined at the time of
site plan review to the extent the Commission determines that the number of on-site
parking stalls otherwise required is unnecessary due to available public parking
spaces.
(c) Permitted Uses. Only those permitted principal uses or accessory uses as designated
with a "P" in the B-1 column of Table 15.11A shall be permitted within the B-1 District.
(d) Conditional Uses. Those uses designated with a "C in the B-1 column of Table 15.11A
shall be permitted only in accordance with a conditional use permit as provided in sec. 15.16.
15-118
(e) Dimensional Standards. Lots and buildings shall conform to the maximum and minimum
dimensional standards established in the B-1 column of Table 15.11B.
(f) Performance Standards. All uses in the district shall conform to the performance
standards set forth in §15.04(12).
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(3) B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
(a) Purpose. The B-2 District is intended to accommodate retail, service and other
businesses which serve the needs of the surrounding neighborhood or community areas without
creating any detrimental or deleterious effect on the use, value and enjoyment of adjacent or
nearby residential property or on the safe and expeditious movement of traffic in the public streets.
These uses are likely to rely on customers who access the property in automobiles, and therefore,
require more significant accommodations to vehicular functions.
(b) General Standards. All buildings and uses hereafter established or enlarged within the
B-2 General Business District shall conform to the following standards:
1. No building shall be used for residential purposes except as an accessory use by the
owner or operator of the business premises.
2. All outside storage, which is permitted as an accessory use only, shall be enclosed
by decorative screening as provided in section 15.05.
(c) Permitted Uses. Only those permitted principal uses or accessory uses as designated
with a "P" within the B-2 column of Table 15.11A shall be permitted within the B-2 District.
(d) Conditional Uses. Those uses designated with a "C" in the B-2 column of Table 15.11A
shall be permitted only in accordance with a conditional use permit as provided in sec. 15.16.
(e) Dimensional Standards. Lots and buildings shall conform to the maximum and minimum
dimensional standards established in the B-2 column of Table 15.11B.
(f) Performance Standards. All uses in the district shall conform to the performance
standards set forth in §15.04(12).
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(4) B-3 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT.
(a) Purpose. The B-3 District is intended to provide for retail, office and other commercial
businesses which benefit from direct access or visibility to heavily traveled major arterial roads or
highways. This district is designed to support commercial activities which require large land areas,
are oriented to the automobile and do not depend upon adjoining uses for reasons of comparison
shopping and pedestrian traffic.
(b) General Standards. All buildings and uses hereafter established or enlarged within the
B-3 Highway Business District shall conform to the following standards:
1. No building shall be used for residential purposes except as an accessory use by the
owner or operator of the business premises and except that accommodations may
15-119
be offered to the transient public by motels, hotels, and inns as part of commercial
indoor lodging.
2. All outside storage, which is permitted as an accessory use only, shall be enclosed
by approved screening as provided in sec. 15.05.
(c) Permitted Uses. Only those permitted principal uses or accessory uses as designated
with a "P" within the B-3 column of Table 15.11A shall be permitted within the B-3 District.
(d) Conditional Uses. Those uses designated with a "C" in the B-3 column of Table 15.11A
shall be permitted only in accordance with a conditional use permit as provided in sec. 15.16.
(e) Dimensional Standards. Lots and buildings shall conform to the maximum and
minimum dimensional standards established in the B-3 column of the district standards table.
(f) Performance Standards. All uses in the district shall conform to the performance
standards set forth in §15.04(12).
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(5) A-B AGRICULTURAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
(a) Purpose. The A-B Agriculture-Business District is designed to provide for those uses
which are commercial in nature; are associated with local agricultural production; require a rural
location due to extensive land area needs or proximity of resources; and do not require urban
services.
(b) Permitted Uses. Only those permitted principal uses or accessory uses as designated
with a "P" within the A-B column of Table 15.11A shall be permitted within the A-B District.
(c) Conditional Uses. Those uses designated with a "C" in the A-B column of Table 15.11A
shall be permitted only in accordance with a conditional use permit as provided in sec. 15.16.
(d) Dimensional Standards. Lots and buildings shall conform to the maximum and minimum
dimensional standards established in the A-B column of Table 15.11B. The building height
limitation stated therein shall not apply to agricultural buildings such as silos, bins, feed and seed
storage facilities.
(e) Performance Standards. All uses in the district shall conform to the performance
standards set forth in §15.04(12).
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
15-120
TABLE 15.11A BUSINESS DISTRICT USE LIST
[Am. 04-13; Eff. 5-20-04; Am. 09-05, Eff. 319-09; Am 15-036; Eff. 7-30-15]
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
B-1
B-2
B-3
A-B
SERVICE RETAIL
Animal Grooming facilities
[Cr. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
P
P
Banks and other financial institutions.
P
P
Barbershops, beauty shops, and hairdressers.
P
P
Bed and Breakfast establishments, as defined by §254.61(1), Stats.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
P
Day care centers.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
P
P
C
Duplicating, blueprinting, photocopying, addressing, mailing, mailing
list and stenographic services.
P
P
Funeral homes and undertaking facilities.
C
C
Garment pressing establishments, hand laundries, hat cleaning and
blocking shops and coin-operated dry cleaning establishments.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
P
General grocery stores, supermarkets, fruit and vegetable stores,
meat and fish stores, dairy products stores, including ice cream stores
and miscellaneous food stores.
P
P
P
Hotels, motor hotels, motels and similar lodging facilities.
P
P
Laundries and dry-cleaning establishments, including coin operated
laundries, commonly called Laundromats.
P
P
C
15-121
TABLE 15.11A BUSINESS DISTRICT USE LIST
[Am. 04-13; Eff. 5-20-04; Am. 09-05, Eff. 319-09; Am 15-036; Eff. 7-30-15]
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
B-1
B-2
B-3
A-B
Liquor stores. [Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
P
Photographic studios and commercial photography establishments.
P
P
Places of Worship, including churches, synagogues, mosques, and
meeting houses.
C C C C
Radios, TV, high-fidelity sound equipment, electronic amplifier,
stereophonic sound system, musical instrument or other such device
sales, service, repair, testing, demonstration facility.
P
P
Recreation, outdoor including amusement parks, drive-in theaters,
golf courses open to the public, golf driving range, archery range,
baseball batting cages, miniature golf courses, and similar commercial
recreational facilities.
P
P
Recreation, indoor including billiards and pool establishments,
bowling alley, movie theater, fitness/exercise center, skating rinks, and
similar commercial facilities.
P
P
Restaurant, Sit down, substantially all patrons sit at tables inside,
although some may carry out food.
P
P
P
Restaurant, Carry out, predominant number of patrons carry out,
although some inside seating is provided. Excludes drive thru type
establishments. [Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
P
Restaurant, drive through type establishment
[Cr. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
P
P
Restaurant, Concession establishments without seating, selling ice
cream, popcorn, and comparable items as the primary use.
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
P
15-122
TABLE 15.11A BUSINESS DISTRICT USE LIST
[Am. 04-13; Eff. 5-20-04; Am. 09-05, Eff. 319-09; Am 15-036; Eff. 7-30-15]
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
B-1
B-2
B-3
A-B
Restaurants, Sidewalk cafes with outdoor service
[Am. 12-09, Eff. 5-24-12]
P
C
C
Retail bakers, including those which produce some or all of the
products sold on the premises, but not including establishments which
manufacture bakery products primarily for sale through outlets located
elsewhere or through home service delivery.
P
P
Retail sales, soft goods including: antique and secondhand stores,
bookstores (not including adult books), gift, novelty and souvenir
shops, stationary stores, camera/photographic supply stores, candy nut
or confectionary, clothing and shoe stores, department and variety
stores, drug stores and pharmacies, electrical supply stores, florist
shops, jewelry, watch and clock stores including repair services, news
dealers and newsstands, sporting goods stores and bicycle shops,
tobacco and smoker s supplies stores, home furnishings and floor
coverings stores, paint and wallpaper stores in buildings under 20,000
square feet in area.
P
P
P
Retail sales, hard goods including home appliance and furniture
stores, automotive accessory stores for the sale of items such as tires,
batteries or other automotive accessories, farm supply and equipment
dealers, furniture, home furnishings and floor coverings stores, garden
supply and equipment stores, including power mowers, hardware
stores, paint, glass and wallpaper stores in buildings under 20,000
square feet in area.
P
P
Retail sales, Hard and Soft Goods as defined above in excess of
20,000 square feet of area.
C
C
Reupholstery and furniture repair and interior design studios.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
Tailor shops, dressmaker shops, garment and shoe repair shops and
shoe shine parlors
P
P
Taverns, bars and other drinking places. [Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
P
15-123
TABLE 15.11A BUSINESS DISTRICT USE LIST
[Am. 04-13; Eff. 5-20-04; Am. 09-05, Eff. 319-09; Am 15-036; Eff. 7-30-15]
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
B-1
B-2
B-3
A-B
Telephone and telegraph offices.
P
P
P
SERVICE RETAIL, HEAVY
Automobile repair shops, including shops for general mechanical
repairs, automobile body repair, establishments primarily engaged in
specialized services such as electrical, battery and ignition repair,
radiator repair, glass replacement and repair, carburetor repair and
wheel alignment service, and repair of tires, but not including
establishments for rebuilding, retreading, recapping, vulcanizing, or
manufacturing tires, and not including establishments exclusively for the
painting of automobiles.
C
P
P
Automobile washing, cleaning or polishing establishments, including
self-service car washes.
P
P
Automobile and truck, passenger, new and/or used, dealers.
P
P
Commercial parking lots, parking garages, parking structures.
C
C
C
C
Gasoline service stations; provided that all gasoline pumps, storage
tanks and accessory equipment must be located at least 10 feet from
any existing or proposed street line and all storage tanks must be
underground.
P
P
Mini-warehouses, for the indoor storage of household items and other
non-hazardous, non-perishable durable goods entirely within partitioned
buildings with individual access to each partitioned area.
C
C
C
Motorized bicycle, motorcycle, go-cart, snowmobile, aircraft or other
motorized vehicles and components, sales, service, repair, testing,
demonstration or other use of motorized bicycles, with the provision that
such activity, when carried out in an establishment which also engages
in the sale, repair or other operations with nonmotor-driven bicycles,
shall constitute a separate and distinct use.
C
P
15-124
TABLE 15.11A BUSINESS DISTRICT USE LIST
[Am. 04-13; Eff. 5-20-04; Am. 09-05, Eff. 319-09; Am 15-036; Eff. 7-30-15]
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
B-1
B-2
B-3
A-B
Motorboat or other water craft, marine supply, water craft motors or
components, sales, rental, service, repair, testing, demonstration
facilities or establishment.
C
P
Motor freight operations, including truck terminals, transfer facilities,
vehicle maintenance, cleaning and repair as a component of trucking
operations, provided that any such operation is on the same lot as an
ongoing permitted use in the zoning district, outdoor truck parking shall
be limited to forty (40) truck-trailer combinations, vehicles shall not
exceed fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds gross vehicle weight when
located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential district
boundary line, and outdoor truck parking areas shall be positioned
and/or screened in a manner that minimizes visibility from nearby land
uses and public rights-of-way.
[Cr.10-51; Eff. 11-12-10; Appl to ETZ 11-11; Eff. 4-14-11]
C
Piston-type engine or motor, or any type of device, appliance or
equipment operated by such engine or motor sales, service, repair,
testing, and/or demonstration establishment. Up to ten unenclosed
vehicles awaiting sale or repair shall be allowed only within the limits and
in accordance with any conditions established by conditional use permit.
All other vehicles shall be stored within a building or otherwise enclosed
as provided in Section 15.04(12)(j).
C
C
C
Plumbing, heating and air conditioning equipment dealers.
C
P
P
Rental and leasing establishments providing floor sanding and waxing
machines, ladders, scaffolds, tools, chairs or other furniture, or other
types of equipment or similar items. [Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
P
Rental or leasing establishment for passenger automobiles, limousines
or trucks without drivers, truck trailers, utility trailers, automobile
passenger trailers, trailer home, mobile home or camper.
C
P
Truck parking as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a
permitted business listed in this section. Outdoor truck parking shall be
15-125
TABLE 15.11A BUSINESS DISTRICT USE LIST
[Am. 04-13; Eff. 5-20-04; Am. 09-05, Eff. 319-09; Am 15-036; Eff. 7-30-15]
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
B-1
B-2
B-3
A-B
limited to not more than ten truck-trailer combinations (40 in the A-B
district), shall be limited to vehicles of not over fourteen thousand
(14,000) pounds gross vehicle weight when located within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of a residential district boundary line, and shall be
positioned and/or screened in a manner that minimizes visibility from
nearby land uses and public rights-of-way [Am.10-51; Eff. 11-12-10; Appl to ETZ 11-
11; Eff. 4-14-11]
C
C
C
Wholesale merchandise establishment, in a commercial service building
greater than 20,000 square feet in gross floor area.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
Wholesale merchandise establishment, in a commercial service building
less than 20,000 square feet in gross floor area.
[Cr. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
C
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES [Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping firms or services.
P
P
P
Advertising agencies, consumer credit reporting, news agencies,
employment agencies.
P
P
P
Computer services.
P
P
P
Engineering and architectural firms or consultants.
P
P
P
Insurance company, agent, broker, and service representative offices
P
P
P
Law offices.
P
P
P
Newspaper, periodical or book publishing and printing establishments.
C
C
P
Offices, meeting places, and premises of professional membership
P
P
P
15-126
TABLE 15.11A BUSINESS DISTRICT USE LIST
[Am. 04-13; Eff. 5-20-04; Am. 09-05, Eff. 319-09; Am 15-036; Eff. 7-30-15]
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
B-1
B-2
B-3
A-B
associations; civic, social, and fraternal associations; business
associations, labor unions and similar labor organizations; political;
religious; charitable; or other non-profit membership organizations.
Physician/Surgeon, dentist/dental surgeon, osteopathic physician,
optometrist and chiropractor offices.
P
P
P
Real estate agents, brokers, managers and title companies.
P
P
P
Scientific, or educational firms, agencies, offices or services, but not
research laboratories or manufacturing operations.
P
P
P
Veterinarians’ offices and facilities. [Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
P
P
AG RELATED USES
Agricultural byproducts, sales and storage
C
Agricultural machinery and equipment sales, service and repair
P
Agricultural supply stores, including distribution, mixing, blending and
storage of feeds, seeds and fertilizers
P
Greenhouses and nurseries.
P
P
P
Hauling of dead livestock
C
Kennels and boarding facilities for domestic animals.
C
C
C
Laboratories, plant genetic and agricultural-related experimentation
C
15-127
TABLE 15.11A BUSINESS DISTRICT USE LIST
[Am. 04-13; Eff. 5-20-04; Am. 09-05, Eff. 319-09; Am 15-036; Eff. 7-30-15]
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
B-1
B-2
B-3
A-B
Processing and preserving of natural agricultural products, fruits and
vegetables
P
Riding stables and riding schools.
[Cr. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
Seasonal flower or vegetable plants, landscaping supply or similar
produce sales and seasonal sales of cut trees for holiday decorations
within or adjacent to a temporary structure, and for a duration not to
exceed 60 days in a calendar year.
C
P
P
P
Seasonal vegetable, fruit, or other farm product sales, but not other
types of products or merchandise within a permanent sales
establishment.
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11]
C
P
P
P
Small-scale Methane Generating Equipment and alcohol distilling
equipment designed for use in farming operations, sales and service.
P
Stockyards and livestock auction facilities
C
Trucking services limited to livestock and agricultural commodities
P
Wind driven electrical generating equipment, sales and service
P
Year-round lawn and garden material, supply, and/or equipment
sales, service and repair.
[Am.10-51; Eff. 11-12-10; Appl to ETZ 11-11; Eff. 4-14-11; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
P
MISCELLANEOUS
Accessory building, single, provided such building is used solely for
the purpose of storing inventory, goods or equipment used in the
ordinary course of the business conducted in the principal building on
P
P
P
P
15-128
TABLE 15.11A BUSINESS DISTRICT USE LIST
[Am. 04-13; Eff. 5-20-04; Am. 09-05, Eff. 319-09; Am 15-036; Eff. 7-30-15]
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
B-1
B-2
B-3
A-B
the premises. [Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
Accessory buildings, multiple, provided such buildings are used solely
for the purpose of storing inventory, goods or equipment used or sold in
the ordinary course of the business conducted in the principal building
on the premises.
C
C
C
C
Convention Centers or exposition centers, buildings or grounds
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11]
C
C
C
Communications towers and antennas.
C
C
C
C
Government, local municipal facilities, libraries, educational institutions,,
police and fire stations and post offices.
P
P
P
Hospital or medical center, long term nursing care facility
C
C
Mobile home parks
C
Parking lots, parking garages, or parking structures, public.
P
P
P
Parks and playgrounds.
C
C
C
Public transportation passenger stations, taxicab company offices,
taxicab stands, but not vehicle storage lots or garages.
P
P
P
Residential units, above the ground floor of a commercial use building.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
Residential units, on the ground floor, for owner/operator of the
premises as an accessory use. [Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
C
C
C
Residential buildings (multi-family), of not less than 600 square feet
for two bedroom units and not less than 1000 square feet for three
bedroom units, if provided with on-site enclosed or underground parking.
C
15-129
TABLE 15.11A BUSINESS DISTRICT USE LIST
[Am. 04-13; Eff. 5-20-04; Am. 09-05, Eff. 319-09; Am 15-036; Eff. 7-30-15]
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
B-1
B-2
B-3
A-B
More than one principal building may be permitted on a lot.
Small solar or wind energy system subject to Section 15.04(24)
[Cr. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10]
P
P
P
P
Temporary campground associated with special event, subject to
Section 15.16(10). [Cr. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10]
NP
C
C
C
TABLE 15.11B BUSINESS DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
DESCRIPTION
B-1
B-2
B-3
A-B
Minimum Lot Width (Lineal. Ft.)
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
60
100
150
100
Minimum Lot Area (Sq. Ft.)
6,000
15,000
30,000
20,000
Minimum Lot Area/D.U. (Sq. Ft.)
1,050
15,000
30,000
20,000
Surface Parking within Minimum Front Yard
Setback (Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
C
C
C
Floor Area/D.U. (Sq. Ft.)
400 studio
800 1 bdrm
1,100 2+ bdrm
400 studio
800 1 bdrm
1,100 2+ bdrm
400 studio
800 1 bdrm
1,100 2+ bdrm
Minimum Green Space (%)
Utilizing the combination of adjacent public open
space and common space, and with a Stormwater
management plan approved by the Village if in the
Village limits.
15%
(Less than 15%,
minimum of 5%
permitted as a
conditional use)
15%
15%
40%
Minimum Principal and Accessory Building Setbacks
15-130
Front and Street Side Yard (Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
10
(Less than 10 ft.
permitted as a
conditional use)
25
(Less than 25,
minimum of 15
permitted as a
conditional use)
25
(Less than 25,
minimum of 15
permitted as a
conditional use)
50
Interior Side Yard (Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
10 (Less than 10
ft. permitted as
a conditional
use)
10
10
10
Rear Yard (Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
10 (Less than 10
ft. permitted as
a conditional
use)
10
10
10
TABLE 15.11B BUSINESS DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
DESCRIPTION
B-1
B-2
B-3
A-B
Maximum Building Height (Ft.) – Principal
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
45
65
80
40
Maximum Building Height (Ft.) - Accessory
15
25
25
30
Maximum Accessory Building Size
150 sq. ft.
650 sq. ft.
650 sq. ft.
50% of
principal
building size
Maximum Driveway Opening -At Property
Line
26
40
40
40
Maximum Driveway Opening -At Curb Line
32
46
46
46
Minimum Building Exterior Decorative
Material Required [Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11]
35% 35% 35% N/A
Minimum Landscaping Points Standard: See Section 15.06 and Table 15.06A for landscaping requirements.
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11]
15-131
15.113. REC RECREATIONAL DISTRICT.
(1) PURPOSE. The REC Recreational is intended to accommodate land uses serving
the commercial and natural recreational needs and interests of tourists or the local population.
This district provides an environment that does not allow residential uses, commercial uses that
are not recreation-based, or industrial uses, which are instead allowed in other zoning districts.
(2) PERMITTED USES.
(a) Campgrounds, per the provisions in §15.05(11).
(b) Golf courses, golf driving ranges, and clubhouses.
(c) Parks, natural areas, trails, playgrounds, public educational facilities, and
similar uses.
(d) Recreational vehicle and equipment sales, rental, and repair services.
(e) Sale of bait for fishing.
(f) Storage of recreational vehicles.
(g) Horse boarding stable, riding stable, and the retail sale of items intended for
equestrian activities.
(h) Uses incidental to the operation of any permitted use.
(i) Utility services.
(j) Other indoor recreational use not otherwise listed, but in no case including an
adult entertainment use.
(3) CONDITIONAL USES.
(a) Game management.
(b) Outdoor shooting range.
(c) Other outdoor recreational use not otherwise listed.
(d) Public utility and public service use.
(e) Satellite earth station, commercial communications tower, or commercial
communications antenna.
(4) LOT AREA AND WIDTH REQUIREMENTS. A lot shall be not less than 150 feet in
width at the building setback line and have an area of not less than one acre.
(4) HEIGHT REGULATIONS. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
15-132
(5) MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS. For buildings, minimum yards (setbacks) shall
be as follows:
(a) Front yard—50 feet
(b) Side yard—25 feet
(c) Rear yard—50 feet
(6) OFF STREET PARKING. Off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of §15.07.
(7) LANDSCAPING STANDARDS. Per §15.06.
(8) DRIVEWAY STANDARDS. Driveway openings shall not exceed 45 feet at the lot line
and 50 feet at the curb or street pavement line.
15.115 OFFICE AND RESEARCH DISTRICT.
[Renum. from 15.19 and Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(1) PURPOSE. The O-R Office and Research District is established to provide for large
administrative offices and research and development activities and testing laboratories, all of
which are integrated in a planned development. Also, other business and professional offices,
support uses typically found in an office park setting, and very limited industrial uses are
allowed. To maintain an attractive setting for the uses within the district, large sites and
extensive landscaped areas are required, together with development design standards. The OR
District is intended to be located primarily on and near collector streets and arterial highways
to provide for good accessibility to these uses.
(2) GENERAL STANDARDS. All buildings, uses, and sites hereinafter established or
enlarged in the O-R District shall conform to the following standards:
(a) All business, servicing or processing, except off-street parking and off-street loading,
outside storage areas as provided below, and drive-up service windows for banks and financial
institutions, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. All storage, except for
licensed motor vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or
effectively screened with screening not less than six (6) feet or more than eight (8) feet in
height, and no materials or equipment stored shall exceed the height of such screening. All
outside storage areas shall be located to the rear of buildings and shall be limited to not more
than five percent (5%) of the total lot area.
(b) The exterior appearance of any building constructed within this district shall be
compatible with that of adjoining structures especially as it relates to rooflines and building
materials. Where possible, all existing mature, healthy trees shall be retained. Except for
woodlots, marshes and other lands maintained in a natural state, all land areas not covered by
buildings, structures, storage areas, parking lots, loading areas, and driveways, shall be
landscaped. Landscaping shall mean decorative plazas, mounds, pools or the planting of grass,
shrubs, trees and other plant materials or other comparable surface cover.
15-133
(c) Accessory off-street parking lots and loading berths, and access driveways shall be
located, designed, and improved, so as to provide for safe and convenient access from
adjoining streets, as well as safe and convenient circulation within the site. Access driveways
and parking lots shall be separated from principal pedestrian walkways and recreational areas
by pavement markings, curbs, planting areas, fences or other appropriate materials to ensure
pedestrian safety. Off-street parking lots for employees shall be located in required rear yards to
the rear of a building or in an interior side yard beyond the larger of the required front yard or the
actual front building setback. Any parking lot located in a required side or rear yard shall be
located not less than twenty (20) feet from any lot line of a residential zoning district. Access
driveways shall be designed and located so that such driveways do not provide a direct
unlandscaped view from the street to any loading berths or storage areas.
[Am. 12-18, Eff. 9-14-12]
(d) Parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted
business listed hereinafter, shall be limited to vehicles of not over one and one-half (1-1/2) tons
capacity when located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential zoning district.
(e) No use shall be so conducted as to cause the harmful discharge of any waste
materials into or upon the ground, into or within any sanitary or storm sewer system, into or
within any water system or water, or into the atmosphere. All uses shall be conducted in such a
manner so as to preclude any nuisance, hazard, or commonly recognized offensive conditions
or characteristics, including creation or emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors,
vibrations, particulate matter, chemical compounds, electrical disturbance, humidity, heat, cold,
glare or night illumination. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the Zoning Administrator may
require evidence that adequate controls, measures, or devices have been provided to ensure
and protect the public interest, health, comfort, convenience, safety, and general welfare from
such nuisance, hazard, or offensive condition.
(3) PERMITTED USES. Only those permitted principal uses or accessory uses as
designated with a “P” in Table 15.115 A shall be permitted within the O-R District.
(4) CONDITIONAL USES. Those uses designated with a “C” in Table 15.115 A shall be
permitted only in accordance with a conditional use permit as provided in §15.16.
(5) BULK STANDARDS. No structure or lot shall be developed, used or occupied
unless it meets the minimum lot width, lot area, yard requirements, height limits, and other
dimensional standards as set forth in Table 15.115 B.
(6) SITE PLAN REVIEW AND POSSIBLE EXEMPTION. Any developer or owner of
lands zoned or proposed to be zoned O-R may develop its own standards to regulate the
development of a property and create an architectural review or development committee to
administer such standards, provided such standards, categories of committee membership, and
development review process shall be approved by the Village Board. In developing the
standards, due consideration shall be given to pedestrian circulation, preservation and linkage
of open space areas, location of future buildings, and the clustering of amenities to provide for a
planned integrated development. Village Board approval of such standards and an architectural
review or development review committee may, at the discretion of the Village Board, obviate the
need for subsequent Village site plan review under §15.05.
15-134
TABLE 15.115 A
OFFICE AND RESEARCH DISTRICT
[Am. 2012-18, Eff. 9-14-12] Key: P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
O-R
SERVICE AND RETAIL USES
Banks and other financial institutions.
P
Day care centers.
P
Health clubs, fitness centers, and similar facilities.
P
Hotels, motor hotels, motels and similar lodging facilities.
C
Recreation, indoor including billiards and pool establishments, bowling centers, movie
theaters, skating rinks, and similar commercial facilities, but not including health clubs, fitness
centers, and similar facilities
C
Restaurants and other eating places, predominant number of patrons sit down at restaurant to
eat, although some may carry out food, not including drive-in and drive-through type
establishments.
C
Retail sales, soft goods, in individual retail occupancies not exceeding 5,000 square feet in
area and in building having not more than 20,000 square feet devoted to retail sales, with uses
including but not limited to: antique and secondhand stores, bookstores (not including adult
books), gift, novelty (not including adult novelties) and souvenir shops, stationery stores,
camera/photographic supply stores, candy nut or confectionary, clothing and shoe stores,
department and variety stores, drug stores and pharmacies, electrical supply stores, florist
shops, jewelry, watch and clock stores including repair services, news dealers and newsstands,
sporting goods stores and bicycle shops, tobacco and smoker’s supplies stores, home
furnishings and floor coverings stores, paint and wallpaper stores.
P
Taverns, bars and other drinking places.
C
Telephone and telegraph offices.
C
15-135
TABLE 15.115 A
OFFICE AND RESEARCH DISTRICT
[Am. 2012-18, Eff. 9-14-12] Key: P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
O-R
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES AND RESEARCH USES
Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping firms or services.
P
Advertising agencies, consumer credit reporting, news agencies, employment agencies.
P
Computer services, data processing and telecommunication centers.
P
Engineering and architectural firms or consultants.
P
Insurance company, agent, broker, and service representative offices.
P
Law offices.
P
Newspaper, periodical or book publishing and printing establishments.
C
Offices, meeting places, and premises of professional membership associations; civic, social,
and fraternal associations; business associations, labor unions and similar labor organizations;
political; religious; charitable; or other non-profit membership organizations.
P
Physician/Surgeon, dentist/dental surgeon, osteopathic physician, optometrist and
chiropractor offices.
P
Real estate agents, brokers, managers and title companies.
P
Scientific firms, agencies, offices or services.
P
15-136
TABLE 15.115 A
OFFICE AND RESEARCH DISTRICT
[Am. 2012-18, Eff. 9-14-12] Key: P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
O-R
Research and development activities, and testing laboratories, provided no manufacturing or
the fabrication, assembly or production of articles, other than prototypes or models used of
experimentation or research, shall be allowed.
P
Veterinarian’s offices and facilities for domestic animals.
C
MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRIAL USES
Production, or processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or
products, produced or assembled manually or by a light industrial process using only light
machinery; conducted entirely within enclosed, substantially constructed buildings (except for
loading and unloading); not including outdoor storage of raw materials or manufactured
products; and limited to the following uses, products, components, or circumstances:
? Electronic and electrical products and instruments, such as transistors, semiconductors,
small computers, scanners, monitors and compact communication devices,
? High technology products related to the fields of physics, oceanography, astrophysics,
metallurgy, chemistry and biology,
? Laser technology, radiology, X ray and ultrasound products, manufacturing and assembly;
? Medical and dental supplies,
? Optical, fiber optical and photographic products and equipment;
? Orthopedic and medical appliances, such as artificial limbs, brace supports and stretchers,
? Scientific and precision instruments and components, including robotics;
? Products related to process design, process simulation, software development, and safety
engineering.
? Specific products not listed above but similar in character.
P
Small-scale products (finished weight not exceeding fifty pounds) related to energy and
environmental or to telecommunications and satellite applications.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
Small-scale products (finished weight not exceeding fifty pounds) related to the resource
industries of agriculture and food production, forestry, petrochemicals and mining.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
15-137
TABLE 15.115 A
OFFICE AND RESEARCH DISTRICT
[Am. 2012-18, Eff. 9-14-12] Key: P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
O-R
Wholesale, warehouse or distribution centers without outdoor storage. (Does not include
storage or distribution centers for bottled gas, butane, fuel oil or solid fuels).
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
MISCELLANEOUS USES
Communications antennae.
C
Convention Centers or exposition centers, buildings or grounds.
C
Detached Garage shall only be used for the parking of motor vehicles used by the business on
the premises.
C
Government, local municipal facilities, libraries, educational institutions, police and fire stations
and post offices.
P
Hospital, long term nursing care facility, or other health care facility involving overnight stays.
C
Indoor Civic, Cultural & Institutional (Incl. Educational and Training Centers & Emergency
Services).
P
Medical, dental, optical, and similar clinics (not including overnight stays).
P
Parking lots, parking garages, or parking structures.
P
Heliports.
C
Public transportation passenger stations, taxicab company offices, taxicab stands, but not
vehicle storage lots or garages.
C
C
15-138
TABLE 15.115 A
OFFICE AND RESEARCH DISTRICT
[Am. 2012-18, Eff. 9-14-12] Key: P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use
NAME/DESCRIPTION OF USE
O-R
Outdoor Recreational/Open Space (Public/ Private) parks and playgrounds.
Utilities/Transportation.
C
TABLE 15.115 B
OFFICE AND RESEARCH DISTRICT BULK STANDARDS
[Am. 12-18, Eff. 9-13-12]
DESCRIPTION
O-R
Minimum Lot Width (Lineal Ft.)
125
Minimum Lot Area (Sq. Ft.)
40,000
Maximum Floor Area Ratio
1.5
Maximum Building Coverage
0.5
Surface Parking within any minimum required front
yard
By conditional use permit, or as otherwise allowed
under alternative standards approved by the Village
Board under Section 15.115(6)
Minimum Green Space (%) Utilizing the combination of
adjacent public open space and common space, and with a
stormwater management plan approved by the Village if in
the Village limits.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
20%
15-139
Minimum Principal Building Setbacks
Front and Street Side Yard (Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
25
Interior Side Yard (Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
10
Rear Yard (Ft.)
10
Maximum Building Height (Ft.) or Number of Stories
– Principal Building
80 feet or 6 stories, whichever is greater
Maximum Driveway Opening – At Property Line
40
Maximum Driveway Opening – At Curb Line
46
Minimum Decorative Exterior Material Required
35%
Minimum Landscaping Points Standard: See Section 15.06 and Table 15.06A for landscaping requirements.
per 100 Linear Ft. of Building Foundation
50
per 1000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area
20
per 100 Linear Ft. of Street Frontage
50
per 10,000 sq. ft. of Paved Area/ or 20 stalls
90
15.12 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
(1) PURPOSE. The Industrial districts are designed to provide for the grouping of
compatible industries. These districts are intended to preserve lands for industrial and allied
uses and to prohibit residential and other incompatible uses. All industrial uses are subject to
the performance standards in Section 15.04(12).
The M-1 Restricted Industrial District is intended for industrial uses which can be located
in close proximity to commercial uses, and in locations convenient to residential areas, without
adverse impacts on such areas. The district regulations are designed to permit manufacturing,
wholesaling, and warehousing activities and be conducive to the development and protection of
offices, research and development institutions, and certain specialized manufacturing
15-140
establishments, all of a non-nuisance type. Some retail uses are permitted which service the
industrial area or which do not depend upon intensive visits of retail customers.
The M-2 General Industrial District is intended for most types of industrial operations,
which may have moderate impacts on surrounding land uses and transportation facilities. This
District accommodates areas that are predominantly industrial in character (i.e., industrial
parks); manufacturing, transportation, contractor, wholesaling, and related operations; and a
limited range of retail, service, and other compatible uses.
The M-3 Intensive Industrial District is designed primarily for manufacturing, assembling,
or fabricating activities including large scale or specialized operations whose external effects are
likely to be felt to some degree by surrounding districts. Operations within this district may
generate substantial noise, smoke, dust, heat, cold, humidity fumes, particulate matter,
electrical disturbance, radiation emission, glare, night, illumination, vibrations, smells, risk of
spills, fires or explosions and often require conditional use permit approval.
(2) GENERAL PROVISIONS. All properties in the M-1, M-2 or M-3 industrial districts
shall comply with the following requirements.
(a) Allowable Uses are expressed in categories. The initial determination of whether a
use (or a portion of a use) fits within a particular category as described below is to be made by
the Zoning Administrator. Persons objecting to this initial determination may appeal the
determination to the Board of Zoning Appeals. A use or operation within these districts may
have several segments or components. Some of these segments may be classified as permitted
use segments and others as conditional use segments. Where this is the case, conditional use
approval shall be required and shall extend only to the portion of the operation that requires
conditional use approval. Conditional use approval is required at any point after initial
construction and occupancy on a site when the use or operation changes so as to bring it within
the scope of sec. 15.16.
The uses identified with a "P" within Table 15.12A, shall be permitted in accordance with
the specified parameters. The uses identified with a "C" within Table 15.12A are allowed with
an approved conditional use permit.
(am) Mineral Extraction Operations. Mineral extraction operations may be authorized in
the ETZ Area within the M-2 and M-3 districts by approval of a conditional use permit. All
mineral extraction operations are subject to §15.04(12) and §15.16(4).[Cr. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06]
(b) Similar and Compatible Uses. Other uses similar and compatible to those allowed
as permitted uses in accordance with the conditions specified. The determination of whether a
use is similar and compatible shall be made in accordance with this chapter.
(c) Accessory Uses and Temporary Uses. Uses which are incidental to the operation of
an approved use are permitted if in compliance with sec. 15.16. Incidental is defined as an
integral part of the principal use; e.g. outdoor storage would be incidental to a lumber yard.
(d) Dimensional Standards. Lots and buildings shall conform to the minimum
dimensional standards as provided in Table 15.12B.
15-141
(e) Landscaping Requirements. All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for
landscaping set forth in sec. 15.06.
(f) Parking and Loading Requirements. All uses shall conform to the applicable
requirements for off-street parking and loading set forth in sec. 15.07.(4) Parking of trucks as an
accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business listed hereinafter, shall be
limited to vehicles of not over four (4) tons gross vehicle weight when located within one
hundred fifty (150) feet of a residence district boundary line. Parking and loading areas shall
have a permanent, durable, and dustless surface, and be graded as to prevent the
accumulation of surface water.
(g) Sign Requirements. All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for signs
set forth in sec. 15.08.
(h) General Standards. All buildings and uses thereafter established or enlarged shall
conform to the following standards:
1. No part of any building or property shall be used for residential purposes except
where permitted as an accessory use; and
2. Outdoor vending machines for the sale or display of merchandise shall not
occupy an aggregate ground area of more than sixteen (16) square feet; and
3. All industrial, wholesale, warehouse, business, service or retail activities shall be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings. Accessory or incidental
functions such as outside storage and parking are subject to approval as
provided in sec. 15.16; and shall be completely screened as described in secs.
15.05 and 15.06.
4. All industrial, wholesale, warehouse, business, service or retail activities shall
comply with the performance standards set forth in §15.04(12).
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(i) Setback Provisions.
1. The principal building setbacks from a property line adjacent to a residential
district shall be equal to the height of the building or the minimum setback
provided in Table 15.12B, whichever is greater.
2. Subpar. 1 shall not apply to increase the setback distance required by Table
15.12B due to the height of stacks, tanks, bulkheads, or ventilating equipment,
including towers enclosing the same and parapets not more than three (3) feet in
height.
3. The minimum distance between any points of any two structures on an individual
site shall be at least ten feet or the minimum distance set forth in the state
building code fire wall regulations, whichever is greater.
4. Exception: Minimum side or rear setbacks prescribed for the M-1, M-2 and M-3
districts within the Village may be reduced or waived by conditional use permit
issued in accordance with sec. 15.16 to allow for the interconnection of two or
15-142
more buildings on different lots by the construction of an enclosed walkway,
mechanical conveyance system, skywalk or similar facility designed to allow
convenient movement of persons, materials, products or equipment from one
building to another, provided that the following conditions are met:
a. If the parcels are not under common ownership, appropriate easements, joint
use agreements, or similar agreements are in effect authorizing the use of the
entire connecting structure by the occupants of at least one of the buildings.
b. No manufacturing, assembly, office, clerical, storage or other functions, other
than the conveyance of persons, materials, products or equipment shall be
conducted within the normal setback area.
c. Such other conditions as are prescribed pursuant to sec. 15.16.
15-143
TABLE 15.12A
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USES
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
DESCRIPTION
M-1
M-2
M-3
INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING USES
Mineral Extraction (ETZ Area only) C C
Production, or processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or
products, limited to the following uses, products, components, or circumstances:
- Electronic and electrical products and instruments, such as transistors,
semiconductors, small computers, scanners, monitors and compact communication
devices,
- High technology products related to the fields of physics, oceanography, [cont’d]
astrophysics, metallurgy, chemistry and biology,
- Laser technology, radiology, X ray and ultrasound products, manufacturing and
assembly;
- Medical and dental supplies,
- Optical, fiber optical and photographic products and equipment;
- Orthopedic and medical appliances, such as artificial limbs, brace supports and
stretchers,
- Scientific and precision instruments and components, including robotics;
- Products related to process design, process simulation, software development, and
safety engineering.
P
P
P
Production of specific products not listed above but similar in character and which are
produced or assembled manually or by a light industrial process by virtue of the use
of only light machinery; conducted entirely within enclosed, substantially constructed
buildings; which do not include the use of the open area around such buildings for
storage of raw materials or manufactured products, or for any industrial purpose other
than loading and unloading operations.
P
P
P
Small-scale products (finished weight not exceeding fifty pounds) related to energy
and environmental or to telecommunications and satellite applications.
P
P
P
Small-scale products (finished weight not exceeding fifty pounds) related to the
resource industries of agriculture and food production, forestry, petrochemicals and
mining.
P
P
P
15-144
TABLE 15.12A
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USES
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
DESCRIPTION
M-1
M-2
M-3
Production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or
products, involving the following uses, products, components, or circumstances:
Cameras and other photographic equipment; Ceramic products, such as pottery,
figurines and small glazed tiles; Cosmetics and toiletries, pharmaceutical products,
perfumes, and perfumed soaps; small electrical household appliances, such as
lighting fixtures, irons, fans and toasters; Electrical equipment assembly, such as
home radio and television receivers and home movie equipment, but not including
electrical machinery; Electrical supplies, manufacturing and assembly, such as wire
and cable assembly, switches, lamps, insulation and dry cell batteries.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
P
Products from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane,
cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastic, precious
and semiprecious stones, rubber, shell, wood (but not including a planing mill) and
yarn.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
P
Products related to material research and development in such areas as prepared
glass, ceramics, carbon fiber, metals, textiles, polymers, plastics, chemical foams and
inorganic chemicals such as liquid crystals, and synthetic fuels.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
Products (finished weight exceeding fifty pounds or sold in bulk) related to energy and
environmental or to telecommunications and satellite applications.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
Products (finished weight exceeding fifty pounds or sold in bulk) related to the
resource industries of agriculture and food production, forestry, petro-chemicals and
mining.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
Recycling of building construction material, including sorting, separating, processing,
and packaging, as strictly and indoor use with no outdoor operations or storage.
[Cr. 07-34; Eff. 9-28-07; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P P
Crematories
C
C
C
15-145
TABLE 15.12A
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USES
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
DESCRIPTION
M-1
M-2
M-3
Foundries
C
Grain elevators and storage
C
Incinerators
C
Laboratories – research, development and testing, including testing facilities and
equipment, and manufacturing and fabrication of products in conjunction with such
research or development.
C
P
P
Laundries and dry cleaning establishments, industrial and retail (with a central plant
serving more than one retail outlet) including supply services such as linens, uniforms
and diapers.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
P
P
Pilot plants or other facilities for the testing of manufacturing, processing or fabrication
methods, or for the testing of products or materials.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
C
P
Printing and publishing establishments, including but not limited to those for print
media, clothing, and packaging.
[Am. 16-005, Eff. 3-10-16]
C
P
P
TRANSPORTATION RELATED USES
Air freight terminals
C
C
P
Automobile painting and undercoating services
C
C
P
Automobile/truck storage facilities, subject to the temporary vehicle storage
requirements of Section 15.04(12)(j)
C
15-146
TABLE 15.12A
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USES
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
DESCRIPTION
M-1
M-2
M-3
Automobile, truck and motorcycle, rental, sales and service, subject to the temporary
vehicle storage requirements of Section 15.04(12)(j)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
Automobile accessory stores
P
Automobile service station; for the retail sale of and dispensing of fuel, lubricants, tires
batteries, accessories, and diagnostic centers, repair garages, tire installation, vehicle
washes and minor services customarily incidental thereto with limited outdoor storage
(up to ten vehicles).
C
C
Automobile driving schools.
P
Bus sales and maintenance shops.
C
C
P
Bus and railroad passenger stations, terminals, turnarounds, and lots.
C
C
Heliports
C
C
C
Mobile home or garage dealers with displays
C
C
C
Motor freight operations, including truck terminals, transfer facilities, vehicle
maintenance, cleaning and repair as a component of trucking operations.
C
C
Parcel delivery and pick up services and facilities.
C
C
P
Rail freight terminals, switching yards, shops and roundhouses.
C
C
C
15-147
TABLE 15.12A
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USES
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
DESCRIPTION
M-1
M-2
M-3
Recreational vehicle sales and service including campers, snowmobiles, trailers and
boats.
C C C
Sales, retail or wholesale, and servicing of construction equipment and farm
equipment.
C
C
Semi-tractor truck/trailer sales, rentals and service.
C
C
Taxicab garages.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
P
Towing services, subject to the temporary vehicle storage requirements of Section
15.04(12)(j).
C
C
P
SERVICE RELATED USES
Adult Oriented Establishments.
C
P
Bars/cocktail lounges, including dancing and/or live entertainment, but not including
Adult Oriented Establishments.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
C
C
Bowling centers
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
C
Business services such as: commercial art and photography, computer and data
processing, photo-finishing and equipment rental and leasing.
P
P
Cabinetmaking shops.
P
P
15-148
TABLE 15.12A
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USES
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
DESCRIPTION
M-1
M-2
M-3
Construction firm offices, shops, storage areas, display rooms.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13
P
P
P
Contractor’s equipment storage yards
C
C
Daycare and group housing
C
Electrical shops
P
P
Exterminating and fumigating shops
C
P
P
Furniture cleaning, upholstering, and repair.
P
P
P
Greenhouses and nurseries, retail sales or wholesale.
P
Hospitals and other medical care complexes.
C
C
Hotels, motels, including ”bed and breakfast” facilities.
C
C
C
Landscape contractor offices with outdoor storage.
C
C
Landscape contractor offices with indoor storage
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
P
Lawnmower sales and repairs.
P
15-149
TABLE 15.12A
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USES
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
DESCRIPTION
M-1
M-2
M-3
Lumber companies and/or yards, building material/home supplies, sales, and service.
C
C
C
Lumber and building material yards selling on a wholesale basis or selling
predominantly to building contractors with most deliveries made by the yard to off-site
destinations.
C
C
Machine shops.
C
P
P
Machinery storage yards.
C
Ornamental ironworks shops.
P
P
P
Packing and crating services.
P
P
P
Plumbing, heating, water softener, and fixture supplies sales and service.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
P
P
Recreation facility, indoor, including amusements, interactive sports, weight
training/exercise facility, tennis/racquetball courts, indoor ice or roller skating rinks or
similar activities.
C
C
Recreation facility, outdoor, including sports complexes.
C
C
Refrigeration shops.
C
P
Restaurant, Sit down, where substantially all patrons sit at tables inside, although
some may carry out food.
C
C
C
15-150
TABLE 15.12A
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USES
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
DESCRIPTION
M-1
M-2
M-3
Restaurant, Carry out, where the predominant number of patrons carry out, although
some inside seating is provided. Includes drive thru type establishments.
C C C
Retail catalog sales and mail order stores.
P
P
Retail outlet stores, accessory to a manufacturing, wholesale or distribution
establishment.
P
P
P
Retail sales or services including health and recreation facilities and eating and
drinking places, that exclusively or predominantly serve businesses and employees of
the industrial area and/or are a minor part of the total parcel usage by area, volume or
similar measures.
P
P
P
Sewer and septic tank sales, cleaning and rodding service.
C
C
Sheet metal shops.
P
P
P
Sign contractors.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
P
P
Sporting goods, including bicycle sales and repair shops.
P
Stone companies, construction and landscaping related, not including quarries.
C
C
Taxidermists.
P
Trade and vocational schools.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
P
P
15-151
TABLE 15.12A
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USES
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
DESCRIPTION
M-1
M-2
M-3
Welding shops.
P P
Window cleaning services.
P
P
P
WAREHOUSE OR DISTRIBUTION RELATED USES
Mini-warehouses
C
C
C
Wholesale, warehouse or distribution centers without outdoor storage. (Does not
include storage or distribution centers for bottled gas, butane, fuel oil or solid fuels).
P
P
P
Wholesale, warehouse, or distribution centers with outdoor storage. Includes facilities
which handle bottled gas, butane, fuel oil or solid fuels and facilities with outdoor
storage.
C
C
UTILITY/GOVERNMENT RELATED USES
Electric power production and substations.
C
C
C
Fire and police stations.
P
P
P
Highway maintenance shops and yards, with limited storage of asphalt, salt and other
bulk materials.
C
C
C
Natural gas transmission and distribution.
C
C
C
Parking lots, public; park and ride lots.
C
C
C
15-152
TABLE 15.12A
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USES
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
DESCRIPTION
M-1
M-2
M-3
Power Plants.
C
Postal Services.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
P
P
Pumping stations, water towers, water works, or wells; public.
C
C
C
Telephone exchanges, telephone transmission equipment, buildings and service
yards.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
P
P
Towers associated with microwave relay, communications, radio and television and
radar related facilities
C
C
C
Utility operation offices, shops, storage areas, display rooms, service yards or
garages.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
C
P
P
Waste material storage, processing, treatment or disposal, as a principal use.
C
MISCELLANEOUS USES
Agricultural buildings and structures as an accessory use.
P
P
Convention Centers or exposition centers, buildings or grounds.
C
C
C
Cultivation of field and garden crops as an accessory use.
C
C
C
Farms, includes crops and animals, as an accessory use.
C
C
C
15-153
TABLE 15.12A
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USES
[Am. 09-05, Eff. 3-19-09; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
DESCRIPTION
M-1
M-2
M-3
Offices for business or professional services, associations, financial institutions,
personnel training centers or call centers and telecommunication centers.
P
P
Outdoor storage of bulk materials as an accessory use.
C
C
Residence of the proprietor, caretaker, or watchman as an accessory use.
C
C
C
Small solar or wind energy system, subject to Section 15.04(24).
[Cr. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10].
P
P
P
Zero lot line construction.
C
C
TABLE 15.12B
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
BULK STANDARDS
M-1
M-2
M-3
Minimum Lot Width (Lineal Ft.)
100
100
150
Minimum Lot Area (Sq. Ft.)
25,000
30,000
40,000
Principal and Accessory Building
Setbacks
Minimum Front and Street Side Yard
Setback (Ft.)
[Am. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
30
(Less than 30, minimum of
20 permitted as a
conditional use)
30
40
Minimum Interior Side Yard Setback (Ft.)
[Am. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
15
(Less than 15, minimum of
10 permitted as a
conditional use)
15
20
15-154
TABLE 15.12B
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
BULK STANDARDS
M-1
M-2
M-3
Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Ft.)
[Am. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
25
(Less than 25, minimum of
20 permitted as a
conditional use)
25
30
Maximum Principal Building Height (Ft.)
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
45
65
80
Maximum Accessory Building Height (Ft.)
[Am. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
25
25
25
Minimum Green Space (%) - Utilizing the
combination of adjacent public open
space and common space and with a
stormwater management plan approved
by the Village if in the Village limits.
[Am. 10-04, Eff. 2-4-10]
20%
(Less than 20%, minimum
of 10% permitted as a
conditional use)
20%
(Less than 20%,
minimum of 10%
permitted as a
conditional use)
20%
(Less than 20%,
minimum of 10%
permitted as a
conditional use)
Minimum Building Decorative Material
Required
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11]
20%
15%
15%
Maximum Driveway Opening at Property
Line (Ft.)
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11]
45 45 45
Maximum Driveway Opening at Curb Line
(Ft.)
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11]
50
50
50
Minimum Landscaping Points Standard: See Section 15.06 and Table 15.06A for landscaping requirements.
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11]
15-155
15.13 A-1 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT.
(1) PURPOSE. The A-1 Agriculture District is established to preserve, in agricultural
uses, lands suited to future urban development pending proper timing and the economical
provision of public utilities and community facilities to ensure orderly development.
(2) PERMITTED USES. The following uses are permitted in the A-1 district:
(a) Agricultural uses, but not including commercial dairies, commercial hatcheries and
commercial mink, fox or other fur bearing animal farms, and rat farms, commercial feeding of
garbage or offal to swine or other animals. Accessory buildings or structures used for shelter or
feeding of livestock are permitted provided that they are located not less than one hundred fifty
(150) feet from any lot in a residence district.
(b) Public parks, trails and playgrounds.
(c) Accessory uses, including but not limited to the following:
1. Noncommercial athletic fields and playing fields.
2. Home occupations.
3. Seasonal roadside produce stands no larger than 200 square feet.
4. Temporary buildings for storage of building materials and equipment and
construction purposes when on the same or adjoining lot as the principal use for
a period not to exceed the duration of such construction.
(d) A single family dwelling for the owner or the operator of an agricultural operation on
the premises.
(e) Offices for State, County, City, Village, Town or other taxing municipality.
(f) Any residential use lawfully existing as of February 20, 2010. A residential structure
that does not conform to the area requirements of this chapter may be added to, altered,
restored, repaired, replaced, or reconstructed, and new residential accessory buildings may be
constructed, provided that any replacement, addition or accessory building either:
1. complies with all building height and yard requirements of this section and, in
the case of a replacement residence, is located within 100 feet of the residence it is
replacing, except as otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or
Joint Committee.
2. is otherwise permitted by §§15.17(6)-(12) of this chapter.
(3) CONDITIONAL USES. The following conditional uses may be allowed in the A-1
district upon approval of a conditional use permit.
(a) Agricultural uses, including commercial dairies, commercial hatcheries and
commercial mink, fox or other fur bearing animal farms, and rat farms, but not including
commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals. Buildings or structures used
15-156
for shelter or feeding of livestock shall be located not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from
any lot in a residence district.
(b) Cemeteries, including mausoleums, crematoriums and columbariums in conjunction
therewith, provided that crematoriums shall be located not less than three hundred (300) feet
from any lot line.
(c) Greenhouses, provided such buildings are located not less than one hundred fifty
(150) feet from any lot in a residence district.
(d) Laboratories for research, development and testing, provided such buildings shall not
be located less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any lot line.
(e) Public utility and public service uses as follows:
1. Electric substations.
2. Gas regulator stations, mixing stations and gate stations.
3. Radio and television towers.
4. Railroad rights-of-way, including rights-of-way for switch, spur or team tracks, but
not including railroad yards and shops, or freight and service buildings.
5. Sewerage system lift stations.
6. Telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers, telephone transmission
equipment buildings.
7. Water pumping stations and water reservoirs.
8. Processed sludge drying facilities accessory to public owned sewerage plants.
(f) Outdoor recreational facilities, swimming, tennis, boating, horse riding, skiing and
other sports. Accessory clubhouses and maintenance buildings may be authorized provided
they are located not less than one hundred (100) feet from any lot in a residence district, except
buildings for shelter and keeping of horses and buildings and facilities for boating shall be not
less than three hundred (300) feet from any such lot.
(g) Landscape nurseries and tree service uses (non-retail) including processing mulches
and soils and storage of decorative landscape materials such as fencing and logs provided
storage areas, buildings or processing areas shall be located not less than one hundred fifty
(150) feet from any lot in a residence district.
(h) Golf courses, including golf driving ranges, provided clubhouses and maintenance
buildings shall be located not less than three hundred (300) feet from any lot in a residence
district.
(i) Airports, landing strips or landing fields and accessory structures.
15-157
(j) Veterinary clinics and hospitals provided that any building used for such purposes
shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet from any residence district.
(k) Kennels and the retail sale of pet food, pet supplies and similar items accessory
thereto.
(l) Horse boarding stables, riding stables, and the retail sale of bridles, saddles,
grooming materials and similar items accessory thereto.
(m) Training of dogs or horses at a permitted kennel or horse boarding facility.
(n) Park and ride lots.
(o) Planned unit developments.
(4) LOT AREA AND WIDTH REQUIREMENTS. In the A-1 Agriculture district, there
shall be provided a lot area of not less than five (5) acres and a lot width of not less than two
hundred (200) feet.
[Am. 12-18, Eff. 9-14-12]
(5) HEIGHT REGULATIONS. In the A-1 agricultural district, no building or structure,
shall exceed fifty (50) feet in height.
(6) YARD REQUIREMENTS. In the A-1 agricultural district, front, side, and rear yards
shall be provided, each of which shall not be less than 30 feet.
(7) LANDSCAPING STANDARDS. Landscaping shall be provided such that the points
credited pursuant to sec. 15.06 total not less than the sum of the following:
(a) 20 points per 100 linear feet of building foundation.
(b) 10 points per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(c) 20 points per 100 linear feet of street frontage.
(d) 40 points per 10,000 square feet of paved area or per 20 parking stalls.
(8) DRIVEWAY STANDARDS. Driveway openings shall not exceed twenty-four (24)
feet at the property line nor thirty-six (36) feet at the curb line.
15.131 A-I EXCLUSIVE (A-1 EX) AGRICULTURE DISTRICT.
(1) PURPOSE. The A-1 Ex district is designed to provide for a wide range of agriculture
uses and agricultural accessory uses. The district favors uses which are associated with the
primary production and harvesting of crops, livestock, animal products or plant materials.
Activities typically associated with working farms should be expected in the A-1 Ex district,
including noise, dust, odors, heavy equipment, use of chemicals, and long hours of operation.
The A-1 Ex district also includes undeveloped natural resource and open space areas, and
other uses permitted hereunder. The A-1 Ex district is intended to meet the criteria for
certification as a farmland preservation zoning district under s. 91.38, Wis. Stats.
15-158
(2) PERMITTED USES.
(a) Agricultural uses.
(b) Agricultural accessory uses, except for those types of agricultural accessory uses
listed as conditional uses below.
(c) Any residence lawfully existing as of February 20, 2010. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Section 15.17 regarding nonconforming uses and structures, such residence may
be added to, altered, restored, repaired provided all of the following criteria are met:
1. The use remains residential,
2. The structure complies with all residential building height, setback, side yard, and
rear yard standards of this section; and
(d) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(e) A transportation, utility, communication, pipeline, electric transmission, or drainage
use that is:
1. Required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. Authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that
specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
(3) CONDITIONAL USES.
(a) The following types agricultural accessory uses:
1. Farm residences, subject to the application requirements in Section 15.16(3)(a)
and a “sunset” condition indicating that the conditional use permit shall expire upon sale of the
property to an unrelated third party (thereby requiring a new conditional use permit or rezoning
application at such time) and requiring the recording of a notice document with the Register of
Deeds notifying current and future owners of this provision.
2. Sale of agricultural and dairy products not produced on the premises and
incidental sale of non-alcoholic beverages and snacks.
3. The seasonal storage of recreational equipment and motor vehicles owned by
private individuals other than those residing on the premises, but not including the storage of a
dealer's inventory.
4. Agricultural entertainment activities exceeding 45 days per year, in aggregate, or
events planned or anticipated to attract 200 or more persons per day.
5. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts,
exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar
activities, occurring on more than five days in a calendar year.
15-159
6. Horse boarding stables, riding stables, hay and sleigh rides, and horse training
facilities, including the sale of bridles, saddles, grooming supplies and related items at a horse
boarding or riding stable facility.
(b) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses.
(c) Any transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or
drainage use that is not classified as a permitted use.
(d) Non-metallic mineral extraction operations, subject to s. 91.46(6), Wis. Stats. and
Sections 15.04(12) a nd 15.16(4) of this chapter.
(4) PROHIBITED USES. All uses not listed in subs. (2) and (3) are prohibited in the A-1
Ex Agricultural District.
(5) DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
(a) The minimum lot area is 35 acres. Replacement dwellings on lots less than 35
acres are permitted per subsection (2)(c) above.
(b) The minimum lot width is 150 feet.
(c) Residential dwellings (including replacement dwellings), detached residential
accessory buildings, and other buildings that are not agricultural accessory buildings shall meet
the maximum building height and minimum setback requirements applicable to such buildings in
the RH-1 district per Table 15.10B. The maximum height of residential accessory buildings and
any other accessory building that is not an agricultural accessory building is 15 feet.
(d) Agricultural accessory buildings have no height limitation; agricultural accessory
buildings constructed after January 1, 2015 shall meet the minimum setback requirements for
accessory buildings in the RH-1 district. No agricultural accessory building shall be moved or
structurally altered so as to be nearer than 25 feet from any street or highway right-of-way.
(e) Agricultural accessory buildings, cages, kennels, hives and runs for housing of
animals or insects shall be located at least 100 feet from any residential district, except with
respect to existing structures when the residence district has been created for an existing farm
residence or by separating a farm residence from a farm property and the separated parcel has
been rezoned to a residence district after or at the time of the division..
15.132 A-2 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT.
(1) STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. The purpose of the A-2 Agriculture District is to
provide for low density land uses compatible with agricultural and other rural uses and to
accommodate agricultural uses on parcels of less than 35 acres.
(2) PERMITTED USES. The following uses are permitted in the A-2 District:
(a) Agricultural uses.
(b) Single family detached residences.
15-160
(c) Utility services.
(d) Home occupations.
(e) Accessory buildings.
1. Accessory buildings include private garages and buildings clearly incidental to a
permitted use of the premises. The building shall not be used for the storage of
goods or merchandise considered to be a dealer's inventory or for storage of
machinery or equipment used off of the premises for other than agricultural
purposes.
2. Accessory buildings may be built on parcels of land in the A-2 Agriculture District
without the necessity of there being a residence on the property.
(f) Horse boarding stables, riding stables, hay and sleigh rides.
[Cr. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(3) CONDITIONAL USES. The following uses require a conditional use permit in the A-
2 District:
(a) Mineral extraction operations, asphalt plants, ready mix concrete plants. Mineral
extraction operations are subject to sec. 15.04(12) and 15.16(4).
[Am. 06-06; Eff. 6-9-06]
(b) Radio, television transmitting towers, microwave towers, community television
antenna installations including the buildings or structures necessary for their operation but not
including buildings for offices, studios or the like.
(c) Dumping grounds, sanitary landfill sites, demolition material disposal sites and
incinerator sites shall also comply with §60.72 Wis. Stats. and shall meet the minimum
standards as adopted by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(d) Cemeteries.
(e) Airports, landing strips or landing fields together with accessory structures.
(f) Religious uses.
(g) Salvage recycling centers.
(h) Solid waste recycling centers.
(i) Dependency living arrangements.
(j) Governmental uses.
(k) Native wildlife rehabilitation facilities.
(l) Parking or storage of not more than two trucks, semi-tractors or semi-trailers which
have a gross vehicle weight of over 12,000 lbs.
15-161
(m) Private schools.
(n) Kennels, horse shows and similar events.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(o) Unlimited livestock on 3 to 16 acres.
(p) Sale of agricultural and dairy products not produced on the premises and incidental
sale of non-alcoholic beverages and candy.
(q) Seasonal storage of recreational equipment and motor vehicles owned by private
individuals in existing accessory farm buildings. The storage of a dealers inventory or the
construction of any new buildings for storage shall be considered a commercial use.
(r) Training of dogs at a dog kennel or training of horses at a horse boarding facility.
(s) Family businesses, subject to the following limitations:
1. All employees, except one or one full-time equivalent, shall be a member of the
family residing on the premises.
2. The Village Board may limit the percentage of the property that may be devoted
to the business.
3. The conditional use permit holder may be restricted to a service oriented business
and thus prohibited from manufacturing or assembling products or selling
products on the premises or any combination thereof.
4. The conditional use permit may restrict the number and types of machinery and
equipment the permit holder may be allowed to bring or operate on the premises.
5. The design, size, and location of the structure(s) or area(s) used for the business
may be subject to conditions set forth in the conditional use permit.
6. The conditional use permit shall automatically expire on sale of the property or the
business to any entity not party to the original conditional use permit application.
[Cr. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(4) BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITS. Building height limitations shall be the same as for the
A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District.
(5) AREA AND FRONTAGE REGULATIONS
(a) Minimum lot size in the A-2 District shall be one (1) acre and minimum lot width shall
be 150 feet.
(b) Keeping of livestock shall be restricted according to lot sizes as follows:
1. On parcels of less than 2 acres the keeping of livestock is not permitted.
15-162
2. On parcels of between 2 acres and 16 acres livestock shall be limited to 1 animal
unit per each full acre.
3. On parcels of more than 16 acres, the number of livestock permitted is not
restricted.
(c) For salvage recycling centers the minimum area is three acres.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08]
(6) SETBACK REQUIREMENTS. No building, including barns and other farm buildings
of any description whatsoever, shall be erected, moved or structurally altered so as to be nearer
than 25 feet from any street or highway right-of-way.
(7) SIDE YARD REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Side yards for residential dwellings and residential accessory buildings shall be the
same as for the RE-1 Residence District.
(b) Accessory buildings, cages, kennels, hives and runs for housing of animals or insects
shall be located at least 100 feet from any residential district, except with respect to existing
structures when the residence district has been created for an existing farm residence or by
separating a farm residence from a farm property and the separated parcel has been rezoned to
a residence district after or at the time of the division.
(8) REAR YARD REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Rear yards for residential dwellings and residential accessory buildings shall be the
same as for the RE- 1 Residence District.
(b) Accessory buildings, cages, kennels, hives and runs for housing of animals or insects
shall be located at least 100 feet from any residential district, except with respect to existing
structures when the residence district has been created for an existing farm residence or by
separating a farm residence from a farm property and the separated parcel has been rezoned to
a residence district after or at the time of the division.
(9) OFF-STREET PARKING. Off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance
with the provision of sec. 15.08.
15.133 A-3 AGRICULTURAL TRANSITION DISTRICT. [Cr. 15-044; Eff. 12-24-15]
(1) PURPOSE. The A-3 district is established to preserve, in agricultural and open
space uses, lands suited to future urban development pending proper timing and the
economical provision of public utilities and community facilities to ensure their orderly
development. The A-3 district does not meet the criteria for certification as a farmland
preservation zoning district under Section 91.38, Wis. Stats., because it is not mapped in areas
planned for long-term farmland preservation in the Dane County farmland preservation plan.
(2) PERMITTED USES. Permitted uses shall be the same as those within the A-1
Exclusive Agricultural district.
15-163
(3) CONDITIONAL USES. Conditional uses shall be the same as those within the
A-1 Exclusive Agricultural District.
(4) DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS. Lot area, width, setback, height, and other
dimensional requirements shall be the same as those within the A-1 Exclusive Agricultural
District.
15.134 A-4 SMALL LOT EXCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT. [Cr. 15-044; Eff. 12-24-15]
(1) PURPOSE. The A-4 district is established to provide for a modest range of
agricultural and agricultural accessory uses, at scales consistent with the size of the parcel and
compatible with neighboring land uses, and on lots between five and 35 acres in area. The
district is also intended to preserve remnant parcels of productive agricultural land that are
between five and 35 acres following development of adjoining property. Activities typically
associated with working farms should be expected in the A-4 district, including noise, dust,
odors, heavy equipment, use of chemicals, and long hours of operation. The A-4 district also
includes undeveloped natural resource and open space areas, and other uses permitted
hereunder. The A-4 district is intended to meet the criteria for certification as a farmland
preservation zoning district under s. 91.38, Wis. Stats.
(2) PERMITTED USES. Permitted uses shall be the same as those within the A-1
Exclusive Agricultural district, except that the keeping of livestock shall be limited to a density of
one animal unit per each full acre as a permitted use.
(3) CONDITIONAL USES. Conditional uses shall be the same as those within the A-
1 Exclusive Agricultural district, except that the keeping of livestock at a density of greater than
one animal unit per each full acre shall be a conditional use.
(4) PROHIBITED USES. All uses not referenced as either permitted or conditional
uses in subs. (2) and (3) are prohibited in the A-4 district.
(5) DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS. Dimensional requirements shall be the same
as those within the A-1 Exclusive Agricultural District, except that the minimum lot area in the A-
4 district shall be not less than five acres and the maximum lot area shall be not greater than 35
acres.
15.14 C-1 CONSERVANCY DISTRICT.
(1) PURPOSE. The C-1 Conservancy district is established to preserve and perpetuate
in an open state certain areas such as lakes and waterways, wetlands and marshes, flood
plains and stream beds, certain agricultural lands, slopes and other areas of aesthetic value
which, because of their unique physical features, are deemed desirable and functional as
natural drainage ways and water retention areas, natural habitats for plant and animal life, green
space and similar uses beneficial to the community. The regulations of the conservancy district
are intended not only to preserve and perpetuate certain open space land and water areas for
multiple purpose uses consistent with the intent and purpose of this ordinance, but also to
protect the community from the costs which may be incurred when unsuitable development
occurs in certain areas.
(2) PERMITTED USES. The following uses are permitted in the conservancy district:
15-164
(a) Land and water preserves, including arboretums and sustained forestry yield.
(b) One single-family detached dwelling for the use of the owner or caretaker.
(c) Outdoor recreational activities including boating, swimming, harvesting of wild crops
such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, fishing, trapping, raising of
fish and wild animals or the provisions of natural habitat for the foregoing.
(d) Public parks, trails and playgrounds.
(e) Outdoor public educational facilities.
(f) Noncommercial athletic fields and play fields.
(g) Municipal facilities and uses, including, recreational buildings and community
centers, provided such buildings shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any lot in a
residential district.
(3) CONDITIONAL USES. The following conditional uses may be allowed in the C-1
Conservancy district upon approval of a conditional use permit.
(a) Cemeteries, including mausoleums, crematoriums and columbariums in conjunction
therewith, provided that crematoriums shall be located not less than three hundred (300) feet
from any lot line, and that mausoleums and columbariums shall be located not less than twentyfive
(25) feet from any lot line.
(b) Golf courses, including golf driving ranges, provided clubhouses and maintenance
buildings shall be located not less than three hundred (300) feet from any lot in a residential
district.
(c) Improvement, including but not limited to the alteration, creation, damming and
dredging of water courses and bodies of water.
(d) Land and water, including the following uses, provided that buildings, structures or
accessory facilities shall be located not less than three hundred (300) feet from any lot in a
residential district:
1. Boat landing piers, boat rentals.
2. Commercial Campgrounds and facilities.
3. Other uses and facilities for outdoor recreation, including buildings containing
dwelling units or lodging rooms for use by the transient public when accessory to
such outdoor recreation use.
(e) Public utility and public service uses as follows:
1. Electric substations.
2. Gas regulator stations, mixing stations and gate stations.
15-165
3. Radio and television towers.
4. Railroad rights-of-way, including rights-of-way for switch, spur or team tracks, but
not including railroad yards and shops, or freight and service buildings.
5. Sewerage system lift stations.
6. Telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers, telephone transmission
equipment buildings.
7. Water pumping stations and water reservoirs.
(f) Outdoor recreational uses including, tennis, horse riding, skiing and other sports.
Accessory clubhouses and maintenance buildings may be authorized as conditional uses
provided they are located not less than fifty (50) feet from any lot in a residential district, except
buildings for shelter and keeping of horses and buildings and facilities for boating shall be not
less than three hundred (300) feet from any such lot.
(g) Accessory uses, including but not limited to the following.
1. Roadside stands.
2. Temporary buildings for storage of building materials and equipment for
construction purposes when located on the same or adjoining lot as the principal
use for a period not to exceed the reasonable duration of construction.
(4) HEIGHT REGULATIONS. In the C-1 Conservancy district, no building or structure
shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories nor thirty-five (35) feet in height.
(5) YARD REQUIREMENTS. In the C-1 Conservancy district front, side and rear yards
shall be provided, each of which shall not be less than the following:
(a) Front yard- twenty five (25) feet.
(b) Side yards--each ten (10) feet. If the adjacent property is zoned residential, the
setback shall be twenty (20) feet except as otherwise specified in this section.
(c) Rear yard- twenty-five (25) feet. If the adjacent property is zoned residential, the
setback shall be fifty (50) feet except as otherwise specified in this section.
(6) LOT AREA. There shall be no minimum required lot size in the C-1 Conservancy
District except that no lands designated as land and water preserves, within the C-1
Conservancy district under common ownership on the effective date of this chapter shall be
divided in any manner which results in the creation of a new lot less than 35 acres in area.
15-166
15.15 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) DISTRICT
15.15 (1)Purpose and Intent
15.15 (2)Minimum Area
15.15 (3)Permitted Uses
15.15 (4)Procedures for Approval
15.15 (5)Changes to Approved Planned Unit Developments.
15.15 (6)Standards For Approval
15.15 (7)Subdivision Review
15.15 (8)Street Design Standards
15.15 (9)Open Space Requirements
15.15 (10) Extraterritorial Provisions
(1) PURPOSE AND INTENT. The purpose of this section is to encourage improved
design in the development of land by providing relief from rigid zoning requirements which are
designed for conventional developments but which may preclude desirable but unconventional
development. The PUD district shall not be used as a substitute when the Village Board
determines that a one or more standard zoning districts would enable implementation of a
particular development plan in substantially similar form to that envisioned. In other words, the
PUD district shall not be the default choice for new development projects, but instead should be
reserved for developments where conforming to standard zoning districts would be impractical
or significantly compromise the vision of the development. The PUD district and this section is
further intended to promote the following objectives:
(a) Diversification in the use permitted, and variation in the relationship of uses,
structures, open spaces and heights of structures in developments conceived as unified
projects.
(b) Environmental design in the development of land that is of a higher quality than
would otherwise be possible through the strict application of general zoning requirements.
(c) Promotion of the functional and beneficial use of common open space.
(d) Preservation of archeological and historic resources and natural landscape features
and amenities of a development site and utilization of such features in a harmonious fashion.
(e) Creation of a variety of uses in compatible arrangements which provide a greater
choice of living, employment and shopping environments.
(f) Efficient use of land resulting in more cost effective networks of utilities, streets and
other facilities.
(g) Coordination of architectural styles, building forms and relationships, graphics and
other private improvements.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(2) MINIMUM AREA. A Planned Unit Development shall not be less than three (3)
acres of contiguous land under a single form of ownership. This subsection shall not be
interpreted to prohibit the post-development sale of all or part of an approved PUD subject to
the provisions of this section and all applicable statutes and subdivision regulations.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
15-167
(3) PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES. The uses which may be permitted uses
or conditional uses under a Planned Unit Development include a mixture of uses, including any
uses listed as permitted or conditional uses in different standard zoning districts in this chapter.
All permitted and conditional uses within each Planned Unit Development shall be as listed
within the approved Final Development Plan for that Development. No use is permitted as a
matter of right in the PUD District or as a conditional use except as may be provided in an
approved Final Development Plan for each particular Planned Unit Development.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(4) PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL.
(a) Concept Plan and Pre-application Conference. Prior to preparation of a formal
application, the applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a concept plan for the
proposed Planned Unit Development and confer on procedures, submittal requirements,
relationships to Village plans, and standards for approval. The applicant and/or Zoning
Administrator may choose to refer the concept plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission or
the Joint Committee to obtain information and guidance relating to the preparation of an
application. The views expressed by the Zoning Administrator shall be for informational
purposes only and designed to afford the applicant the opportunity to revise the application prior
to its formal submission to address staff concerns.
(b) Preliminary Application/Zoning Map Amendment Submission. The applicant shall
submit a completed Planned Unit Development Preliminary Development Plan/rezoning
application on a form(s) provided by the Zoning Administrator, nine (9) hard copies and a digital
PDF copy of a Preliminary Development Plan prepared in accordance with par. (c), and an
application fee as established by the Village Board. All Preliminary Development Plan
documents shall be prepared in Microsoft Word or other commonly available word processing
software.
(c) Preliminary Development Plan. The preliminary development plan shall contain the
following:
1. The name and address of all owners of the site proposed for development as well
as the name and address of all professional site planners, architects, engineers,
surveyors or other consultants;
2. A legal description of the site covered by the plan;
3. A general area plan drawing reflecting the intended land uses and the location of
each, and all future proposed street locations within the site when the proposed
Planned Unit Development is intended to be developed in more than one phase;
4. The location of all property lines, existing streets, easements, utilities and any
other significant physical features;
5. Date, north arrow and graphic scale (not less than one inch equals one hundred
feet (1" = 100') of all drawings submitted;
6. The present zoning district designation(s) of the property;
15-168
7. An indication of the existing conditions on the tract including contour lines at two
(2) foot intervals, water courses and existing drainage facilities, wooded areas
and isolated trees of six inches (6") or more in diameter, existing streets,
sidewalks or other improvements, and existing buildings and structures with an
indication of those which will be removed and those which will be retained as part
of the development;
8. A description of the area surrounding the site showing land use, streets, peculiar
physical or natural features, public facilities and existing zoning;
9. Quantitative data indicating the following:
a. Minimum and maximum number of dwelling units;
b. Approximate gross and net residential densities, excluding all streets and
roadways;
c. Total amount of usable open space area provided in the tract;
d. Such other calculations as the Planning and Zoning Commission or, if the
property is located wholly or partially in the ETZ Area, the Joint Committee
may require.
10. A development schedule indicating:
a. the approximate date when construction of the project will begin;
b. the stages in which the project will be built and the approximate date when
construction of each stage will begin;
c. the approximate dates when the development of each stage will be
completed; and
d. the area and location of common open space that will be provided at each
stage;
e. a schedule of deadlines for submission of final development plans for
each phase of the proposed development if final development plans
encompassing the entire development will not be filed within one (1) year
from the date of approval of the preliminary development plan.
11. An explanation of the methods proposed by the applicant to provide for the
maintenance and regulation of common areas and open spaces, including copies
of any proposed deed restrictions, building covenants and organizational
documents of any property owner 's association or similar agreements; and
12. Such other documents explaining other circumstances as the Planning and
Zoning Commission or Joint Committee may require.
(d) Public Hearing. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator
shall schedule the matter for public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. Notice
15-169
of the hearing shall be given by publication of a Class 2 notice as provided in Chapter 985,
Stats. and providing any notice to adjacent municipalities required by §62.23(7), Stats. The
hearing may be continued as necessary for the submission of additional information or the
revision of the application documents.
(e) Planning and Zoning Commission Action. Within thirty (30) days after the completion
of the hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make findings with regard to the
standards set forth in sub (6) and §15.03(7)(e), and forward a report to the Village Board with a
recommendation to approve, approve with conditions, or reject the Preliminary Development
Plan and associated rezoning to the PUD district.
(f) Board Action on Preliminary Development Plan. Approval of the Preliminary
Development Plan by the Village Board shall constitute approval of the general arrangement of
the Plan, the provisions submitted by the applicant, a waiver of those provisions of the general
zoning code which are set forth in the Preliminary Development Plan, and approval of a
rezoning of the lands within the Planned Unit Development to the PUD District. Such rezoning
shall take effect only when a Final Development Plan associated with the Planned Unit
Development is subsequently approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Joint
Committee and a building permit is issued thereunder. Such Board approval of the Preliminary
Development Plan and associated zoning map amendment shall become void, as to any lands
for which a final development plan application is not submitted by the latest of:
1. one (1) year from the date of approval of the preliminary development plan;
2. the date set forth in the approved preliminary development plan pursuant to
subpar. (c)10e;
3. any date established by the Village Board by resolution extending the period
provided in subpar. (f)1 or 2.
(g) Final Application Submission. Nine (9) hard copies and one digital PDF copy of a
completed Final Development Plan application form and the Final Development Plan shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator. All Final Development Plan documents shall be prepared in
Microsoft Word or other commonly available word processing software. At the discretion of the
applicant, one or more complete Final Development Plan applications may be submitted
concurrently with a Preliminary Development Plan application associated with all or part of the
same land. The Final Development Plan submission shall be accompanied by a fee and review
escrow in accordance with a fee schedule set by the Village Board. The Final Development Plan
shall include the following:
1. Any amendments required as part of the preliminary review process;
2. A site plan of the proposed development indicating the general location of the
following:
a. All buildings, structures and other improvements, including architectural
elevation or perspective drawings of all buildings and improvements sufficient
to show the developer's intent;
b. Common open space (for developments with residential use) and recreation
facilities with a designation of the intended uses;
15-170
c. Off-street parking facilities and number of spaces to be provided;
d. Sidewalks;
e. Illuminated areas;
f. Screening or buffering of the development perimeters;
g. All areas and streets which are intended to be dedicated to the public;
i. Landscaping plan;
j. A detailed plan for signage including locations, dimensions, heights, and
qualitative standards.
[Cr. 08-27; Eff. 8-22-08; renumbered from 1j by revisor]
3. Quantitative data indicating the following:
a. Maximum number of dwelling units;
b. Maximum lot coverage of buildings and structures (percent of total);
c. Maximum impervious surface coverage of all building and structures,
driveways, roads, sidewalks, patios and other non-porous surfaces (percent
of total);
d. Approximate gross and net residential densities, excluding all streets and
roadways;
e. Minimum amount of usable open space area provided in the tract;
f. Such other calculations as the Planning and Zoning Commission or, if the
property is located wholly or partially in the ETZ Area, the Joint Committee
may require.
g. Minimum square footage for each residential use type within the proposed
PUD.
4. A checklist specific to the PUD listing the use, design, dimensional, and other
requirements and conditions of the Final Development Plan, in order to facilitate
later developer, builder and home/business owner compliance with the Final
Development Plan.
5. Clear indication of which submitted materials are intended to be included in the
Final Development Plan as regulatory materials enforceable by the Village, and
which submitted materials the applicant is intending as supplemental, nonregulatory
components and/or components that are proposed to be enforced by
others aside from the Village.
[Cr. Ord. 06-06, Eff. 3-9-06]
15-171
(h) Planning and Zoning Commission Action. The Planning and Zoning Commission (or
appropriate Joint Committee if in the ETZ Area) shall review the Final Development Plan for
conformity with the approved Preliminary Development Plan and the provisions of this section.
If the Final Development Plan complies with the approved Preliminary Development Plan except
for changes required as a condition of such approval, and subject to approval of such changes,
and if the Planning and Zoning Commission or Joint Committee approves all of the features as
shown on the site plan required by sub. (4)(g)2, the Planning and Zoning Commission or Joint
Committee shall, by resolution, approve, approve with conditions, or reject the Final
Development Plan. The Zoning Administrator shall deliver for recording the approved Final
Development Plan, resolution, and all ordinances, dedications, covenants and such other
documents as may be required as a condition of the approval.
(i) Recording of Final Development Plan; Rezoning of Lands. The applicant shall record
the approved Final Development Plan and associated documents upon receipt from the Zoning
Administrator. Upon presentation of evidence of recording and an application for a building
permit within the Final Development Plan area for an authorized use, the rezoning of the Final
Development Plan area shall become effective and the Zoning Administrator shall cause the
official zoning map to reflect the rezoning.
(j) Lapse of PUD Approvals. The applicant shall conform to the development schedule in
the approved Final Development Plan. If no building permit has been issued in the Planned
Unit Development within five (5) years from the approval of the associated Final Development
Plan or if any improvement is not completed within five (5) years from the date set forth in the
Preliminary Development Plan, all associated Preliminary Development Plan and Final
Development Plan approvals shall lapse and be void. The Village Board may, by resolution,
extend the period for the beginning of construction, the establishment of an approved use, or
completion of a phase of development as provided in the development schedule. If a
Preliminary Development Plan or Final Development Plan lapses under the provisions of this
section, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the lapse of approval and the
property owner shall promptly cause the property to be brought into compliance with all of the
district regulations in effect prior to the approvals granted pursuant to par. (i). In the event such
land has been rezoned to the PUD district but the approvals have lapsed under this section, the
Zoning Administrator shall initiate an application to rezone the land from PUD back to the zoning
district over the land before PUD, or the nearest comparable zoning district.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(5) AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS. The Zoning
Administrator may authorize an amendment to an approved Preliminary Development Plan
and/or Final Development Plan in the design, location, siting and height of buildings and
structures; lot dimensional standards; and any other standards or features specifically identified
for such consideration in the Plan(s), if required by engineering, topographic, lot configuration,
or other circumstances not foreseen at the time such Plan(s) was approved, provided that the
amendment does not result in any of the following:
(a) A change in the approved use, character, or vision of the development;
(b) An increase by more than five percent (5%) in the overall coverage of structures;
(c) An increase in the density or intensity of use by more than five percent (5%);
(d) A reduction of more than five percent (5%) in approved open space; or
15-172
(e) A reduction of minimum required off-street parking and loading spaces by more
than 25 percent (25%).
(f) A reduction in any minimum lot area, minimum floor area, or dimensional
requirement by more than five percent (5%), unless the reduction is necessary to allow for a
conveyance of land to the Village or another governmental entity for public purposes.
(g) A conflict with the specific intent of the Village Board or Plan Commission in
approval of the Plan(s).
Any other amendment to the Preliminary Development Plan shall be classified as major
amendments, and must be approved by Village Board, following a recommendation from the
Planning and Zoning Commission (or Joint Committee if in the ETZ Area). Any other
amendment to the Final Development Plan must be approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission (or Joint Committee if in the ETZ Area). Each approved amendment to the Final
Development Plan must be recorded by the applicant before the Village will issue a building
permit authorized under the approved amendment.
(6) STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL. No planned unit development shall be approved
unless the Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine all of the following:
(a) That the proposed site will be provided with adequate drainage facilities for surface
and storm waters.
(b) That the proposed site is accessible from public roads that are adequate to carry the
traffic that will be generated from the proposed development.
(c) That the proposed development can be adequately, safely, and efficiently provided
with, and will not place an undue burden on, public utility services and facilities.
(d) That the streets and driveways on the site of the proposed development will be
adequate to serve the residents of the development and will meet the minimum construction
standards and specifications of all applicable ordinances of the Village, except to the extent
such standards and specifications are modified as part of the approved Preliminary or Final
Development Plans.
(e) That the character or uses of the proposed development will not adversely affect real
estate values in, or the character of, the neighborhood adjacent to the proposed development or
the development of such areas as permitted by the zoning code.
(f) That adequate provision has been made for the maintenance of any common
grounds, parks, open spaces, recreational areas, community buildings, or other common
facilities included in the proposed development.
(g) That adequate safeguards have been provided to prevent the subsequent
development of, and construction of, buildings and structures upon, any common grounds,
parks, open spaces, or recreational areas included in the proposed development.
(h) That the proposed development offers a cohesive design which is compatible with
the physical nature of the site and surrounding area.
15-173
(i) That the proposed development will produce an attractive environment of sustained
aesthetic desirability, economic stability and functional practicality compatible with the intent of
the Village Master Plan or applicable comprehensive plan.
(j) That, to the extent the plan provides for lot dimensions, setbacks, building heights,
landscape treatments or other design features which do not conform to the general district
regulations, modifications or those regulations in the context of the overall development plan will
not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.
(k) That the proposed design satisfies all of the requirements of this section and all
applicable subdivision regulations.
(l) That the schedule for development and submission of final development plans as set
forth in a preliminary development plan is reasonable considering the scope of the development
and its proposed phases, the impact of the schedule on Village planning, and the ability of the
Village and other governmental entities to accommodate the needs created by the development
as development occurs.
(7) SUBDIVISION REVIEW. The applicable subdivision review under the Village
subdivision ordinance shall be carried out as an integral part of the review of a planned unit
development. The plans required must be submitted in a form which substantially satisfy
requirements of the subdivision regulations for the preliminary and final plat approvals.
Subdivision applications may be submitted for the whole, a part, or parts of the overall planned
unit development as indicated by phases in the final development phasing plan.
(8) STREET DESIGN STANDARDS.
(a) Circulation. All commercial buildings shall have access on internal or frontage roads.
The road system must give consideration to properties beyond the planned unit development.
(b) Streets. Streets in a planned unit development may be dedicated to public use or
may be retained under private ownership. They shall be constructed in accordance with
standards required by local governmental regulations, or as otherwise specified in the planned
unit development conditional use permit.
(9) OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Distribution and Design:
1. Open space shall be distributed equitably throughout a planned unit development
in relationship to the uses to which it serves.
2. Open spaces shall be generally linked to provide a continuous network.
3. Buildings and other structures shall be positioned on a site to provide for
maximum, usable open space.
4. Retention basins and ponds shall have a minimum of fifty (50) feet of usable open
space surrounding the perimeter of such ponds and basins.
15-174
5. No proposed open space area may be accepted as usable common open space
unless its character and quality have been approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. When making its determination the Commission shall give
consideration to the following variables:
a. The topography and existing amenities of the proposed area, including trees,
ground cover and other natural features.
b. The manner in which the proposed area is to be improved and maintained for
recreational or amenity purposes.
c. The existence of public parks or other public recreational facilities in the
vicinity and the relationship thereto.
(b) Open Space Conveyance and Maintenance:
1. All land shown on the final development plan as common open space must be
conveyed under one of the following options:
a. It may be conveyed to a public agency which will agree to maintain the
common open space and any buildings, structures or improvements which
have been placed on it.
b. It may be conveyed to trustees provided in a declaration of covenants
recorded against the property establishing a property owners association or
similar organization for the maintenance of common open spaces within the
planned unit development. The common open space must be conveyed to
the trustees subject to the covenants to be approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and Village attorney, which covenants restrict the
common open space to the uses specified on the final development plan, and
which provide for the maintenance of the common open space in a manner
which assures its continuing use for its intended purpose.
2. No common open space may be put to any use not specified in the final
development plan unless the final development plan has been amended to
permit that use as provided herein. However, no change of use authorized under
amendments of the plan may be considered as a waiver of any of the covenants
limiting the use of common open space areas. All rights to enforce these
covenants against any use permitted under further amendment of the plan are
expressly reserved.
3. If the common open space is not conveyed to a public agency, either one of the
following methods of enforcement must be provided:
a. The legal right to develop the common open space for the uses specified in
the final development plan must be conveyed to a public agency.
b. The restrictions governing the use, improvement, and maintenance of the
common open space must be stated as conditions to the conveyance of the
common open space. The fee title to the common open space shall be
15-175
vested in the Village in the event of a substantial default in the stated
conditions or
c. The covenants governing the use, improvement, and maintenance of the
common open space shall authorize the Village Board to enforce their
provisions.
4. Once a planned unit development plan has been approved, the common grounds,
parks, open spaces, and recreational areas included in the said plan shall not be
used for the construction of any building or structure which has not been
approved by the Parks, Recreation & Natural Resources Committee as part of a
final development plan, nor shall such common grounds, parks, open spaces, or
recreational areas be thereafter computed as a part of the required minimum lot
area or required yard of any other building or structure.
5. Minimum Amount. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the gross area of a
residential planned unit development which includes any residential uses shall
be devoted to open space. Such open space shall be limited to the following:
a. Recreational open space, including but not limited to: swimming pools, tennis
courts, recreation buildings, jogging trails/fitness courses, detention basins
designed for recreational use, tot lots, ball and soccer fields.
b. Common open space, which shall include, but not be limited to the following:
(i) Detention and retention basins and ponds not designed for dual
recreational use, natural water features, wetlands, and conservation
areas. However, such open spaces when combined shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the required open space.
(ii) Perimeter open space, including but not limited to: open space abutting
roadways, adjoining property, and parking lots.
6. Access. Convenient access to all common open space shall be guaranteed to all
residents within the development.
7. Useable Common Open Space.
a. Each residential planned unit development shall have a minimum amount of
usable common open space as specified by the table below:
Density (d.u./net acre)
Common Open Space (% of gross site area)
Less than 4
15%
Greater than 4, Less than 8
20%
Greater than 8
25%
15-176
Such usable common open space shall not include:
(i) Areas reserved for the exclusive use or benefit of an individual tenant or
owner,
(ii) Dedicated streets, alleys, and other public rights-of-way,
(iii) Vehicular drives, parking, loading and storage areas, or
(iv) Irregular or unusable narrow strips of land less than fifteen (15) feet wide.
(10) EXTRATERRITORIAL PROVISIONS.
(a) If all of the property for which an application is submitted under this section is
located in the ETZ Area, the appropriate Joint Committee shall act in lieu of the Planning and
Zoning Commission and shall have all of the powers and duties of the Commission under
this section.
(b) The appropriate Joint Committee shall act jointly with the Planning and Zoning
Commission in reviewing and making recommendations on any application partially within the
ETZ Area and shall hold all required hearings jointly.
(c) No rezoning associated with a Planned Unit Development which includes any lands
in the ETZ Area shall be approved by the Village Board unless first recommended for approval
by the appropriate Joint Committee, and subject to all other requirements of sec. 15.035.
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
15-177
15.155 WP WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
(1) PURPOSE. Persons served by the DeForest Water Utility depend exclusively on
groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can
seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality. This WP overlay district institutes land use
regulations within 1,200 feet of each municipal well, designated in the Village's wellhead
protection plan and mapped as WP areas on the zoning map. The district is intended to protect
groundwater quality and promote the health, safety and general welfare of municipal water
users. Authority for Village adoption of this district and enforcement of associated regulations is
established under §62.23(7)(a) and (c), Stats., and §NR 811.16, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) SEPARATION DISTANCES. Minimum separation distances shall be maintained
between any well and other facilities within the WP overlay district per the standards in §NR
811.12, Wis. Adm. Code.
(3) CONDITIONAL USES. Subject to the separation standards in subsection (2), the
uses listed within this subsection (3) are conditional uses within the WP overlay district,
provided that such uses are allowed in the underlying zoning district. Uses not listed below are
permitted by right in the WP district, provided such uses are permitted by right in the underlying
zoning district and subject to any applicable separation standards in subsection (2).
(a) Animal waste storage areas and facilities.
(b) Asphalt products manufacturing plants.
(c) Automobile fueling, service, painting, repair, and/or maintenance facilities.
(d) Building materials and product sales.
(e) Car washes.
(f) Cartage and express facilities.
(g) Cemeteries.
(h) Center-pivot or other large-scale irrigated agriculture operations.
(i) Chemical storage, sale, processing, and/or manufacturing facilities.
(j) Dry cleaning establishments.
(k) Dumping or disposing of garbage, refuse, trash, or demolition material.
(1) Electronic circuit assembly plants.
(m) Electroplating plants.
(n) Exterminating shops.
(o) Fertilizer manufacturing or storage facilities.
15-178
(p) Foundries and forge plants.
(q) Highway salt storage areas.
(r) Industrial liquid waste storage areas.
(s) Junk yards and salvage yards.
(t) Metal reduction and refinement plants.
(u) Mineral extraction operations.
(v) Motor and machinery service and assembly shops.
(w) Motor freight terminals.
(x) Petroleum products storage tanks, and/or processing of petroleum products.
(y) Pharmaceuticals manufacturing.
(z) Photography studios, including the developing of film and pictures.
(aa) Plastics manufacturing.
(bb) Printing and publishing establishments.
(cc) Pulp and paper manufacturing.
(dd) Septage disposal sites.
(ee) Sludge disposal sites.
(ff) Storage, manufacturing or disposal of toxic or hazardous materials.
(gg) Underground petroleum products storage tanks, and above-ground petroleum
product storage tanks greater than 660 gallons. All new or replaced tanks shall also be installed
in compliance with SPS 310, Wis. Adm. Code.
(hh) Woodworking and wood products manufacturing.
(ii) Any other use with characteristics similar to one or more of the above listed uses,
in the determination of the Zoning Administrator.
(4) CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION, STANDARDS, AND CONDITIONS.
(a) Application. In addition to conditional use permit application requirements in
§15.16(3)(a), the Zoning Administrator may require an environmental impact study,
environmental assessment, or such other information as necessary to evaluate the application
against the conditional use permit standards in this subsection and in §15.16.
(b) Standards. Standards for conditional use permit approval are included within
15-179
§15.16(t). In its consideration of conditional use permits applications for one of the listed
conditional uses in subsection (3) within the WP overlay district, the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Village Board shall consider the following additional factors:
1. The Village’s responsibility as a public water supplier to protect and preserve
public health, safety and welfare.
2. The potential of the proposed use to seriously threaten or degrade groundwater
quality.
3. The availability of alternative uses, locations, and operational characteristics,
and the cost, effect, and extent of availability of such alternatives.
4. The proximity of the applicant's property to other potential sources of
contamination or vulnerable activities or uses.
5. The then-existing condition of the associated well, well field, well recharge area,
and the vulnerability to further contamination.
6. The direction of flow of groundwater and other factors in the area of the
applicant's property which may affect the speed of the groundwater flow,
including topography, depth of soil, extent of aquifer, depth to water table, and
location of private wells.
7. The zone of contribution (5-year, 50-year, 100-year) for the associated well within
which the proposed use is located.
8. Any other hydrogeological data or information which is available from any public
or private agency or organization.
9. The potential benefit, both economic and social, from the approval of the
application.
(c) Approval Conditions. In its approval of any conditional use permit within the WP
overlay district, the Village Board may impose conditions as specified under §15.16(g) and:
1. Environmental and/or safety monitoring to indicate whether the facility may be
emitting any contaminants.
2. A financial guarantee in a form determined by the Village for future monitoring
and cleanup costs.
3. Any requirement authorized for existing facilities under subsection (5).
(5) REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING FACILITIES AND LAND USES.
(a) At the request of the Zoning Administrator, existing facilities, as defined under
§15.02, shall provide to the Village copies of all federal, state and local facility operation
approvals or certificates and ongoing environmental monitoring results.
15-180
(b) Existing facilities shall provide additional environmental or safety monitoring as
deemed necessary by the Village Board, including the production of any and all environmental
statements detailing the extent of chemical use and storage on the property.
(c) Existing facilities, when upgrading or expanding, shall replace equipment or expand
in a manner that improves existing environmental and safety technologies and performance.
(d) At the request of the Zoning Administrator, existing facilities shall devise and file with
the Village, a contingency plan for unexpected release of contaminants or other emergency
events that is satisfactory to the Village Board.
(6) VIOLATIONS AND COMPLIANCE. In the event an individual and/or facility within the
WP district causes the release of any contaminants which endanger the public, in the
determination of the Village Board, the individual or facility causing said release shall
immediately cease and desist, and provide clean-up satisfactory to the Village Board. The
individual or facility will be held financially responsible for all environmental cleanup costs, along
with all required Village consultant fees for oversight, review and documentation. Following any
such discharge, the Village may require additional environmental and/or safety monitoring.
[Cr. 13-06, Eff. 4-4-13]
15.16 CONDITIONAL USES.
(1) PURPOSE. Conditional uses are certain land uses which, because of their unique
characteristics, cannot be properly classified as unrestricted permitted uses in any particular
district or districts without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon
neighboring land or public facilities, and of the public need for the particular use at a particular
location. Such uses, nevertheless, may be necessary or desirable to be allowed in a particular
district provided that due consideration is given to the location, development, and operation of
such uses. The purpose of this section is to provide for the approval of conditional uses where,
in light of requirements or restrictions imposed as conditions of approval, such uses will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare and will meet the standards for the approval of
conditional use permits in this section.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(2) CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS. Whenever the regulations of any zoning district
authorize one or more conditional uses, such uses shall be permitted only upon issuance of,
and in compliance with, a conditional use permit under this section. Conditional use permits
shall terminate on the earliest of:
(a) The date or event specified in any limited conditional use permit issued under sub.
(4) or any temporary use permit issued under sub. (7);
(b) The effective date of a change in the district designation of the property or the district
regulations which results in the use becoming a prohibited use in the district, subject to the
provisions of 15.17;
(c) The discontinuation of the operations authorized by the conditional use permit for any
period of twelve (12) consecutive months;
(d) One (1) year after the date of issuance if the approved conditional use has not been
implemented nor substantial construction to facilitate the use commenced;
15-181
(e) Entry of an order by the municipal court or any court of record terminating the permit
upon a finding that the conditions set forth in the permit have been materially or repeatedly
violated; or
(h) The reversal of conditional use permit approval by the Village Board upon an appeal
under sub. (3)(e).
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(3) PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.
(a) Application. All applications for conditional use permits shall be submitted on a form
provided by the Zoning Administrator. The application shall contain a description of the
property, the name of the applicant, a description of the proposed use including applicable
operational characteristics, a conceptual site and building plan if site and building improvements
are anticipated or required to accommodate the conditional use, and such other information as
the Zoning Administrator shall determine necessary for appropriate review. The application
shall describe all conditions and restrictions proposed by the applicant to assure that the
proposed use will continually meet the standards set forth in par. (f). The Zoning Administrator
may reject any application which does not contain the required information or which proposes a
use not authorized as a conditional use by the applicable district regulations. The following
additional information shall be submitted with an application for a farm residence in the A-1 Ex
or A-4 district:
1. Written description of the farm operation, including location, size, crops grown
and/or livestock raised, number of employees beyond family members, and summary of
farm income derived from the farm operation.
2. Completed IRS form “Schedule F – Profit or Loss from Farming” for the past
three tax years.
3. Farm conservation plan obtained from the Land Conservation Division of the
Dane County Land & Water Resources Department.
4. Site plan showing the farm ownership boundaries and the location of the
proposed new homesite and driveway access.
[Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11; Am. 15-044; Eff. 12-24-15]
(b) Pre-application Conference. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning
Administrator may schedule a pre-application conference with the applicant or the applicant's
representative and those Village or Town officers or employees deemed appropriate by the
Administrator. The purpose of the conference is to discuss the application informally and to
provide the applicant with the results of the staff review of the proposal and to identify those
ways in which the proposed use complies or fails to comply with the intent of the Zoning Code
and the standards for approval. The views expressed by the staff shall be for informational
purposes only and designed to afford the applicant the opportunity to revise the application prior
to its formal submission to address staff concerns.
(c) Review by Planning and Zoning Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall forward
the complete application, along with any changes made by the applicant pursuant to par. (b) to
the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall schedule a public hearing on the application
before the Commission. Public notice of the hearing shall be provided by publication of a Class
1 notice pursuant to Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. The date of the hearing shall be between fourteen (14)
and forty-five (45) days after the final complete application is filed.
15-182
(d) Commission Action. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider all
comments made at the public hearing and any recommendations made by Village staff or
consultants. The Commission, by resolution, shall within sixty (60) days of the public hearing,
approve, approve with conditions or reject the application, except where the applicant provides
an extension in writing. The Commission shall make findings as to whether or not the proposed
use will satisfy each of the standards for approval set forth in par. (f) and such findings shall be
recorded in the minutes of the Commission.
(e) Appeal to the Village Board. An appeal of a decision under par. (d) may be taken to
the Village Board by any person, firm or corporation; any officer, department, board,
commission or agency of the Village or, in the case of lands within the ETZ Area, the town in
which the affected land is located, who is aggrieved by the decision. Such appeal shall be made
in writing to the Zoning Administrator within ten (10) days after the date of the Planning and
Zoning Commission’s decision. In the case of an appeal:
1. The Zoning Administrator and Building Inspector shall issue no permits to enable
commencement or continuation of building and other activities authorized by the
conditional use permit, and shall issue a “stop work” order for any such activities
already commenced.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall immediately notify the applicant and property
owner of the appeal in writing, and shall schedule the appeal for Village Board
consideration.
3. The Village Board shall, by resolution, make a final decision to grant, with or
without conditions, or to deny each application for a conditional use permit after
receiving and reviewing the Commission’s findings and making its own findings
as to whether or not the proposed use will satisfy the standards for approval set
forth in par. (f), and shall have all of the powers of the Commission under par. (g)
and sub. (6). The Village Board’s determination shall be final and subject to
appeal to the circuit court under any procedure authorized by statute.
(f) Standards for Approval. No conditional use permit shall be granted unless the
Planning and Zoning Commission finds that the use authorized thereby, as limited by any
enforceable conditions:
1. Will be consistent with the purposes and intent of the zoning code, and will not
adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare;
2. Will not be hazardous, harmful or otherwise adverse to the environment or to the
reasonable use and value of nearby properties or the community in general;
3. Will be compatible with the existing uses of, and structures upon, surrounding
properties, and will not impede the normal and orderly development and
improvement of other properties for uses permitted in the district;
4. Will be designed and operated in a manner which minimizes adverse effects,
including visual impacts, on surrounding properties and the community as a
whole;
15-183
5. Provides adequate means of ingress and egress so as to minimize traffic
congestion in the public streets and will not cause any significant traffic problems;
6. Has, or makes provision for, adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other
necessary site improvements;
7. Will be consistent with the applicable Comprehensive Plan and any adopted
Detailed Neighborhood Plan for the area in which it is located;
8. Conforms to all other applicable requirements for the zoning district in which it is
located, and all applicable standards in §§15.11 and 15.12; and
9. If within the A-1 Ex or A-4 district:
i. The use and its location in the district are consistent with the purpose of the
district.
ii. The use and its location in district are reasonable and appropriate, considering
alternative locations, or are specifically approved under state or federal law.
iii. The use is reasonably designed to minimize the conversion of land, at and
around the site of the use, from agricultural use or open space use.
iv. The use does not substantially impair or limit the current or future agricultural use
of surrounding parcels of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to
agricultural use.
v. Construction damage to land remaining in agricultural use is minimized and
repaired, to the extent feasible. [am. 15-044; eff. 12-24-15]
(g) Conditions on Approval. In granting any conditional use permit, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance and operation of the proposed use as it determines to be
reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to assure continued
compliance with each of the standards set forth in par. (f). The Commission may require such
written agreements, deed restrictions, easements or other documents as it deems necessary to
assure that any conditions imposed will be satisfied. The conditions and restrictions imposed
may include, without limitation, specifications for any or all of the following:
1. Landscaping;
2. Type of construction;
3. Construction schedules and completion dates;
4. Sureties;
5. Lighting;
6. Fencing;
7. Operational controls and restrictions;
8. Hours of operation;
9. Traffic circulation and access restrictions;
10. Setback and yard requirements;
11. Sewage and water supply systems;
12. Screening of exterior structures or operations;
15-184
13. Off-street parking;
14. Limits on the timeframe that the conditional use permit will remain valid.
(h) Issuance of Permit. Upon approval of a conditional use permit application by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the provision of such guarantees established as
conditions of such approval, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a conditional use permit
setting forth the authorized use and all restrictions and conditions placed thereon, subject to the
appeal provisions of subsection (e). Copies of all such permits shall be maintained in the files of
the Zoning Administrator and the Building Inspector, and may be recorded by the Village against
the property and placed on the official zoning map. In the event the Village Board rejects or
modifies a conditional use permit on appeal, the conditional use permit shall be null and void.
(i) Extraterritorial Provisions. If all of the property for which an application is submitted
under this section is located in the ETZ Area, the appropriate Joint Committee shall act in lieu of
the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall have all of the powers and duties of the
Commission under this section. Any appeal of the Joint Committee’s action shall proceed
according to subsection (e). The appropriate Joint Committee shall act jointly with the Planning
and Zoning Commission in reviewing and making recommendations on any application partially
within the ETZ Area and shall hold all required hearings jointly.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(4) MINERAL EXTRACTION OPERATION PERMITS.
(a) Applicability. The subsection shall apply to all mineral extraction operations and
applications for conditional use permits authorizing such operations.
(b) Application Requirements. An application for a conditional use permit to conduct a
mineral extraction operation shall include a written description of the proposed operation
including a time schedule of development and termination, a site plan and a topographic
reclamation plan.
(c) Setbacks. Excavations below the grade of an abutting public street or highway shall
be set back from the street or highway a distance at least equal to the required building setback
distance provided in the district regulations.
(d) Soil Reclamation. Topsoil from the area of operation shall be saved and stored on
site for reclamation of the area. Proposed storage areas shall be shown on the site plan.
(e) Site Restoration. Restoration of the area of operations is required as follows:
1. Final slopes shall not be graded more than 3:1 except in a quarry operation.
2. The area shall be covered with topsoil and seeded to prevent erosion.
3. The area shall be cleared of all debris and left in a workmanlike condition subject
to the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
(f) Nonconforming Operations. Mineral extraction operations which existed prior to 1969
and were registered with, and approved by, the Dane County Zoning Administrator shall be
considered nonconforming uses in accordance with sec. 15.17.
15-185
(5) SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LARGE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS. In addition
to the requirements of sub. (3), an application for a conditional use permit for approval of a retail
or commercial service building in excess of 20,000 ft2 gross floor area shall include a written
Compatibility Report containing all of the information required in pars. (a) through (f).
(a) A description of how the proposed development is compatible with adopted Village
Plans, including the Comprehensive Plan, Detailed Neighborhood Plans, and other plans
officially adopted by the Village;
(b) A completed Development Questionnaire form prepared and approved by the
Zoning Administrator providing such information concerning the details of the proposed
development as the Zoning Administrator determines necessary or appropriate to allow for full
evaluation of the size, scope, nature and details of the proposed development;
(c) A Community Impact Analysis which shall include the following elements:
1. Identification and assessment of the impacts of proposed project, including
positive, negative, and indirect impacts.
2. Proposed measures to mitigate adverse impacts and/or maximize positive
impacts including provision of infrastructure or public services improvements
sufficient to support the project. Any adverse impacts that cannot be mitigated
shall be identified.
3. An Economic Impact Analysis including the following information:
i. A description of the types of jobs to be created and their wage ranges;
ii. An estimate of the number of full-time (40 hrs/wk) and part time (less than
40 hrs/wk) jobs to be created;
iii. An estimate of the amount of local labor to be used in the construction of
the project and in employment positions created by the project. Local
labor shall be estimated both in terms of Village and county residents or
businesses;
iv. An evaluation of the market and financial feasibility of the project,
including a trade area analysis indicating the market proposed for the
project and the area from which patrons will be attracted, and any plans
for phased construction. The evaluation shall include any further market
studies prepared for the project by the applicant;
v. An analysis of whether the proposed project will result in more than one
acre of commercial land for every 150 residents of the Village;
vi. An evaluation of the impact of the proposed project on commercial
vacancy rates in the Village of DeForest and nearby sites;
vii. An estimate of the extent to which the proposed project will reduce the
diversity of the Village’s economic base by eliminating smaller
businesses;
15-186
viii. An evaluation of the projected costs and benefits to the community
resulting from the project including:
(a) projected costs arising from increased demand for, and required
improvements to, public services and infrastructure, including an
explanation of the level of services required;
(b) the value of improvements to public services and infrastructure to be
provided by the project;
(c) the projected tax revenues to the Village of DeForest to be generated
by the project;
(d) the projected impact of the project on land values (both residential
and commercial) and the potential resultant loss or increase in tax
revenues to the Village of DeForest;
(e) a short-term and long term projection of increased revenues to the
Village of DeForest, and costs resulting from the proposed project;
(f) A comparison between the amount of revenue generated by the
proposed project that will be retained and redirected back into the
economy of the Village of DeForest trade area and that which is so
retained and redirected by other chain stores and locally-owned,
independent retailers in the Village of DeForest trade area; and
(g) An estimate of the extent to which the proposed project would
preclude higher value development on the site.
ix. The projected lifespan of the proposed buildings;
x. A copy of all written policies maintained by the proposed users of the
site on corporate giving and volunteer participation in the community.
(d) For development totaling over 40,000 square feet of gross floor area, a completed
Transportation and Traffic Impact Analysis in a format consistent with the requirements of the
State of Wisconsin WisDOT District 1;
(e) For developments which include more than 40,000 square feet of gross floor area, an
escrow fund in an amount determined by the Zoning Administrator to be sufficient to reimburse
the Village for its costs in hiring a consultant of its choice with appropriate experience to
complete and present an Economic and Fiscal Impact Analysis.
(f) Unless the entire project is included in an adopted Detailed Neighborhood Plan, a
conditional use application which includes development exceeding 80,000 square feet in total
gross floor area of all combined buildings for retail or commercial service uses within the
development shall be accompanied by a Detailed Neighborhood Plan for all areas within one
thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the subject property, as measured from the outer
perimeter of the subject property or group of properties proposed for development, and other
nearby lands as determined by the Plan Commission and Village Board to be part of the
neighborhood. The Detailed Neighborhood Plan shall clearly demonstrate the provision of land
15-187
use, multi-modal transportation, utility, stormwater management and community character
components, and patterns that clearly forward the objectives of the Village’s Comprehensive
Plan, as determined by the Plan Commission and Village Board. The Detailed Neighborhood
Plan shall be approved by the Village Board as a precondition to approval of the conditional use
permit. The Detailed Neighborhood Plan shall contain the following specific elements at a scale
of not less than 1 inch equals 400 feet:
1. Land use with specific zoning districts and/or land uses;
2. Transitional treatments such as berms and/or landscaping between areas with
differing land uses or character;
3. A complete public and private road network;
4. A pedestrian and bicycle network;
5. Transit routes and stops, including possible park-and-ride locations, where
applicable;
6. A conceptual stormwater management network;
7. Public facility sites including parks, schools, conservation areas, public safety
facilities and public utility facilities;
8. Recommendations for community character themes including building materials,
landscaping, streetscaping and signage.
(g) Use Restrictions Prohibited. Where any building requiring a conditional use permit
under this subsection is proposed as a replacement location for a business already located
within the Village, the permit shall be conditioned upon an agreement by the applicant and the
proposed occupant of the building that it will not impose any restriction on the type of reuse
which may be made of the previously occupied building through conditions of sale or lease.
(6) LIMITED CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS. In any case where requested by the
applicant, or in lieu of denial of an application where the Planning and Zoning Commission finds
that the standards set forth in par. (f) will be satisfied during a limited period of time, the
Commission may grant a limited conditional use permit. The Commission shall specify in the
resolution granting the permit a date, or objectively determinable event, upon which the permit
will expire and set forth the reasons for the limitation.
(7) TEMPORARY USE PERMITS. Any use allowed in the applicable zoning district
(whether as a permitted or conditional use) may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator
without a requirement for a conditional use permit for periods of not more than ninety (90) days
in any calendar year on any zoning lot as provided in this section. Such authorization shall be in
the form of a temporary use permit issued by the Zoning Administrator setting forth the allowed
use, the dates during which the use is permitted, and any conditions or restrictions determined
necessary by the Zoning Administrator to meet the standards in subsection (3)(f) and other
requirements of this chapter. Appeals from decisions of the Zoning Administrator shall be made
to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with §15.03 and the rules of the Board of Zoning
Appeals. A temporary use permit may be issued only upon an application in compliance with
sub. (3)(a) and upon a finding by the Zoning Administrator that:
15-188
(a) The proposed used will, for the period allowed, satisfy all of the standards of sub.
(3)(f);
(b) The use proposed has not generated objections within the previous two years and is
not likely to generate significant public comment, such that a public hearing appears necessary;
(c) No member of the Planning and Zoning Commission or Village Board has objected to
the issuance of temporary use permits for the same or a similar use within the previous two
years; and
(d) If the subject property is located in the ETZ Area, no member of the Joint Committee
or the Town Board of the town in which the land is located has objected to the issuance of
temporary use permits for the same or similar use within the last two years. A decision by the
Zoning Administrator to refuse a request for a temporary use permit shall not be deemed a final
decision for purposes of appeal, but the application shall, at the request of the applicant, be
treated as an application for a regular or limited conditional use permit and be processed
according to the procedure in sub. (3).
[Am. 08-14; Eff. 5-16-08; Am. 11-10; Eff. 4-16-11; Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(9) TEMPORARY CAMPGROUND ASSOCIATED WITH SPECIAL EVENT.
(a) Applicability. This subsection shall apply to all temporary accommodations to tourists
and guests during special events open to the public in tent, recreational vehicle (RV), or trailer
camper accommodations and to applications for conditional use permits authorizing such
accommodations in conjunction with special events.
(b) Permitted Zoning Districts. Temporary camping accommodations as described in
par. (a) may be allowed by conditional use permit in certain zoning districts, per Tables 15.10A,
15.11A, 15.12A, and within planned unit development zoning districts if approved by the Village
Board. Within residential zoning districts, such uses may be allowed only for civic, cultural,
educational, recreational, or religious entities and only on lots where the pre-existing principal
use is an approved civic, cultural, educational, or religious institution.
(c) Maximum Number and Duration: Uses approved under par. (b) shall not continue for
more than a ten (10) day period for any approved special event and each lot (or set of
contiguous lots under unified ownership) shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) events per
calendar year.
(d) Application Requirements. In addition to the requirements of sub. (3), an application
for a conditional use permit shall include the following information:
1. Name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the owner(s), applicant(s) and
location of the site.
2. Details and description of the event, including precise dates, times, location, and
estimated number of attendees.
3. Description of provisions for potable water supplies/water stations, sanitary
bathroom facilities, and waste disposal structures. No direct discharge of any
wastewater shall be permitted on site.
15-189
4. Site plan, professionally drawn to a recognized scale, indicating and labeling:
i. All existing buildings, parking lots, driveways, and other applicable site
improvements.
ii. The proposed event area and parking and/or camping area, including the
number of parking /camping spaces and surface cover of the area.
Recreational vehicles used for camping will be permitted only on hard
surfaces and all vehicles shall be spaced to allow at least ten (10) foot wide
aisles for ingress and egress in all locations.
iii. Adequate space for ingress, travel, and egress for emergency and
recreational vehicles to a public street.
iv. Locations of other structures on property including tents, tables, or inflatable
structures.
v. Locations and dimensions of temporary signage.
vi. Detailed site information if there will be grading, toilet facilities, showers, or
other temporary or permanent site improvements made.
(e) Review Process. The review process shall be as provided in sub. (3). In addition,
prior to Planning and Zoning Commission action, the Village Public Safety Committee shall
provide a recommendation on the proposal if located within the DeForest Area Fire and EMS
District.
[Am. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
15.17 NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS.
[Repealed & Recr. 13-021, Eff. 10-10-13]
(1) PURPOSE. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of the various
zoning districts by this chapter that buildings, structures and uses which do not conform to the
district regulations be eliminated or made to conform to the regulations as soon as reasonable
fairness to the property owner or occupant permits. The purpose of this section is to provide for
the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses and to specify the circumstances
and conditions under which nonconforming buildings, structures and uses may be continued in
accordance with §§62.23(7)(h) and 62.23(7a), Stats. The provisions of this section are intended
only to excuse, on the terms and conditions set forth herein, noncompliance with the regulations
of this chapter, and nothing herein shall be construed to waive or modify any other statute,
regulation or ordinance governing the use of land or the occupancy of any building.
(2) CONTINUATION OF A NONCONFORMING USE. Any nonconforming use lawfully
established prior to the date it becomes prohibited by this Chapter may be continued without
expansion and in a manner of operation existing upon such date, except as specified for
nonconforming uses in this section.
15-190
(3) MODIFICATION OF A NONCONFORMING USE. A nonconforming use shall not be
expanded, enlarged, extended, or reconstructed unless the use qualifies under subsection (5).
(4) DISCONTINUANCE OF A NONCONFORMING USE. When any nonconforming use
of any structure or land is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, or is
changed into different use, any future use of said structure or land shall be in complete
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(5) MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF A NONCONFORMING USE. The ordinary
maintenance and repair of a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary repairs and
incidental alterations that do not exacerbate the adverse impacts of the nonconforming use in
relation to the intent and purpose of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
whenever a nonconforming use is damaged to the extent of more than 50 percent of the thencurrent
equalized assessed value of the use and associated structure, such use shall not be
restored except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Notwithstanding the previous sentence, the structural repairs or alterations in a conforming
structure containing a nonconforming use shall not during its lifetime exceed 50 percent of the
equalized assessed value of said structure at the time of the first known structural repair or
alteration, unless the use within said structure is permanently changed to a conforming use.
(6) CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING STRUCURE. Any structure lawfully
established may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation existing upon such date,
except as provided for nonconforming structures in this section.
(7) EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. Any nonconforming structure
may be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, provided that said
extension, enlargement, reconstruction, movement or alteration does not create any new
violation of any setback or building requirements of the zoning district, nor increase the degree
of the existing nonconformity except as:
(a) permitted under subsection (8),
(b) required by law or governmental order,
(c) required to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or
(d) in accordance with a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(8) DAMAGED OR DESTROYED NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A damaged or
destroyed nonconforming structure may be restored to the size, location, and use that it had
immediately before the damage or destruction occurred, without any limits on the costs of the
repair, reconstruction, or improvement, if all of the following apply:
(a) The nonconforming structure was damaged or destroyed on or after March 2, 2006.
(b) The damage or destruction was caused by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice,
snow, mold, or infestation.
(9) UNSAFE STRUCTURES. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Zoning
Administrator from initiating remedial or enforcement actions when a lawful nonconforming
structure is declared unsafe or presents a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare.
15-191
(10) FUTURE MODIFICATION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES. When any
lawful nonconforming structure in any district is modified so as to be in conformance with the
provisions of this Chapter, any future modification of said structure shall be in conformance with
the provisions of this Chapter.
(11) ORDINARY MAINTENANCE OF A NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES. Ordinary
maintenance, repairs (including repairs reasonably necessary to prevent the deterioration of a
structure), and remodeling of a nonconforming structure are permitted. Ordinary maintenance,
repairs, and remodeling include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling, the addition
of acoustical ceilings, the installation of heating, electricity, plumbing (including fixtures),
insulation, and the replacement of doors, windows, and other non-structural components.
(12) TIMING OF BUILDING PERMIT. Any structure for which a building permit has been
lawfully granted prior to an amendment to this Chapter causing the structure or use to become
nonconforming, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans, provided
construction is started within 365 calendar days after issuance of the permit, and construction is
completed within the term of the permit. If all such conditions are met, the construction or
alteration within the scope of the permit shall not be deemed a change in the use or an
expansion of the nonconformity for purposes of this section.
(13) NONCONFORMING RECORDED LOTS. A lot of record lawfully created and not
designated as an unbuildable outlot, but that does not meet one or more the minimum lot
dimensional requirements for the zoning district may be utilized for a new permitted-by-right use
in that district, provided the measurements of such lot area, dimensions, and setbacks are equal
to or greater than 75 percent of the minimum requirements of the district. Said lot shall not be
more intensively developed unless combined with one or more abutting lots (or portions thereof)
so as to create a lot that meets the requirements of this Chapter.
16-1
CHAPTER 16
PARKS AND RECREATION
SUBCHAPTER I – PARKS AND RECREATION
16.01 Park Regulations ........................................................................................ 16-1
16.02 Use of Parks; Permits ................................................................................ 16-5
16.022 Use of Village Recreational Equipment and Materials ............................. 16-9
16.025 Dog Parks ................................................................................................. 16-10
16.03 [Repealed 14-011, Eff. 1-17-14] ............................................................................... 16-11
16.04 Penalty ...................................................................................................... 16-12
SUBCHAPTER II – URBAN FORESTRY
[Cr. 05-38, Eff. 12-22-05]
16.20 Purpose and Intent ................................................................................... 16-12
16.21 Definitions................................................................................................. 16-12
16.22 Tree Advisory Board ................................................................................ 16-12
16.23 Village Forester ........................................................................................ 16-14
16.24 Standards and Specifications ................................................................. 16-15
16.25 Public Nuisances, Declaration and Abatement ..................................... 16-15
16.26 Planting, Maintenance and Removal of Public Trees and Shrubs ........ 16-16
16.27 Tree Protection During Construction ...................................................... 16-18
16.28 Private Tree Maintenance ........................................................................ 16-18
16.29 Penalty ...................................................................................................... 16-18
16.30 Appeals ..................................................................................................... 16-19
SUBCHAPTER I – PARKS AND RECREATION
16.01 PARK REGULATIONS.
(1) PURPOSE AND INTENT. The regulations set forth in this chapter are intended
to protect and preserve the parks, parkways, recreational facilities and conservancy areas
within the Village from injury, damage or desecration and to provide for the maintenance of
certain park areas designated by the Village Board in a natural state.
(2) DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter,
(a) “Community Gardens” shall include all grounds and structures owned by the
Village that the Village makes available for the noncommercial raising of vegetables, fruits,
flowers and herbs for personal consumption or use.
[Cr. 13-09, Eff. 4-3-13]
(b) “Motorized Vehicle” shall mean any motor vehicle as defined by
§340.01(35), Wis. Stats., licensed for highway use, including neighborhood electric vehicles
as defined by §3.115 of this Code, but excluding snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles.
[Cr. 11-01, Eff. 2-3-11].
(c) “Motorized Equipment” means any vehicle, as defined by §340.01(74), Wis.
Stats. other than a motor vehicle, and any other machinery or equipment powered by an
internal combustion engine or electric motor designed to transport persons or movable
property, other than an electric wheelchair used by a person with a disability. The term
16-2
includes, but is not limited to, all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, construction equipment,
motorized bicycles or skateboards, electric personal assistive mobility devices, riding lawn
mowers, garden tractors and motorized farm equipment.
[Cr. 11-01, Eff. 2-3-11].
(d) "Parks" shall include all grounds, structures and water courses which are or
may be located within any area dedicated to public use as a park, parkway, recreational
facility or conservancy district in the Village.
[Cr. 93-39, Eff. 10-8-93]
(e) "Prairie Area" shall mean any park or detention basin so designated by
resolution of the Village Board to be established, preserved or maintained in a natural
prairie state.
[Cr. 93-39, Eff. 10-8-93]
(3) SPECIFIC REGULATIONS.
(a) Park Hours.
1. Public parks within the Village shall be open to the public beginning at 7:00
a.m. daily and shall be closed, and all activities therein shall be terminated,
at 10:00 p.m. daily. No person shall enter or remain in any park at any time
other than as provided in this section, unless specific written authority is first
obtained from the Director of Public Services.
2. The Village Board may extend the hours of operation for any park for a
specified event. Any such extension shall specify the date and description of
the event, the alternative opening or closing time approved and any
restrictions imposed by the Village Board as a condition of the extension.
[Am. 02-41, Eff. 11-21-02]
(b) Smoking. No person shall smoke or hold a lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe in any
structure within any park, or in any other area in any park where notices prohibiting
smoking are posted pursuant to any order of the Village Board.
[Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
(c) Littering Prohibited. No person shall litter, dump or deposit any rubbish, refuse,
earth or other material in any park, except that any person lawfully using Community
Gardens may deposit weeds and plant materials gathered from the Community Gardens in
designated compost areas, and may apply compost, mulch and other customary
horticultural substances and materials to the person’s assigned Community Garden plot.
[Am. 13-09, Eff. 4-3-13]
(d) Sound Devices. No person shall operate or play any amplifying system unless
specific written authority is first obtained from the Director of Public Services.
[Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
(e) [Repealed 13-11, Eff. 06-28-13]
(f) Bill Posting. No person shall post, paste, fasten, paint or attach any placard, bill,
notice, sign or advertising matter upon any structure, tree or other natural object in any
park, except park regulations and other signs authorized by the Village Board.
[Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
16-3
(g) Throwing Stones and Missiles Prohibited. No person shall kill, injure or disturb
or attempt to injure or disturb waterfowl, birds or animals, wild or domestic, within any park.
No person shall climb any tree or remove flowers or fruit, wild or cultivated, or break, cut
down, trample upon, remove or in any manner injure, deface, write upon or ill use any tree,
shrub, flower, flower bed, turf, soil, sand, fountain, ornament, building, structure, apparatus,
bench, table, official notice, sign or other property within any park. This paragraph shall not
apply to persons acting within the scope of specific permission from the Village Board in
connection with a program of urban wildlife control approved by the Board.
[Am. 06-01, Eff. 2-7-06]
(h) Firearms, Fireworks, Bows and Arrows. No person shall shoot, fire or
discharge any gun or pistol, nor possess, shoot, fire or discharge any rocket, torpedo,
missile, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot or any fireworks or explosive device of any
description, within or into any park unless specific written authority is first obtained from
the Village Board. The word “gun” shall include firearms, gas-operated guns, pellet guns
or any other device which will propel projectiles.
[Am. 01-49, Eff. 11-8-01; Am. 06-01, Eff. 2-7-06; Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
(i) Golf, Hardball. No person shall shoot or strike a golf ball or throw or bat a
hardball in any park, except that hardball may be played in areas designated for this
purpose.
(j) Removal of Park Equipment Prohibited. No person shall remove benches,
seats, tables or other park equipment from any park.
(k) Camping. No camping shall be permitted in any park, except when prior
approval of the Village Board is first obtained.
[Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
(l) Trapping. No person shall trap in any park unless specific written authority is
first obtained from the Village Board.
[Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
(m) Making of Fires. Except as provided in sec. 5.23 of this Code, no person shall
start, tend or maintain a fire except in personal grills or designated fireplaces. Personal
grills shall be used only in designated picnic areas. The use of personal grills is permitted
provided lawns and vegetation are not endangered. Unburned fuel and ashes shall be
disposed of in such a manner as to prevent fire or damage to any park property.
[Am. 93-39, Eff. 10-8-93; Am. 14-01, Eff. 1-17-14]
(n) Horse and Carriages. No person shall ride a horse or drive a horse-driven
vehicle in any park, except on roads or designated bridle paths, except when approval of
the Village Board is first obtained. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or
drive a horse-drawn vehicle in a careless, negligent or reckless manner which may
endanger the safety and well-being of others.
[Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
(o) Bicycles. All ordinances of the Village relating to the use of bicycles shall be
applicable in all parks. Bicycles shall be parked only in areas so designated.
16-4
(p) Interference With Permittee Prohibited. No person shall in any manner, harass,
disturb or interfere with persons holding written permits granted by the Village Board for the
use of parks, shelter areas or park facilities.
[Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
(q) Protection of Park Property. No person shall kill, injure or disturb or attempt to
injure or disturb waterfowl, birds or animals, wild or domestic, within any park. No person
shall climb any tree or remove flowers or fruit, wild or cultivated, or break, cut down,
trample upon, remove or in any manner injure, deface, write upon or ill use any tree, shrub,
flower, flower bed, turf, soil, sand, fountain, ornament, building, structure, apparatus,
bench, table, official notice, sign or other property within any park.
(r) Use of Water Areas. No person shall swim, wade, fish, ice skate or operate or
propel a boat or canoe in any lagoon or watercourse within any park except in areas so
designated and at times posted.
(s) Drinking in Parks Regulated. See sec. 10.03(6)(d) of this Code.
(t) Glass Beverage Bottles in Parks Prohibited. No person shall possess any glass
beverage bottle within the limits of the parks of the Village.
(u) Persons Walking Animals Required to Remove Fecal Matter. The owner or
person in charge of any animal shall not permit solid fecal matter of said animal to be
deposited in any park unless such matter is immediately removed therefrom by said owner
or person in charge.
[Cr. 95-3, Eff. 2-6-95]
(4) MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT. (a) General. Except for emergency
vehicles, no person shall operate an unlicensed or licensed motorized vehicle or motorized
equipment within a Village park outside of areas specifically designated as parking areas or
areas where the operation of such vehicles or equipment is specifically authorized.
Motorized vehicles and motorized equipment are restricted to the roads, drives and parking
areas. No motorized vehicles or motorized equipment of any nature may be used on grassy
areas except vehicles which have authorization for shows, rides or exhibits. This section
shall not apply to the use of motorized vehicles or motorized equipment for maintenance by
Village staff or by the holder of a permit granted under sec. 16.02 while maintaining a
reserved diamond.
[Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
(b) Authorized Equipment. Notwithstanding the provisions of par. (a), any person
assigned a Community Garden plot may use motorized hand-operated rotary tillers and
other hand-held gardening tools within the person’s assigned plot.
[Sub. (4) Cr. 11-01, Eff. 2-3-11; Am. 11-09, Eff. 3-17-11; Repl & recr. 11-15, Eff. 4-29-11; Am. 13-09, Eff. 4-3-13]
(5) ADMINISTRATIVE RULES.
(a) Adoption of rules. In addition to the general rules set forth in sub. (3), the
Director of Public Services or the Village Administrator may promulgate administrative rules
governing the use of parks and park facilities within the Village. Such rules shall be made
with the purposes of protecting the health, safety, comfort and welfare of the users of the
parks and facilities and others who may be affected by activities occurring in the parks, and
of minimizing adverse impacts to the parks, park facilities and surrounding properties.
16-5
Rules promulgated under this section shall take effect immediately upon posting of the
rules at the affected facility, and shall continue in effect until rescinded by the officer
adopting the rule or the Village Board.
[Am. 08-30, Eff. 10-9-08; Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
(b) Enforcement. The Director of Public Services, the Chief of Police or any law
enforcement officer designated by the Chief, may suspend any person from further use of
any park for violation of any rules adopted under par. (a). Such suspension shall remain in
effect for the duration thereof as determined by the Director, Chief or officer when the
suspension is imposed. The imposition of a suspension under this paragraph may be
appealed to the Administrative Review Appeals Board under the provisions of Chapter 17
of this Code. The pendency of an appeal shall not stay a suspension. The Director shall
refer any rule violations which also constitute violations of any ordinance of the Village to
the Police Department for citation and prosecution.
[Am. 08-30, Eff. 10-9-08; Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
(c) The Public Services Committee may establish a sub-committee with
membership as determined by the Committee, to consider and make recommendations to
the Committee on matters related to Community Gardens and to provide horticultural
advice and information to Community Garden users. Any such sub-committee shall be
comprised solely of volunteers and shall not be considered a standing committee of the
Village.
[Cr. 13-09, Eff. 4-3-13; Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15; Am. 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
16.02 USE OF PARKS; PERMITS.
(1) The municipality owned parks, park facilities and shelter areas in the Village are
primarily for the nonexclusive use of the residents of the Village. However, under proper
circumstances, exclusive use of the same may be permitted. This section is intended to
regulate exclusive use of municipally owned parks, park facilities and shelter areas in the
Village to the end that the general welfare of the Village is protected.
(2) A person or group, firm, organization, partnership or corporation may reserve the
use of a park, park facility or shelter area located in the Village by written application filed
with the Director of Public Services for a permit for exclusive use of the same. Director may
approve the exclusive use of plot in established Community Gardens by any person from
May 1 until the last Sunday in October of a given year on terms and conditions approved by
the Village Board.
[Am. 13-09, Eff. 4-3-13; Am. 15-02, Eff. 01-16-15]
(3) Applications, other than for use of Community Garden plots, shall be filed at
least 14 days prior to the date on which the exclusive use is requested and shall set forth
the following information regarding the proposed exclusive use:
[Am. 13-09, Eff 4-3-13; Am. 15-02, Eff. 01-16-15]
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(b) If the exclusive use is proposed for a group, firm, organization, partnership or
corporation, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the same,
and the responsible and authorized heads or partners of the same.
(c) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
responsible for the use of said park, area or facility.
16-6
(d) The date when the exclusive use is requested and the hours of the proposed
exclusive use.
(e) The anticipated number of persons to use said park, area or facility.
(f) Any additional information which the Director finds reasonably necessary to a
fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued.
[Am. 15-02, Eff. 01-16-15]
(4) Applications for the exclusive use of a park, park facility, shelter area may be
approved by the Director.
[Am. 95-3, Eff. 2-6-96; Am. 15-02, Eff. 01-16-15]
(5) The Director shall act as promptly on all applications for permits after consulting
with the applicant, if necessary.
[Am. 15-02, Eff. 01-16-15]
(6) The application shall be denied for any of the following reasons:
(a) If it is for a use which would involve a violation of Federal or state law or any
provision of this Code.
(b) If the granting of the permit would conflict with another permit already granted or
for which application is already pending.
(c) If the application does not contain the information required by sub. (3) above.
(7) The application may be denied for any of the following reasons:
(a) If the applicant is not a resident of the Village.
(b) If the exclusive use is proposed for a group, firm, organization, partnership or
corporation and the said group, firm, organization, partnership or corporation does not have
its headquarters, principal place of business or hold regular meetings in the Village.
(c) If it is for a use of a park, park facility or shelter area at a date and time when, in
addition to the proposed use, anticipated nonexclusive use by others of the park, park
facility or shelter area is expected and would be seriously adversely affected.
(d) If the policing of the exclusive use will require so large a number of persons as
to prevent adequate law enforcement to the park, park facility or shelter area involved or of
the rest of the Village.
(e) The exclusive use will reasonably create a substantial risk of injury to persons
or damage to property.
(f) The exclusive use is so poorly organized that participants are likely to engage in
aggressive or destructive activity.
(8) Prior to granting any permit, the Director may require the permittee to file
evidence of good and sufficient sureties, insurance in force or other evidence of adequate
16-7
financial responsibility, running to the Village and such other third parties as may be injured
or damaged, in an amount depending upon the likelihood of injury or damage as a direct
and proximate result of the exclusive use sufficient to indemnify the Village and such third
parties as may be injured or damaged thereby, caused by the permittee, its agents or
participants. Whether or not sureties are required, the permittee shall fully reimburse the
Village for any expenses it incurs to repair any damage (beyond normal wear) to the park
or park facilities, to clean the reserved area at the expiration of the permit, to replace any
keys or re-key any locks upon a failure of the permittee to return all keys to the Village and
any cost incurred in obtaining such reimbursement, including reasonable attorney fees.
[Am. 05-04, Eff. 1-20-05; Am. 15-02, Eff. 01-16-15]
(9) A permit is not required for exclusive use of a park, park facility or shelter area
for an event or gathering sponsored by the Village.
[Am. 11-01, Eff. 2-3-11]
(10) The Director or the Village Board may revoke a permit already issued if
deemed justified by an actual or potential emergency due to weather, fire, riot, other
catastrophe or likelihood of a breach of the peace or by major change in the conditions
forming the basis of the issuance of the permit.
[Am. 15-02, Eff. 01-16-15]
(11) Each permit shall be in a form prescribed by the Village Administrator and
shall designate the park, park facility or shelter area involved, date, hours of the exclusive
use, purpose of the exclusive use and the name of the person, group, firm, organization,
partnership or corporation to which the permit is issued.
(12) Permit Fees and Deposits.
(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this subsection, all applications for park
use permits shall be accompanied by a fee and key/cleanup deposit according to the
following schedule:
[Repealed and recr. 15-02, Eff. 01-16-15; Am. 15-03, Eff. 01-20-15; Am. 17-03, Eff. 1-18-17]
PARK FACILITY
RESERVATION & USE FEE
(per day except as indicated)
DEPOSIT
Resident Non-Resident Non-Profit Deposit
Firemans Large Shelter $50.00 $100.00 $25.00 $75.00
Small Shelter $35.00 $70.00 $17.50 $75.00
Log Cabin $50.00 $100.00 $25.00 $75.00
Ball Diamond w/o services $30.00 $30.00 $0.00 $75.00
Ball Diamond w/service $75.00 $75.00 $30.00 $75.00
Veterans Memorial Gazebo $35.00 $70.00 $17.50 $75.00
Sunnybrook Shelter $35.00 $70.00 $17.50 $75.00
Liberty Land Shelter $35.00 $70.00 $17.50 $75.00
Western Green Shelter $50.00 $100.00 $25.00 $75.00
Yahara Shelter $50.00 $100.00 $25.00 $75.00
Conservancy Commons Shelter $75.00 $150.00 $37.50 $75.00
Rivers Turn Shelter $35.00 $70.00 $17.50 $75.00
All Parks Community Garden Plot $25.00/season N/A N/A $50.00/season
16-8
(b) Permit Fees for Business Use. Notwithstanding par. (a), the fee for business
use of Village park structures or athletic fields shall by $115.00 per facility per day. As used
in this paragraph, “business use” shall mean the use of any park facilities in connection with
a tournament, training or instructional session, or other event for which a person or entity
operating for profit intends to charge a fee to the participants as a condition to their
participation in the activities for which the facilities are reserved. The sale of concessions
alone shall not be considered a business use if the purchase of such concessions is not
required as a condition of participation, and the price of the concessions is the only charge
made to the participants.
[17-03 Sub. (b) recreated, Eff. 1-18-17]
(c) Playing Field Services. The field reservation fees including services entitle the
permit holder to the use of field lighting and scoreboards, where available. Field service
also includes grooming, striping and other maintenance of diamonds on Mondays through
Fridays. Fields reserved for use on Saturdays will be groomed on Friday, provided that any
reserved use of the same diamond is completed prior to 1:00 p.m. on Friday. Additional
field maintenance services and service on Saturdays and Sundays shall be available at
additional charges as provided in sub. (13).
[Repealed and recr. 15-02, Eff. 01-16-15; 17-03 Sub. (b) renumbered sub. (c), Eff. 1-18-17]
(d) Deposits made pursuant to this subsection shall be returned to the applicant if
the facilities for which the permit was issued are surrendered in a clean and undamaged
condition upon expiration of the permit and all keys issued for access to the facilities are
returned to the Village on the next business day. In the event the permittee is liable to the
Village for any loss or damage as provided in sub. (8), the amount thereof may be retained
from the deposit and the balance, if any, returned to the permittee. Any deposit retained
shall be deemed partial satisfaction of the permittee's liability to the Village and neither the
retention of the deposit nor return thereof shall preclude the Village from recovering the
balance of the amount due under sub. (8).
[Am. 05-04, Eff. 1-20-05; 17-03 Sub. (c) renumbered sub. (d), Eff. 1-18-17]
(e) Non-Profit Fee Eligibility. Non-Profit fees shall be charged only to those
organizations registered as charitable entities pursuant to §501(c)3 of the Internal Revenue
Code. An applicant shall provide proof of such status at the time of application.
[Repealed & recr. 15-02, Eff. 01-16-15; 17-03 Sub. (d) renumbered sub. (e), Eff. 1-18-17]
(f) Fee Waivers. The following entities shall be exempt from all fees required under
this section. The Director of Public Services may exempt other organizations if he or she
determines that such organization provides volunteer services or other contributions of
significant value to parks and recreational programs:
[Repealed & recr. 15-02, Eff. 01-16-15; 17-03 Sub. (e) renumbered sub. (f), Eff. 1-18-17]
1. DeForest Area School District (for District-related functions);
2. DeForest Area Fire/EMS Departments;
3. DeForest Area Library;
4. DeForest Area Senior Center;
16-9
5. DeForest Area Chamber of Commerce (Independence Day Celebration &
Farmer’s Market);
6. Norski Nibbles;
7. Friends of the Yahara River Headwaters;
8. DeForest Veterans Memorial Foundation.
(g) Youth Leagues. The fee and deposit requirements under par. (a) shall not apply
to bona fide youth sports leagues or members thereof for routine practices, provided that
no field preparation or other services as described in par. (b) are provided. The Director of
Public Services may establish an annual or other fee to be charged to each such league or
team to defray the expense to the department of scheduling the various practice sessions
throughout the season and condition reservations for such use on payment of the fee.
[Cr. 15-02, Eff. 01-16-15; 17-03 sub. (f) renumbered (g), Eff. 1-18-17]
(13) FIELD MAINTENANCE.
(a) Playing Field Maintenance. The Parks, Recreation & Natural Resources
Department shall, to the extent practicable, make Village personnel available from time to
time during the term of the permit as requested by a permit holder at the time of issuance of
the permit for preparatory and maintenance work on ball diamonds or other park areas.
The Department shall charge a fee of $30.00 per hour for each individual worker for the
time so requested, which shall be payable at the time of issuance of the permit. The fee
shall be calculated based on one hour increments and any fraction of an hour shall be
calculated as a full hour. If maintenance services are requested for more than one interval
of time, the fee for each interval shall be separately calculated. Upon conclusion of the
permit period, the Director of Public Services shall determine the actual amount of time
spent at the request of the permit holder and if the total charges exceed the amount
previously paid, shall provide a report to the Village Finance Director, who shall invoice the
permit holder for the balance due. Any amount so invoiced shall be payable within 30 days
of the date of invoice.
[Cr. 11-01, Eff. 2-3-11; Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
(b) Supplies. In addition to all other fees required by this section, a permittee
reserving a baseball or softball diamond shall pay the Village for all diamond drying agents
determined necessary by the Parks Department staff, or requested by the permittee, and
used to improve playing conditions on the field during the reserved time.
[Cr. 05-04, Eff. 1-20-05; Renumbered from (12)(e) and am. 11-01, Eff. 2-3-11; Am. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
(c) Additional Services. The Parks, Recreation & Natural Resources department
shall, upon request of a permit holder or applicant under this section, relocate available
picnic tables to the area of the reserved facility for use by the applicant’s organization
during the reservation period if requested by the applicant at the time of application. The
department shall charge a fee of $25 for every two tables moved at the applicant’s request.
[Cr. 15-02, Eff. 1-16-15]
16.022 USE OF VILLAGE RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS.
[Cr. 14-20, Eff. 05-06-14; Am. 15-38, Eff. 10-20-15]
(1) GENERAL. The Parks, Recreation & Natural Resources Department may
make available to the general public, recreational equipment and educational materials
16-10
owned by the Village as provided in this section. The Department shall establish
reasonable rules governing the loaning of such equipment and materials, including the
length of time they may be retained, the care and use thereof, and other matters designed
to assure the preservation of the equipment and materials in good condition and to
reasonably maximize their availability to other residents.
[Cr. 14-20, Eff. 05-06-14; Am. 15-38, Eff. 10-20-15]
(2) AUTHORIZED EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS. The Department may loan
the following equipment to the general public at the rates provided herein. The Department
shall require a deposit in the amount provided herein for each set of equipment and
materials loaned, which shall be fully refundable if all equipment and materials are returned
without damage and otherwise in accordance with the rules of the Department. In the
event any of the equipment or materials is lost or damaged, the Department shall retain
from the deposit the amount necessary to repair or replace the lost or damaged items, and
refund the balance. The Department may adopt rules providing for the forfeiture of a
portion of the deposit in the event the equipment and materials are not returned when due,
with the sole purpose of encouraging compliance with adopted rules.
Equipment Rental Rate Deposit
Birdwatching equipment and
educational materials
$0.00/ 6-day $150.00
Bocce Balls $20.00/ 3-day $50.00
Bean Bag Toss Game $20.00/ 3-day $50.00
Snow Shoes $10/ 3-day $50.00
[Cr. 14-20, Eff. 05-06-14; Am. 15-38, Eff. 10-20-15]
16.025 DOG PARKS.
(1) Applicability. This section applies only to those parks designated by the Village
Board as “dog parks.”
(2) Dog Park Usage. Dogs are permitted to run unleashed in any designated dog
park within the Village, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Dogs must remain on a leash while outside the designated off-leash area of any
dog park.
(b) The owner or keeper of the dog must be present at all times while the dog is in
the dog park and in proximity to the dog to maintain visual supervision and voice contact;
(c) The dog must be under the voice control of the owner or keeper at all times;
(d) No owner or keeper of dogs shall have more than 3 dogs under his or her
supervision at any one time.
16-11
(e) The dog must have attached to its collar a valid permit tag issued under sub. (3)
or the person supervising the dog must have in his or her possession a valid daily pass
issued according to rules established by the Village Board.
(f) Aggressive dogs are prohibited from the dog parks and any dog exhibiting
aggressive behavior shall be immediately removed from the park.
(g) Dog parks shall be closed from sunset to sunrise each day.
(h) No animals other than dogs are permitted in the dog parks.
(i) No female dog shall be allowed in the dog parks when in heat.
(j) No food, glass containers or smoking are permitted in the dog parks.
(k) The dog must have a current dog license tag issued by the Village or another
governmental agency, or the person supervising the dog must have in his or her
possession written proof that the dog is currently vaccinated against rabies.
(L) Use of the dog parks shall be subject to administrative rules under §16.01(5).
[Am. 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
(3) Annual Permit Tags. Annual permit tags shall be issued by the Village Clerk
and shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year during which they are issued.
Permit tags shall be issued to Village residents without charge at the time of issuance or
renewal of each dog license under §9.07(3)(b).
(4) Permit Fees. Dog park permit tags or daily passes may be purchased for any
dog not licensed by the Village. The fee for an annual tag shall be $20 for the first dog and
$5 for each additional dog under the ownership or control of the same person, and such
tags shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year during which they are issued.
Daily passes shall be available for a fee of $3.00 for each dog.
[Am. 14-36, Eff. 12-16-14]
(5) Replacement Tags. A replacement permit tag shall be available for a fee of
$3.00 upon certification by the owner that a properly issued annual tag has been lost or
destroyed.
(6) Use of Permit Tags. No person shall permit a permit tag issued for one dog to
be attached to the collar of another dog, or obtain a replacement tag unless an original tag
for the same dog has been lost or destroyed. No person shall possess a permit tag unless
that person is the owner or keeper of the dog for which the tag was issued.
(7) Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to forfeitures
as provided in §20.04.
[Cr. 13-24, Eff. 9-27-13]
16.03 [Repealed 14-001, Eff. 1-17-14]
16-12
16.04 PENALTY. Any person who violates any provisions of this subchapter,
including a violation of any suspension issued under §16.01(4)(b), shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in sec. 20.04 of this Code.
[Renum. 93-39, Eff. 10-8-93; Am. 08-22, Eff. 6-19-08]
SUBCHAPTER II – URBAN FORESTRY
[Subch. II Repl. & Recr. 09-25, Eff. 2-1-10]
16.20 PURPOSE & INTENT. This subchapter establishes policies, regulations
and standards necessary to insure that the community will continue to realize the benefits
provided by its urban forest. Activities regulated include, but are not limited to, the planting,
transplanting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs within the Village in
order to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to
persons using the streets, sidewalks or other public property; to promote and enhance the
beauty and general welfare of the Village; to prevent damage to any public sewer, water
main, street, sidewalk or other public property; to protect trees and shrubs located in public
areas from undesirable and/or unsafe planting, removal, treatment and maintenance
practices; and to guard all trees and shrubs within the Village against the spread of disease
or pests. It is the intent of the Village Board that the provisions of this subchapter shall
apply to all the trees, shrubs, or plants growing in or upon any public right-of-way or other
public lands and to all trees within the boundaries of the Village.
16.21 DEFINITIONS. The following terms, as used in this subchapter, shall be
defined as follows:
(1) “Public Tree” shall mean any tree located within a public right-of-way or
upon any other lands owned or leased by the Village whether acquired by lease, purchase,
gift, dedication, condemnation or otherwise.
(2) “Shrub” shall be defined as provided in §15.06(2)(i) of this Code.
(3) “Tree” shall mean any woody plant usually with a single stem unbranched at
the base, reaching a height of fifteen (15) feet or more.
(4) “Tree Advisory Board” shall mean the board established under §16.22 and
charged with implementation of this subchapter.
16.22 TREE ADVISORY BOARD.
(1) CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP. The DeForest Tree Advisory Board is
hereby established to administer this subchapter. The Village Board shall serve as the Tree
Advisory Board.
[Am. 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
(2) POWERS AND DUTIES. The Tree Advisory Board shall:
(a) Provide for the care of all trees and shrubs planted in the rights-of-way of all
streets or highways, or in any park or other public areas of the Village;
16-13
(b) Prepare an urban forestry management plan, which shall include provisions for
the planting, maintenance and protection of all public trees, and make amendments thereto
as the Tree Advisory Board shall determine appropriate from time to time;
[Am. 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
(c) [Repealed 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
(d) Prepare and maintain an inventory of trees and shrubs located in public
areas within the Village and on private property along streets where street trees cannot be
planted due to site limiting factors;
(e) Adopt rules and regulations for the protection and maintenance of trees and
shrubs located on public property, and to protect the public health, safety and welfare
against dangers resulting from any trees and shrubs, including any regulations deemed
necessary to protect against injury or damage caused by the spread of disease, insects or
fungus;
(f) Identify, improve and promote desirable tree and shrub species within the
Village;
(g) Identify and maintain a list of tree and shrub species deemed to be
nuisances due to their propensity to harbor pests or transmit diseases which endanger
other trees or shrubs or the public health, safety and welfare. Any trees or shrubs so listed
by the board shall be deemed public nuisances within the meaning of §11.01 of this Code;
(h) Apply for county, state, federal and private grant funds for the Village’s
urban forestry program;
(i) [Repealed 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
(j) Provide a forum for, and encourage, public comments on Village tree and
shrub projects and the urban forestry program;
(k) Encourage public participation in urban forestry practices and projects within
the Village and the surrounding extraterritorial area;
(l) Conduct an Arbor Day observance each year;
(m) Inform and educate Village residents about the care of natural areas in their
neighborhoods;
(n) Undertake programs for education of the public with regard to the benefits of
urban trees, the proper selection, planting and care of urban trees and other matters
relating to urban forestry as it deems appropriate;
(o) Maintain the “Tree City USA” status of the Village;
(p) Provide plan review and technical assistance to the Planning & Zoning
Commission or any other board, committee or commission of the Village upon request, and
provide technical advice and assistance with respect to matters affecting the urban forest to
the public on such terms and conditions as determined by the board.
16-14
(3) LIMITATION ON REGULATIONS. Except as provided in sub. (4), and
notwithstanding the provisions of sub. (2), the regulations established by the Tree Advisory
Board shall not apply to the extent they conflict with the applicable provisions of §15.06.
The planting of any tree or shrub required or approved by the Planning & Zoning
Commission as part of a landscaping plan required under §15.06 shall not be prohibited by
the regulations adopted by the Tree Advisory Board.
(4) EMERGENCY AUTHORITY. In addition to the general powers of the Tree
Advisory Board, and without limitation by sub. (3), the Tree Advisory Board may issue
emergency orders to temporarily prohibit, limit, or regulate the planting, pruning, spraying,
fertilizing, cutting, removal or handling of any tree or shrub, any species of either, or any
brush, wood or other materials derived therefrom, within the Village if deemed necessary to
prevent threatened harm to any tree or shrub or to the public health, safety or welfare. Any
such order shall not become effective until posted in at least 3 public places within the
Village. The regulations shall be published as a Class I notice in the official Village
newspaper as soon as practicable after their adoption and upon any amendment. If the
order applies only to an individual property, the order shall not be enforced until a copy
thereof is served upon the owner of such property by personal delivery or certified mail.
Emergency regulations adopted pursuant to this subsection shall remain in effect for a
period determined by the Tree Advisory Board.
[Am. 2019-013, Eff. 7-26-19]
16.23 VILLAGE FORESTER. (1) APPOINTMENT. The Village Forester shall be
appointed by, and shall serve at the pleasure of, the Village Board.
(2) POWERS AND DUTIES. The Village Forester, subject to the direction of the
Tree Advisory Board and the Director of Public Services, shall have the following general
powers and duties:
(a) To direct, manage, supervise, and control the Village’s urban forestry
program including the planting, removal, trimming, maintenance, and protection of all trees
and shrubs in or upon all public areas of the Village.
(b) To enforce such rules, regulations, permit, and penalty procedures as
deemed necessary and may do so by the issuance of administrative orders and/or
municipal citations to effectuate the intent of this chapter.
(c) To inspect any trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, plants, logs or branches
existing or growing upon any property within the Village and to conduct surveys to
determine if any destructive or communicable disease or pest exists which may be
detrimental to or endanger the good health and wellbeing of trees or other plant life in
public areas. If entry upon private property is necessary to carry out such duties, the
Village Forester may, unless granted permission for such entry by the owner or occupant,
apply for and execute a special inspection warrant.
(d) To restrict or regulate tree maintenance activities within the Village limits to
reduce the spread of infectious diseases and/or insects.
(e) To provide information to the public concerning the urban forestry program
and tree and shrub care.
16-15
(f) To implement and direct a Village Urban Forestry Management Plan.
(2) AUTHORITY TO PRESERVE AND REMOVE PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS.
The Village Forester shall have the authority to plant, remove, maintain, and protect all
public trees and shrubs or cause such work to be done as may be necessary to preserve
the beauty of public areas, and to protect life and property.
16.24 STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS. (1) The following standards and
specifications, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein, and shall apply to all activities
regulated by this subchapter:
(a) Forestry Specifications for Construction on Public Areas to be adopted by
the Village Board with such amendments as may be approved by the Village Board from
time to time.
(b) ANSI A300-1995 “American National Standard for Tree Care Operations –
Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance – Standard Practices Part 6” or the most
recent version thereof.
(c) ANSI Z60.1-1996 “American Standard for Nursery Stock” or most recent
version thereof.
(d) The Village’s list of prohibited trees and shrubs approved by the Tree Board
under §16.22(2)(g).
[Am. 15-01, Eff. 1-20-15]
16.25 PUBLIC NUISANCES, DECLARATION AND ABATEMENT. (1) The
Village Forester shall have the right to declare as a public nuisance any tree or shrub or
part thereof, including firewood, existing anywhere in the Village which is:
(a) Interfering with the use of any public area,
(b) Infected with a plant disease,
(c) Infested with insects, or
(d) Endangering the life, health or safety of other trees/shrubs, persons or
property located in public areas.
(2) Village Forester shall maintain and make available to the public a list of
recommended and discouraged trees and shrubs along with the list of prohibited trees and
shrubs prepared under §16.22(2)(g).
[Am. 15-01, Eff. 1-20-15]
(3) Abatement of Public Nuisances.
(a) Public Areas. All trees, shrubs or parts thereof on public property shall be
subject to treatment and/or removal when it is determined by the Village Forester or his/her
designee that the trees or shrubs constitute an immediate or future health or safety hazard
or when they have become unsightly, infested, diseased or dead. The Village Forester or
16-16
his/her designee shall have the discretion to determine the most appropriate course of
action to prevent or treat such conditions.
(b) Private Premises. No person shall permit any nuisance tree or shrub as
determined under §16.22(2)(g) or Chapter 11 of this Code to remain on any premises
owned or controlled by such person within the Village. Upon determination by the Village
Forester that any nuisance tree or shrub exists on any private premises, he/she shall order
the owner or tenant having charge of such premises to treat, remove or otherwise control
such tree or shrub in such manner as will abate the nuisance. Within notice reasonable
time as specified in the order, the person shall cause treatment, removal or control of the
nuisance tree or shrub as directed in the order. If the owner or tenant, shall refuse or
neglect to comply with the terms of the order within the time specified, the Village Forester
shall cause the public nuisance to be abated and shall report the expense thereof to the
Village Clerk who shall enter it as a special charge against the property upon which the
nuisance is located. Interest as provided in §1.09 shall apply to all invoices issued under
this paragraph.
[Am. 15-04, Eff. 1-19-15]
16.26 PLANTING, MAINTENANCE, AND REMOVAL OF PUBLIC TREES AND
SHRUBS.
(1) URBAN FORESTRY MANAGEMENT PLAN. The Urban Forestry
Management Plan adopted by the Tree Advisory Board may contain any or all of the
following elements:
(a) Street Tree Planting Plan. A proposed plan for the orderly and systematic
planting of new or replacement trees in the terraces or boulevards along Village streets in a
manner which minimizes conflicts between trees and other public use of streets, facilitates
care of the trees, and enhances the aesthetics of the Village streetscapes. The plan shall
designate the appropriate species of tree(s) for each street segment and shall take into
consideration the mature size and requirements of the species, the width of the terrace or
boulevard, depth of building setbacks, location of street lights, safety signals and signs, the
location of overhead or underground public utility facilities, the location of existing desirable
trees and any other relevant site factors. The plan shall be consistent with the requirements
of §15.06 of this Code.
(b) Tree Maintenance. Plans for the maintenance of trees located in public
places to preserve the function or beauty of such public places in accordance with the
applicable Village maintenance standards. The plan shall provide plans for the trimming,
removal, pruning, spraying, fertilizing or other treatment of any tree on any public place
when necessary or appropriate to promote the general welfare, improve the Village’s
appearance or alleviate any unsafe condition.
(2) PROHIBITED ACTS. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(a) Remove, destroy, cut, deface or injure any tree existing on any public place
in the Village;
(b) Attach any rope, wire, chain, sign or any other device to any tree on any
public place in the Village except as approved by the Village Forester or the Village Board;
16-17
(c) Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil, or other injurious substance to
seep, drain, or be emptied upon or about any public tree or shrub, excluding routine winter
street maintenance by Village Departments;
(d) Participate in the erection, alteration or removal of any building or structure
in the Village without assuring that any tree upon any public place in the vicinity of such
operation is provided with a good and sufficient guard or protection so as to prevent injury,
damage or defacement to such tree arising out of, in connection with or by reason of, such
operation. The sufficiency of the guard or protection shall be determined by the Village
Forester;
(e) Interfere with the Tree Advisory Board or the Village Forester when carrying
out their responsibilities under this subchapter;
(f) Plant, move, remove, prune or otherwise maintain any public tree or shrub
except pursuant to a permit issued by the Village Forester pursuant to sub. (3);
(g) Plant or maintain any tree or shrub which is prohibited or which is declared a
nuisance pursuant to Chapter 11 of this Code or by regulation adopted by the Tree
Advisory Board;
(h) Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful rule, regulation or order issued by
the Village Forester or Tree Advisory Board under this subchapter.
(3) PERMIT REQUIRED. (a) The Village Forester may issue a permit to any
person allowing such person to plant, move, remove, prune or otherwise maintain any
public tree or shrub in accordance with this subsection.
(b) Application and Approval. Any person desiring to plant, move, remove,
prune or otherwise maintain any public tree or shrub shall apply in writing to the Village
Forester for a permit to do such work. Such application shall specify the location and
description of the proposed work. Such permit may be issued if the Village Forester
determines that the proposed work is necessary and in accord with the purposes of this
subchapter, taking into account the safety, health, and welfare of the public, location of
utilities, public sidewalks, driveways and street lights, general character and aesthetic
quality of the area in which the tree or shrub is located or proposed to be located, and the
soil conditions and physiological needs of the tree or shrub, and that the work will be
performed by a person capable of completing the work without unnecessary risk of injury or
damage.
(c) Permit Form, Expiration, Compliance, and Inspection. Permits shall be
issued by the Village Forester on the standard form for this purpose and shall include a
description of the work to be done and shall specify the genus, species, variety, size,
grade, and location of trees or shrubs to be planted, if any. Any work done under such
permit shall be performed in strict compliance with the terms thereof and with the
specifications and standards set forth in §16.24. The Village Forester shall inspect all work
performed pursuant to this section. Permits issued under this section shall specify an
expiration date not to exceed six (6) months after the date of issuance.
16-18
(d) Permit Exemptions. No permit shall be required to water or fertilize any
public tree or shrub or to take the necessary action to guard the public safety or clear the
public way in the event of a storm, accident or other emergency.
16.27 TREE PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION.
(1) REVIEW OF PERMIT APPLICATIONS. The Village Forester shall review all
applications for approval of construction in public rights-of-way and other public areas
under §7.02, and shall make recommendations to the Building Inspector as to conditions or
requirements necessary to adequately protect public trees and trees on property adjacent
to such public areas from damage due to the construction work. Such recommendation
shall include compliance with all applicable standards contained in §16.24 unless the
Forester shall determine that compliance therewith is unnecessary or impracticable under
the circumstances.
(2) VILLAGE CONTRACTS. All Village contracts for public construction shall
include or incorporate by reference the standards contained in §16.24 to the extent
applicable to the construction project, provided, however, that the Village Forester may
waive any standards the Forester determines to be unnecessary or impracticable under the
circumstances. The decision of the Forester under this subsection shall be reviewable by
the Village Administrator.
16.28 PRIVATE TREE MAINTENANCE.
(1) OAK PRUNING REGULATED. No person shall prune, cut or otherwise
injure any oak tree on public or private property between April 1 and October 1 in any year,
provided, however, that the Tree Advisory Board may authorize the issuance of permits to
allow such pruning as may be necessary to protect the public safety and shall specify any
conditions thereon deemed necessary to prevent the spread of Oak Wilt Disease.
(2) PRIVATE TREES. Property owners having trees or shrubs growing on their
property outside of public right-of-way shall maintain such trees and shrubs such that they
do not obstruct street lights, traffic signs or signals, street name signs or the free use of
public ways and do not interfere with overhead or underground utility facilities.
16.29 PENALTY.
(1) GENERAL. Any person who shall violate any provision of this subchapter
shall, in addition to any other remedy provided by this Code, be subject to a civil forfeiture
of:
(a) not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for a first violation;
(b) not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for second and subsequent
violations.
(2) CONTINUING VIOLATIONS. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. Except as provided in sub. (3), each violation shall be considered a first
violation unless 24 hours has elapsed following notice by the Village of the violation. Notice
includes, but is not limited to:
16-19
(a) Oral or written notification or warning provided to the violator;
(b) The posting of a written notice on the premises where the violation has
occurred;
(c) Service of a citation, summons or other document commencing any
enforcement action; or
(d) Any other method of communication which provides actual notice of the
violation to the violator.
(3) RECURRING VIOLATIONS. Notwithstanding the provisions of sub. (2), a
violation shall constitute a second or subsequent violation if committed by a person who,
within the previous 3 years, has been adjudicated guilty of a violation of this subchapter by
any court of competent jurisdiction.
(4) PRIVATE REMEDIES PRESERVED. Nothing in this subchapter shall be
construed in any way to restrict or limit the rights of private parties to pursue whatever
private legal remedies they may have as a result of any nuisance.
16.30 APPEALS. Any person aggrieved by the administration or interpretation of
any of the terms or provisions of this subchapter by any Village officer may, within ten (10)
days after notice of the action appealed from, appeal to the Tree Advisory Board which may
reverse, affirm or modify, in whole or part, the order, requirement, decision or determination
of such officer. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Tree Advisory Board may appeal
that decision to the Village Board. Any appeal to the Village Board shall be filed in writing
not later than 30 days after the date of the decision appealed or be barred.
17-1
CHAPTER 17
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCEDURE
17.01 Purpose ............................................................................................................ 17-1
17.02 Review of Initial Determination ....................................................................... 17-1
17.03 Determinations Reviewable ............................................................................ 17-1
17.04 Determinations Not Subject to Review .......................................................... 17-1
17.05 Administrative Review Appeals Board .......................................................... 17-2
17.06 Conflicting Code Provisions ........................................................................... 17-2
17.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to afford a constitutionally
sufficient, fair and orderly administrative procedure and review in connection with
determinations by all Village officers, employees, agents, agencies, committees, boards and
commissions which may involve constitutionally protected rights of specific persons which
are entitled to due process protection under the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
Chapter 68, Wis. Stats., relating to municipal administrative review procedure, shall be in full
force and effect in the Village, except as to those provisions otherwise provided in this
chapter.
17.02 REVIEW OF INITIAL DETERMINATION. Upon the filing of a written request
by any person aggrieved to review an initial determination filed pursuant to the provisions of
§68.08, Wis. Stats., all Village officers, employees, agents, agencies, committees, boards
and commissions receiving such a request shall conduct administrative reviews of their own
determinations in accordance with §68.09, Wis. Stats. In addition, all such written requests
shall be immediately referred to the Village Attorney.
17.03 DETERMINATIONS REVIEWABLE. The following determinations are
reviewable under this chapter:
(1) The grant or denial in whole or in part after application of an initial permit,
license, right, privilege or authority, except a fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor
license.
(2) The suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an existing permit, license right,
privilege or authority, except as provided in sec. 17.04 of this chapter.
(3) The denial of a grant of money or other thing of substantial value under a statute
or ordinance prescribing conditions of eligibility for such grant.
(4) The imposition of a penalty or sanction upon any person except a Village
employee or officer, other than by a court.
17.04 DETERMINATIONS NOT SUBJECT TO REVIEW. Except as provided in
sec. 17.03 of this chapter, the following determinations are not reviewable under this
chapter:
(1) A legislative enactment, which is an ordinance, resolution or adopted motion of
the Village Board.
17-2
(2) Any action subject to administrative or judicial review procedures under statutes
other than Ch. 68, Wis. Stats.
(3) The denial of a tort or contract claim for money, required to be filed with the
Village pursuant to statutory procedures for the filing of such claims.
(4) The suspension, removal or disciplining or nonrenewal of a contract of a Village
employee or officer.
(5) The grant, denial, suspension or revocation of a fermented malt beverage
license or intoxicating liquor license under §125.12(1), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats.
(6) Judgments and orders of a court.
(7) Determinations made during Village labor negotiations.
(8) Any action which is subject to administrative review procedures as otherwise
provided in this Code.
(9) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any action or determination
of a Village authority which does not involve the constitutionally protected right of a specific
person or persons to due process in connection with the action or determination.
17.05 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW APPEALS BOARD.
(1) MEMBERSHIP. See sec. 1.03(8)(a) of this Code.
(2) POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board shall have the duty and responsibility of
hearing appeals from initial determinations of administrative determinations or decisions of
Village officers, employees, agents, agencies, committees, boards and commissions filed in
accordance with §68.10, Wis. Stats. In conducting administrative review hearings and
making final decisions, the Board shall be governed by §§68.11 and 68.12, Wis. Stats.
17.06 CONFLICTING CODE PROVISIONS. The provisions of this chapter shall
not be deemed to repeal or supersede the provisions of any other section of this Code in
conflict herewith or providing other procedures for review of administrative determinations
within the Village except when otherwise specifically provided in said sections.
18-1
CHAPTER 18
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
[Repl. & Recr. 94-52, Eff. 12-5-94]
18.01 Definitions ........................................................................................................ 18-1
18.02 Grant of Franchise ........................................................................................... 18-3
18.03 Term ................................................................................................................. 18-3
18.04 Favored Nations .............................................................................................. 18-3
18.05 Conditions of Street Occupancy .................................................................... 18-3
18.06 Restoration of Public Ways ............................................................................ 18-3
18.07 Relocation at Request of Franchising Authority ........................................... 18-4
18.08 Relocation at Request of Third Party ............................................................. 18-4
18.09 Trimming of Trees & Shrubbery ..................................................................... 18-4
18.10 Safety Requirements ....................................................................................... 18-4
18.11 Aerial and Underground Construction ........................................................... 18-4
18.12 Required Extension of Service ....................................................................... 18-5
18.13 Subscribers Charges for Extension of Service ............................................. 18-5
18.14 Service to Public Buildings ............................................................................ 18-5
18.15 Franchise Fee .................................................................................................. 18-5
18.16 Rates & Charges .............................................................................................. 18-5
18.17 Renewal of Franchise ...................................................................................... 18-6
18.18 Conditions of Sale ........................................................................................... 18-6
18.19 Transfer of Franchise ...................................................................................... 18-6
18.20 Testing for Compliance .................................................................................. 18-6
18.21 Books & Records ............................................................................................ 18-7
18.22 Insurance Requirements ................................................................................. 18-7
18.23 Indemnification ................................................................................................ 18-7
18.24 Bonds & Other Surety ..................................................................................... 18-7
18.25 Notice of Violation ........................................................................................... 18-7
18.26 Grantee’s Right to Cure or Respond .............................................................. 18-7
18.27 Public Hearing ................................................................................................. 18-8
18.28 Enforcement .................................................................................................... 18-8
18.29 Acts of God ...................................................................................................... 18-8
18.30 Preemption ....................................................................................................... 18-8
18.31 Actions of Franchise Authority & Grantee ..................................................... 18-8
18.32 Notice ............................................................................................................... 18-9
18.01 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms,
phrases, words and abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense,
words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number.
(1) "Affiliate" means an entity which owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is
under common ownership with Grantee.
(2) "Basic Cable Service" is the tier of service regularly provided to subscribers that
includes, but is not limited to, the retransmission of local broadcast television signals.
18-2
(3) "Basic Revenues" means the monthly Cable Service revenues received by
Grantee from Subscribers for Basic Cable Service on an annual basis; provided, however,
that such phrase shall not include:
(a) any revenues received from national advertising carried on the Cable System;
(b) any taxes on Cable Service which are imposed directly or indirectly on any
Subscriber thereof by any governmental unit or agency, and which are collected by the
Grantee on behalf of such governmental unit or agency.
(4) "Cable Act" means the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992, as amended.
(5) "Cable Service"
(a) means the one way transmission to Subscribers of video programming or other
programming service, and
(b) Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video
programming or any other lawful communication service.
(6) "Cable System" means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment or other
communications equipment that is designated to provide Cable Service and other service to
Subscribers.
(7) "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission, or successor
governmental entity thereto.
(8) "Franchise" shall mean the authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the
Franchising Authority, whether authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate or otherwise, which authorizes construction and operation of
the Cable System for the purpose of offering Cable Service or other services to Subscribers.
(9) "Franchising Authority" means the Village of DeForest, Wisconsin, or the lawful
successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
(10) "Grantee" means TCI Cablevision of Wisconsin, Inc., or the lawful successor,
transferee, or assignee thereof.
(11) "Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company,
trust corporation or governmental entity.
(12) "Public Way" shall mean the surface of, and the space above and below, any
public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk,
parkway, way, lane, public way, drive circle or other public right-of-way, including, but not
limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-of- way dedicated for
compatible uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon
or hereafter held by the Franchising Authority in the service area which shall entitle the
Franchising Authority and the Grantee to use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating,
repairing and maintaining the Cable System. Public Way shall also mean any easement
18-3
now or hereafter held by the Franchising Authority for the purpose of public travel, or for
utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other
easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the
Franchising Authority and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing or
transmitting Grantee's Cable Service or other service over poles, wires, cables, conductors,
ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property
as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the Cable System.
(13) "Service Area" means the present municipal boundaries of the Franchising
Authority, and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
(14) "Service Tier" means a category of Cable Service or other services provided by
Grantee and for which a separate charge is made by the Grantee.
(15) "Subscriber" means a person or user of the Cable System who lawfully receives
cable services or other service therefrom with Grantee's express permission.
(16) "Video Programming" means programming provided by, or generally considered
comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station.
18.02 GRANT OF FRANCHISE. The Franchising Authority hereby grants to
Grantee a non-exclusive Franchise which authorizes the Grantee to construct and operate a
Cable System and offer Cable Service and other services in, along, among, upon, above,
across, over, under or in any manner connected with Public Ways within the Service Area
and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, or
retain in, on, over, under, upon, across or along any Public Way and all extensions thereof
and additions thereto, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other related property or
equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the Cable System.
18.03 TERM. The Franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be for a term of
fifteen years from the effective date of the Franchise unless otherwise lawfully terminated in
accordance with the terms of this Chapter. The effective date of this Franchise shall be
January 1, 1995.
18.04 FAVORED NATIONS. In the event the Franchising Authority enters into a
Franchise, permit, license, authorization, or other agreement of any kind with any other
person or entity other than the Grantee to enter into the Franchising Authority's streets and
Public Way for the purpose of constructing or operating a Cable System or providing Cable
Service to any part of the Service Area, the material provisions thereof shall be reasonably
comparable to those contained herein, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair
competitive advantage over another.
18.05 CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY. All transmission and distribution
structures, poles, other lines and equipment installed or erected by the Grantee pursuant to
the terms thereof shall be located so as to cause the least possible interference with the
proper use of the Public Ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners or renters who own or rent property that adjoins any of said Public Ways.
18.06 RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS. If during the course of Grantee's
construction, operation or maintenance of the Cable System there occurs a disturbance of
18-4
any Public Way by the Grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and restore such Public Way
to a condition reasonably comparable, to the extent reasonably possible, to the condition of
the Public Way existing immediately prior to such disturbance.
18.07 RELOCATION AT REQUEST OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY. Upon its
receipt of reasonable advance notice not to be less than five (5) business days, except for
exigent circumstances where it may be less than five (5) business days, the Grantee shall,
at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the Public Way, or
remove from the Public Way, any property of the Grantee when lawfully required by the
Franchising Authority by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment,
freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of
sewers, drains, gas or water pipes or any other type of structures or improvements by the
Franchising Authority; but the Grantee shall in all cases have the right of abandonment of its
property. If public funds are available to any company using such street, easement or rightof-
way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds shall also be
made available to the Grantee.
18.08 RELOCATION AT REQUEST OF THIRD PARTY. The Grantee shall, on the
request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the Franchising Authority,
temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building, provided:
(1) The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said
person, including, if required by the Grantee, making such payment in advance; and
(2) The Grantee is given not less than ten (10) business days advance written notice
to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
18.09 TRIMMING OF TREES AND SHRUBBERY. The Grantee shall have the
authority to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its Cable System in the
Service Area so as to prevent branches from coming in contact with the Grantee's wires,
cables or other equipment. Grantee shall be permitted to charge persons who own, or are
responsible for, such trees or natural growth for the cost of trimming, provided that similar
charges are assessed by and paid to the utilities or the Franchising Authority for tree
trimming. The Grantee shall reasonably compensate the Franchising Authority or property
owner for any damages caused by such trimming.
18.10 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS. Construction, installation and maintenance of
the Cable System shall be performed in an orderly and professional manner. All such work
shall be performed as safe as reasonably possible and in accordance with applicable FCC
or other federal, state and local regulations. The Cable System shall not unreasonably
endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the Service Area.
18.11 AERIAL AND UNDERGROUND CONSTRUCTION. In those areas where all
of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing
telephone communications and electric services are underground, the Grantee likewise shall
construct, operate and maintain all its transmission and distribution facilities underground;
provided that such facilities are actually capable of receiving Grantee's cable and other
equipment without technical degradation of the Cable System's signal quality. In those areas
of the Service Area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public
utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are both aerial and
underground, Grantee shall have the sole discretion to construct, operate and maintain all of
18-5
its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially using existing poles
when available, or underground. Nothing contained in this section shall require the Grantee
to construct, operate and maintain underground any ground mounted appurtenances such
as subscriber taps, line extenders, system passive devices (splitters, directional couplers),
amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals or other related equipment. Notwithstanding anything
to the contrary contained in this section, in the event that all of the transmission or
distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing communications and electric
services are placed underground after the effective date of this Chapter, Grantee shall only
be required to construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution
facilities underground if it is given reasonable notice and access to the public utilities'
facilities at the time such are placed underground.
18.12 REQUIRED EXTENSION OF SERVICE. The Cable System in existence
appears to be in substantial compliance with the Ordinance. Grantee is hereby authorized
to extend the Cable System as necessary, as desirable or as required pursuant to the terms
hereof within the Service Area. Whenever Grantee shall receive a request for service from
at least (15) Subscribers within 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet (one-quarter cable mile) of
its trunk or distribution cable, it shall extend its Cable System to such Subscribers at no cost
to said Subscribers for cable extension, other than the usual connection fees for all
Subscribers; provided that such extension is technically feasible, and if it will not
unreasonably affect the operation, financial condition or market development of the Cable
System or as provided under sec. 18.13.
18.13 SUBSCRIBERS CHARGES FOR EXTENSION OF SERVICE. No Subscriber
shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, the Grantee shall not be required to provide
Cable Service to any customer located farther than 300 feet from the nearest distribution
cable.
18.14 SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS. The Grantee shall provide one (1) outlet
of Basic Cable Service to the Franchising Authority's Public Safety Building, or Office of the
Emergency Management Director. The fee for this service shall be at the basic subscriber
rate, and shall be deducted from the annual Franchise fee payment, not be billed monthly.
18.15 FRANCHISE FEE. Grantee shall pay the Franchising Authority a franchise
fee equal to five percent (5%) of Subscriber revenues received by Grantee from the
operation of the Cable system on a annual basis; provided, however, that the Grantee may
credit against any such payments any state, county or local sales taxes connected with this
Franchise. For the purpose of this section, the 12-month period applicable under the
Franchise for the computation of the franchise fee shall be the calendar year, unless
otherwise agreed in writing by the Franchising Authority and Grantee. The franchise fee
payment shall be due and payable ninety (90) days after the close of the preceding calendar
year. Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief report showing the basis for
computation. In no event shall the franchise fee payments required to be paid by Grantee
exceed five percent (5%) of Subscriber revenues in any 12-month period.
18.16 RATES AND CHARGES. The Franchising Authority may not regulate the
rates for the provision of Cable Service and other services, including, but not limited to,
ancillary charges related thereto, except as expressly provided herein and except as
authorized pursuant to federal and state law, including but not limited to, the Cable Act and
FCC Rules and Regulations relating thereto. From time to time, and at any time, Grantee
has the right to modify its rates and charges including, but not limited to, the implementation
18-6
of additional charges and rates; provided however, that the Grantee shall give notice to the
Franchising Authority of any such modifications or additional charges thirty (30) days prior to
the effective date thereof.
18.17 RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE. The Franchising Authority and the Grantee
agree that any proceedings undertaken by the Franchising Authority that relate to the
renewal of the Grantee's Franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of
sec. 626 of the Cable Act (as such existed as of the effective date of the Cable Act), unless
the procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be
preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision of federal or state
law.
18.18 CONDITIONS OF SALE. Except to the extent expressly required by federal
or state law, if a renewal or extension of Grantee's Franchise is denied or the Franchise is
lawfully terminated, and the Franchising Authority either lawfully acquires ownership of the
Cable system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the Cable System to
another party, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at a fair market price, valued as a
collection of equipment. Grantee and Franchising Authority agree that in the case of a
lawful revocation of the Franchise, at Grantee's request, which shall be made in its sole
discretion, Grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to effectuate a transfer of its
Cable System to a qualified third party. The Franchising Authority further agrees that during
such period of time, it shall authorize the Grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the
terms of its prior Franchise; however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of
time greater than six (6) months from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the end of
such time, Grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its
Cable System which is reasonably acceptable to the Franchising Authority, Grantee and
Franchising Authority may avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to federal
or state law; it being further agreed that the Grantee's continued operating of its Cable
System during the six (6) month period shall not be deemed a waiver, nor an
extinguishments, of any rights of either the Franchising Authority or the Grantee.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section, neither Franchising
Authority nor Grantee shall be required to violate federal or state law.
18.19 TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE. Grantee's right, title or interest in the
Franchise shall not be sold, transferred, assigned or otherwise encumbered to any person
or organization, other than to an Affiliate, without the prior consent of the Franchising
Authority. Such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be
required however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by
assignment of any rights, title or interest of Grantee in the Franchise or Cable System in
order to secure indebtedness.
18.20 TESTING FOR COMPLIANCE. The Franchising Authority may perform
technical tests of the Cable System during reasonable times and in a manner which does
not unreasonably interfere with the normal business operations of the Grantee or the Cable
System in order to determine whether or not the Grantee is in compliance with the terms
hereof and applicable state or federal laws. In the event that such testing demonstrates that
the Grantee has substantially failed to comply with a material requirement , the reasonable
cost of such tests shall be borne by the Grantee. In the event that such testing demonstrates
that the Grantee has substantially complied with such material provisions , the cost of such
testing shall be borne by the Franchising Authority.
18-7
18.21 BOOKS AND RECORDS. The Grantee agrees that the Franchising
Authority may review its books or records during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive
basis, as are reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms hereof.
Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public records to be kept by the
Grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary set forth herein, Grantee shall not be required to disclose information which it
reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature. The Franchising Authority
agrees to treat any information disclosed by the Grantee to it as confidential and only to
disclose it to employees, representatives and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in
order to enforce the provisions hereof, or as required by law.
18.22 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS. Grantee shall maintain in full force and
effect, at its own cost and expense, during the term of the Franchise, Comprehensive
General Liability Insurance in the amount of $2,000,000 combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage. Said insurance shall be non-cancelable except upon thirty (30)
days prior written notice to the Franchising Authority.
18.23 INDEMNIFICATION. Grantee agrees to indemnify, hold harmless and
defend the Franchising Authority, its officers, boards and employees from and against any
liability for damages and for any liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily
injury (including accidental death), which arise out of the Grantee's construction, operation,
or maintenance of its Cable System, including but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees
and costs.
18.24 BONDS AND OTHER SURETY. Except as expressly provided herein,
Grantee shall not be required to obtain or maintain bonds or other surety as a condition or
being awarded the Franchise or continuing its existence. The Franchising Authority
acknowledges that the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the Grantee appear to
be sufficient to afford compliance with the terms of the Franchise and the enforcement
thereof. Grantee and Franchising Authority recognize that the costs associated with bonds
and other surety may ultimately be borne by the Subscribers in the form of increased rates
for Cable Service. In order to minimize such costs, the Franchising Authority agrees to
require bonds and other surety only in such amounts and during such times as there is a
reasonably demonstrated need thereof, such as, but not limited to, the Grantee's failure to
perform under the terms of this Agreement. The Franchising Authority agrees that in no
event, however, shall it require a bond or other related surety in an aggregated amount
greater than $50,000 conditioned upon the substantial performance of the material terms,
covenants and conditions of the Franchise. Initially, no bond or other surety will be required.
In the event that one is required in the future, the Franchising authority agrees to give
Grantee at least sixty (60) days prior notice thereof stating the exact reason for the
requirement. Such reason must demonstrate a change in the Grantee's legal, financial or
technical qualifications which would materially prohibit or impair its ability to comply with the
terms of the Franchise or afford compliance therewith, or past failure to perform under the
terms of this Agreement.
18.25 NOTICE OF VIOLATION. In the event that the Franchising Authority
believes that the Grantee has not complied with the terms of the Franchise, it shall notify the
Grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance.
18.26 GRANTEE'S RIGHT TO CURE OR RESPOND. Grantee shall have seven
(7) days from receipt of the notice described in sec. 18.25 (a) to respond to the Franchising
18-8
Authority contesting the assertion or noncompliance or; (b) to cure such default or; (c) in the
event that, by the nature of the default, such default cannot be cured within seven (7) day
period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Franchising Authority
of the steps being taken and the projected date they will be completed.
18.27 PUBLIC HEARING. In the event that Grantee fails to respond to the notice
described in sec. 18.25 pursuant to the procedures set forth in sec. 18.26, or in the event
that the default is not remedied within sixty (60) days after the Grantee is notified of the
alleged default pursuant to sec. 18.25, the Franchising Authority shall schedule a public
meeting to investigate the default. Such public meeting shall be held at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Village Board but not less than five (5) business days therefrom.
The Franchising Authority shall notify the Grantee of the time and place of such meeting and
provide the Grantee with an opportunity to respond.
18.28 ENFORCEMENT. Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event
the Franchising Authority, after such meeting, determines that Grantee is in default of any
provision of the Franchise, the Franchising Authority may:
(1) Foreclose on all or any part of any security provided under this Franchise if any,
including without limitation, any bonds or other surety; provided, however, the foreclosure
shall only be in such a manner and in such amount as the Franchising Authority reasonably
determines is necessary to remedy the default; or
(2) Commence an action of law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief;
or
(3) In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the Franchise,
declare the Franchise Agreement to be revoked; or
(4) Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such
remedy, as an alternative to damages.
The Grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly with
any provision of the Franchise by reason of any failure of the Franchising Authority to
enforce prompt compliance.
18.29 ACTS OF GOD. The Grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance
with the provisions of the Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto,
where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by strikes, acts of God, power
outages or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control.
18.30 PREEMPTION. If the FCC, or any other federal or state body or agency,
shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of the
Franchise, then to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt and supersede or preclude the
exercise of the like jurisdiction by the Franchising Authority, the jurisdiction of the
Franchising Authority shall not control.
18.31 ACTIONS OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY AND GRANTEE. In any action
by the Grantee or Franchising Authority or representative thereof mandated or permitted
under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious and timely manner.
18-9
Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof,
such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
18.32 NOTICE. Unless expressly otherwise agreed between parties, every notice
or response to be served upon the Franchising Authority or Grantee shall be in writing, and
shall be deemed to have been duly served when received. The notices or responses to the
Franchising Authority shall be addressed as follows:
Village of DeForest
306 DeForest Street
P.O. Box 510
DeForest, Wisconsin 53532-0510
The notices and responses to the Grantee shall be addressed as follows:
TCI Cablevision of Wisconsin, Inc.
5723 Tokay Boulevard
Madison, Wisconsin 53719-1284
With a copy to:
TCI Cablevision of Wisconsin, Inc.
Attn: Operations/Legal Department
P.O. Box 5630
Denver, Colorado 80217
Or:
5619 DTC Parkway
Englewood, Colorado 80111
Franchising Authority and Grantee may designate such other address or addresses from
time to time by giving notice to each other.
20-1
CHAPTER 20
GENERAL PROVISIONS
20.01 Rules of Construction ..................................................................................... 20-1
20.02 Conflict and Separability ................................................................................. 20-1
20.03 Village Administrator to File Documents Incorporated by Reference ......... 20-2
20.04 Penalty Provisions .......................................................................................... 20-2
20.05 Repeal of General Ordinances ........................................................................ 20-3
20.06 Effect of Repeals ............................................................................................. 20-4
20.07 Exemptions for Special Events ...................................................................... 20-4
20.08 Schedule of Deposits [Cr. 15-12, Eff. 03-13-15] ......................................................... 20-5
20.01 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. In the construction of this Code of general
ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the ordinances:
(1) WISCONSIN STATUTES. The term "Wisconsin Statutes" or "Wis. Stats.,"
whichever used in this Code, shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes for the year 1999-2000; the
term shall include session laws of the 2001-02.
(2) GENDER: SINGULAR AND PLURAL. Every word in this Code and in any
ordinance importing the masculine gender may extend and be applied to females as well as
males, and every word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to
several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; provided that these rules of
construction shall not be applied to any provisions which shall contain any express language
excluding such construction or when the subject matter or context of such provisions may be
repugnant thereto.
(3) PERSON. The word "person" extends and applies to natural persons, firms,
corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic and all entitles of any kind
capable of being sued unless plainly inapplicable.
(4) ACTS BY AGENTS. When a provision requires an act to be done which may by
law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
20.02 CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY.
(1) CONFLICT OF CODE PROVISIONS. If the provisions of the different chapters
of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall
prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter.
(2) SEPARABILITY OF CODE PROVISIONS. If any section, subsection, sentence,
clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by
reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof.
The Village President and the Village Board of the Village of DeForest hereby declare that
they would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase
or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
20-2
20.03 VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR TO FILE DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY
REFERENCE. Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written
or printed matter, other than the Wisconsin Statutes or other sections of this Code, are
adopted by reference, they shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth
herein and the Village Administrator is hereby directed and required to file, deposit and keep
in his office a copy of the code, standard, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter
as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept shall be public records open for
examination with proper care by any person during the Village Administrator's office hours,
subject to such orders or regulations which the Village Administrator may prescribe for their
preservation.
20.04 PENALTY PROVISIONS.
(1) GENERAL PENALTY. Except as provided in sub. (2), any person who shall
violate any of the provisions of this Code for which a specific forfeiture is not otherwise
provided shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty as follows:
(a) First Offense, Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code
subject to a forfeiture shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than $500.00, together
with court costs and all applicable fees, surcharges and assessments as provided by law
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment in the County Jail until
the entire judgment is paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
(b) Second Offense, Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of
this Code who shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than $1000.00 for each such offense,
together with court costs and all applicable fees, surcharges and assessments as provided
by law and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment in the County Jail
until the entire judgment is paid, but not to exceed 6 months.
(2) PENALTIES FOR MINORS. Any minor who is 12 years of age or older who
shall violate any provision of this Code for which a different penalty is not expressed shall be
subject to the penalties provided in sub. (1), subject to the following:
[Am. 94-5, Eff. 2-7-94; Am. 06-20, Eff. 6-8-06]
(a) Any minor against whom a forfeiture is imposed shall be allowed up to 12
months for payment;
(b) Any order imposing a forfeiture upon a minor shall include a finding that the
minor alone is financially able to pay;
(c) No minor may be imprisoned for failure to pay a forfeiture imposed under this
Code. Upon failure by any minor to pay any such forfeiture, the court may suspend, for a
period of not less than 30 nor more than 90 days, or until the forfeiture is paid, whichever
occurs first:
1. any hunting, fishing or other license issued under Chapter 29 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, or
2. the minor's operating privileges as defined in §340.01(40), Wis. Stats.
20-3
(d) The court may impose any penalty or enter any other dispositional order
authorized by §§938.343 or 938.344, Wis. Stats.
(e) This subsection shall not apply to violations of Chapter 26 of this Code.
(3) SUBSEQUENT OFFENSES. For purposes of determining whether an offense is
a first or subsequent offense under sub. (1), all violations of any section or sections of this
Code prohibiting the same or substantially similar conduct shall be deemed a violation of the
same provision of this Code.
(4) CONTINUED VIOLATIONS. Each violation and each day a violation continues
or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the Village
from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of
this Code.
(5) EXECUTION AGAINST DEFENDANT'S PROPERTY. Whenever any person
fails to pay any forfeiture, court costs and all applicable fees, surcharges and assessments
as provided by law, upon the order of the court for violation of any ordinance of the Village,
the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has
been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for
the unpaid balance of the judgment.
(6) COURT COSTS. Court costs shall be assessed in the amount established by
state statute. If the applicable statute establishes a range of court costs, the costs shall be
the maximum amount allowed by such statute.
[Subsection Am. 06-20, Eff. 6-8-06]
(7) COLLECTION FEES. If the court elects to use a collection agency to collect
unpaid sums as permitted by §755.21, Wis. Stats., the procedure in that section shall apply.
Any fees assessed by the collection agency shall be paid only from the proceeds of each
judgment collected. The court shall keep records of any such amounts and report them to
the Finance Director at least quarterly, and the Finance Director shall write off said amounts
from the receivable due.
[Cr. 11-20, Eff. 6-17-11]
(8) OTHER DISPOSITIONS AND REMEDIES. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this Code, the court may impose any other appropriate penalty or disposition or may
exercise any other appropriate enforcement remedy authorized to a municipal court by the
Wisconsin Statutes.
[Cr. 11-20, Eff. 6-17-11]
20.05 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES. All ordinances heretofore adopted
by the Village Board of the Village of DeForest are hereby repealed, except all ordinances or
parts of ordinances relating to the following subjects and not conflicting with any of the
provisions of this Code:
The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the Village of DeForest of whatever
name or description.
The establishment of grades, curb lines and widths of sidewalks in the public streets
and alleys.
20-4
The fixing of salaries of public officials and employees.
Rights, licenses or franchises or the creation of any contract with the Village of
DeForest.
The lighting of streets and alleys.
The annexation of territory to the Village of DeForest.
The naming and changing of names of streets, alleys, public grounds and parks.
The letting of contracts without bids.
Tax and special assessment levies.
Release of persons, firms or corporations from liability.
Construction of any public works.
Water, sewer and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main
construction.
Budget ordinances, resolutions and actions.
[Revisor’s note: The repealer was effective as to ordinances enacted prior to April 18, 1983, the effective date of
Ordinance 83-7 originally codifying this code.]
20.06 EFFECT OF REPEALS. The repeal or amendment of any section or
provision of this Code or of any other ordinance or resolution of the Village Board shall not:
(1) By implication be deemed to revive any ordinance not in force or existing at the
time at which such repeal or amendment takes effect.
(2) Affect any vested right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or
incurred under any enactment so repealed or amended, unless the privilege of repealing
such obligation or privilege has been reserved by the Village.
20.07 EXEMPTIONS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
(1) The Village Board may, by resolution, grant to any bona fide cultural, patriotic or
civic organization, a temporary exemption, in whole or in part, from the provisions of §§5.23,
5.28, 9.07(5)(a), 9.07(7), 10.02(1), 10.03(8), 10.03(10)(a), 16.01(3)(g) and (m) of this Code in
order to allow a specific event which the Board determines to be in the public interest.
[Cr. 94-18, Eff. 5-2-94; Am. 95-15, Eff. 4-3-95; Am. 07-06, Eff. 02-23-07; Am. 17-06, Eff. 03-17-17]
(2) Prior to adopting any resolution authorized by sub. (1), the Board shall find:
[Am. 17-06, Eff. 03-17-17]
(a) The event authorized is designed to promote a cultural, patriotic or civic interest of
the general public;
20-5
(b) That the exception or limitation being authorized is reasonably necessary for the
event to be historically accurate or to otherwise fulfill its cultural, patriotic or civic purpose;
(c) That adequate provisions have been made and necessary assurances given by the
sponsor of the event that the exception or limitation will not create any significant risk of harm to
the health, safety or welfare of the participants or the public; and
(d) That activities undertaken pursuant to any exception or limitation granted will not
cause any significant damage to public or private property and that any damage so caused will
be promptly repaired.
(3) The Village Board may condition the exception or limitation granted by such
resolution upon any terms or conditions it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety
and welfare including, but not limited to:
(a) Approvals by the Police Chief and/or Fire Chief of any specific activity which the
Board finds appropriately left to their respective expertise;
(b) Appropriate access to and supervision by the Police and Fire Department of any or
all areas where the event or any portion thereof will be held;
(c) Adequate provision for special fire, medical ambulance or other professional
services and the payment for such services;
(d) Adequate provisions for liability or other insurance deemed necessary by the
Board;
(e) The issuance of any permits or approvals required by any other provisions of this
Code;
(f) Any other condition deemed reasonably necessary by the Village Board.
(4) Any resolution adopted pursuant to this section shall describe the event, identify the
sponsor and specify the time period during which the exemption or limitation shall apply. No
such resolution shall be deemed to authorize the violation of state or federal law, nor to
authorize any activity in violation of any Village Ordinance except as provided therein.
[Cr. 94-18, Eff. 5-2-94]
20.08 SCHEDULE OF DEPOSITS.
[Cr. 15-12; Eff. 03-13-15; Am. 16-46, Eff. 11-24-16]
(1) Uniform Deposit Schedule Adopted. Bond and deposit schedules for all traffic code,
conservation, environmental protection, boating, snowmobile, or ATV violations shall be as
adopted by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference from time to time as set forth in the
Wisconsin Revised Uniform Deposit Schedules.
(2) Except as provided in sub. (1), the following deposit schedule, before application of
court costs, fees, surcharges, and assessments, shall apply to all alleged violations of
Village ordinances punishable by a monetary forfeiture:
20-6
Municipal Code Description of Violation Penalty Range Deposit
§3.01, adopting Improper Parking
§346.51(1), Stats. On/Off Roadway $20-$200 (per §3.12(4)(a)) $20
§3.01, adopting Stopping/Standing in
§346.52(1), Stats. Prohibited Areas $10-40 (per §3.12(4)(a)) $10
2nd conv. w/in 1 year $20-100 (per §3.12(4)(a)) $20
§3.01, adopting Stopping/Standing on
§346.52(2), Stats. Highway by Grade School $5-40 (per §3.12(4)(a)) $5
2nd conv. w/in 1 year $10-100 (per §3.12(4)(a)) $10
§3.01, adopting
§346.53, Stats. Parking/Standing
Where Prohibited $5-40 (per §3.12(4)(a)) $5
2nd conv. w/in 1 year $10-100 (per §3.12(4)(a)) $10
§3.01, adopting
§346.54, Stats. Improper Parking/Standing
Of Vehicle $10-40 (per §3.12(4)(a)) $10
2nd conv. w/in 1 year $20-100 (per §3.12(4)(a)) $20
§3.01, adopting
§346.55(1), Stats. Parking on Left
Side of Highway $10-100 (per §3.12(4)(a)) $10
§3.01, adopting
§346.55(3), Stats. Parking on Posted
Private Property $10-100 (per §3.12(4)(a)) $10
§3.01 All Other Parking
Violations $5-20 (per §3.12(4)) $10
§3.021 Heavy Traffic Route Violations
First Offense $0-500 (per §3.021(7)) $100
Second Offense w/in 1 year $0-1000 (per §3.021(7)) $250
Third Offense w/in 1 year $0-1000 (per §3.021(7)) $500
Fourth and subsequent $0-1000 (per §3.021(7)) $1,000
Offense
[Am. 16-28, Eff. 8-26-16]
§3.02(3) Prohibited Signs $10-20 (per §3.12(5)) $10
§3.06(8) Winter Parking Restrictions $10-50 (per §3.12(4)) $20
Ch. 3 All Other Violations
Of Chapter 3 $50
§8.04 Well Abandonment $25-200 (per §8.04(7)) $200
20-7
§8.70 Sewer Violations $100-500 (per §8.70(6)) $200
§9.01 Alcohol License and
Permit Violations $0-500 (per §20.04) $500
2nd Offense $0-1,000 (per §20.04) $1,000
§9.015 Adult Business
Violations $250-2,000 (per §9.015(11)) $1,000
§9.02 Cigarette Sales
w/o a License $0-500 (per §20.04) $500
2nd Offense $0-1,000 (per §20.04) $1,000
§9.05 Direct Sales and
Solicitation Violations $25-200 (per §9.05(10)(a)) $200
§9.055 Special Event
Vendor Violations $10-200 (per §9.055(4)(a)) $100
§9.07 Animal Violations $25-100 (per §9.07(12)(a)) $50
2nd Offense $75-250 (per §9.07(12)(a)) $200
§9.08 Bicycle Violations $0-10 (per §9.08(12)) $10
§9.08(10) Bicycle Violations
Parental Liability $10-200 (per §9.08(12)) $30
§10.01, adopting
§940.19, Stats. Battery $0-500 (per §20.04) $500
Under Age 17 $0-500 (per §20.04) $250
§10.01, adopting
§941.20, Stats. Endangering Safety
By Use of a Weapon $0-500 (per §20.04) $500
§10.01, adopting
§941.23, Stats. Carrying a Concealed
Weapon $0-500 (per §20.04) $500
§10.01, adopting
§941.237, Stats. Carrying a Handgun
On Licensed Premises $0-500 (per §20.04) $500
§10.01, adopting
§946.41, Stats. Resisting or Obstructing $0-500 (per §20.04) $300
2nd Offense $0-1,000 (per §20.04) $500
Under Age 17 $0-500 (per §20.04) $100
§10.03(1)(c) Defecation and Urination in
Public Prohibited $0-500 (per §20.04) $50
20-8
§10.03(6)(a)1. §125.07(1)(a), Wis. Stats. $0-500 $250
Dispensing Alcohol $0-1,000 per 10.03(6)(b)1
Beverages to for 3rd offense in
Underage Persons 30 months. $500
§10.03(6)(a)2. §125.07(3)(a), Wis. Stats. $0-500 $250
Underage Person Presence
at Place of Sale
§10.03(6)(a)3. §125.07(4)(a), Wis. Stats. $250-500, but greater if $300
Underage Person Violations 2nd or more offense per
§125.07(4)(bs), Wis. Stats.
§10.03(6)(a)3. §125.07(4)(b), Wis. Stats. $100-200, but greater if $200
Underage Possession or 2nd or more offense per
Consumption of Alcohol §125.07(4)(c), Wis. Stats.
Beverages
§10.03(6)(a)4. §125.085 (3)(b), Wis. Stats. $300-1,250 $300
Proof of Age
§10.03(6)(a)5. §125.09(2), Wis. Stats. $0-200, but greater $200
Alcohol on School Grounds if underage, per
§125.09(2)(d), Wis. Stats.
§10.03(7) Possession of Marijuana $50-500 (per §10.03(7)(c)) $300
2nd Offense or more $50-500 (per §10.03(7)(c)) $500
Under Age 17 $0-500 (per §10.25(2)) $100
2nd Offense w/in 1 year $0-500 (per §10.25(2)) $200
3rd Offense w/in 1 year $0-500 (per §10.25(2)) $300
§10.03(7)(b)(2) Possession of Drug
Paraphernalia $50-500 (per §10.03(7)(c)) $300
2nd Offense or more $50-500 (per §10.03(7)(c)) $500
Under Age 17 $0-50 (per §10.24(1)(a)) $50
2nd Offense w/in 1 year $0-100 (per §10.24(1)(b)) $100
3rd Offense w/in 1 year $0-500 (per §10.24(1)(c)) $200
§10.03(7)(b)(3) Possession of
Synthetic Marijuana $50-500 (per §10.03(7)(c)) $300
2nd Offense or more $50-500 (per §10.03(7)(c)) $500
Under Age 17 $0-500 (per §10.25(2)) $100
2nd Offense w/in 1 year $0-500 (per §10.25(2)) $200
3rd Offense w/in 1 year $0-500 (per §10.25(2)) $300
§10.03(7m) Possession of Cigarette, Tobacco Product or Nicotine Product
Under Age 18 $0-25 (per §10.03(7m)(e)) $25
20-9
2nd Offense w/in 1 year $0-40 (per §10.03(7m)(e)) $40
3rd Offense w/in 1 year $0-50 (per §10.03(7m)(e)) $50
§10.03(7n)(b)3 Failure to Post Cigarette, Tobacco Product or Nicotine Product
Notice on Premises $0-25 (per §10.03(7n)(c)) $25
§10.03(7n)(c)1 Failure to Post Cigarette, Tobacco Product or Nicotine Product
Notice on Machine $0-25 (per §10.03(7n)(c)) $25
§10.03(7n) Cigarette, Tobacco Product or Nicotine Product Sales to
Minors $0-500 (per §10.03(7)(e)) $100
2nd Offense w/in 1 year $200-500 (per §10.03(7)(e)) $150
§10.03(7p) Possession of E-Cigarettes
by Minor $0-25 (per§10.03(7p)(e)1) $25
2nd Offense w/in 1 year $0-40 (per§10.03(7p)(e)1) $40
3rd Offense w/in 1 year $0-50 (per§10.03(7p)(e)1) $50
Sale or Transfer of E-Cigarette
to Minor $0-500 (per§10.03(7p)(e)2) $100
2nd Offense w/1 year $200-500 (per§10.03(7p)(e)2) $200
[Cr. 2019-10, Eff. 6-28-19]
§11.10 Junked Automobiles $50-500 (per §11.11(1)) $100
2nd Offense $100-500 (per §11.11(1)) $200
§11.11(2)(b) Environmental Pollution Nuisances
1st Offense $1,000-5,000 (per §11.11(2)(b)) $2,500
2nd Offense $1,000-25,000 (per §11.11(2)(b)) $10,000
3rd Offense $1,000-25,000 (per §11.11(2)(b)) $15,000
4th Offense $1,000-25,000 (per §11.11(2)(b)) $20,000
5th and Subsequent Offenses $1,000-25,000 (per §11.11(2)(b)) $25,000
Ch. 11 All Other Violations
Of Chapter 11 $50-500 (per §11.11(1)) $300
2nd Offense $100-500 (per §11.11(1)) $500
Ch. 13 Subdivision and
Development Violations $100-1,000 (per §13.11(1)) $500
2nd Offense $100-1,000 (per §13.11(1)) $1,000
§14.125 Outdoor Furnace
Violations $50-200 (per §14.125(5)) $100
2nd Offense $200-500 (per §14.125(5)) $300
Ch. 14 All Other Violations
Of Chapter 14 $0-500 (per §20.04) $500
2nd Offense $0-1,000 (per §20.04) $1,000
Ch. 15 Zoning Code Violations $5-500 (per §15.03(8)(b)) $500
20-10
§§16.20 Urban Forestry Violations $50-500 (per §16.29(1)(a)) $200
to 16.28 2nd Offense $100-500 (per §16.29(1)(b)) $300
Ch. 21 Floodplain Violations $200-500 (per §21.09) $500
§22.04 Recycling Violations $0-50 (per §22.24(3)(a)) $50
2nd Offense $50-200 (per §22.24(3)(a)) $200
Ch. 22 All Other Violations
Of Chapter 22 $10-1,000 (per §22.24(3)(b)) $500
2nd Offense $10-1,000 (per §22.24(3)(b)) $1,000
Ch. 24 Simplified Erosion
Control Violations $150 (per §24.18(1)) $150
2nd Offense $400 (per §24.18(1)) $400
3rd Offense $800 (per §24.18(1)) $800
Other Erosion Control
Or Storm Water Violations $500 (per §24.18(1)) $500
2nd Offense $1,000 (per §24.18(1)) $1,000
3rd Offense $2,000 (per §24.18(1)) $2,000
Ch. 25 Shoreland/Wetland
Zoning Violations $500-2,000 (per §25.21(3)) $1,000
§26.03(1) Habitual Truancy $0-500 (per §26.04(1)(h)) MANDATORY
APPEARANCE
PER 26.03(3)
§26.031 Truancy $0-50(per §26.04(2)(b)) MANDATORY
2nd Offense $0-100(per §26.04(2)(b))APPEARANCE
PER 26.031
§26.05(1) Contributing to Truancy $0-500 (per §26.05(1) ) $300
§26.06(1) Truancy
Parental Liability $0-500 (per §26.06(2) ) $300
§26.07 Failure to Control Truant $0-500 (per §26.07) $300
Ch. 27 Housing and Property
Maintenance Violations $45 (per §27.08(4)(a)) $45
All Other Ordinances - Adults $0-500 (per §20.04) $200
2nd Offense $0-1,000 (per §20.04) $300
All Other Ordinances – Under 17 $0-500 (per §20.04) $100
If Violation Only Applicable
To Persons Under 18 $0-50 (per §10.25(2)) $50
[Cr. 15-12, Eff. 03-13-15; Am. 16-46, Eff. 11-24-16]
21-1
CHAPTER 21
FLOODPLAIN ZONING REGULATIONS
[Repealed & Recreated 14-27, Eff. 09-12-14]
TABLE OF CONTENTS
21.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND PURPOSE…………………………………21-1
21.02 DEFINITIONS………………………………………………………………………..… 21-2
21.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS……………………………………………………………..21-10
21.04 GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS.. 21-12
21.05 HYDRAULIC AND HYDROLOGIC ANALYSES…………………………………. 21-12
21.06 WATERCOURSE ALTERATIONS…………………………………………………. 21-13
21.07 CHAPTER 30, 31, WIS.STATS. DEVELOPMENT……………………………..… 21-13
21.08 PUBLIC OR PRIVATE CAMPGROUNDS……………………………………....… 21-13
21.20 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW)………………………………………………………. 21-14
21.30 FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF)……………………………………………………. 21-16
21.40 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP)……………………………………… 21-19
21.50 NONCONFORMING USES………………………………………………………..…21-20
21.51 ADMINISTRATION…………………………………………………………….…..… 21-24
21.52 FLOODPROOFING STANDARDS FOR NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES OR
USES..…………………………………………………………………………………..21-31
21.53 PUBLIC INFORMATION…………………………………………………………..… 21-31
21.60 AMENDMENTS………………………………………………………………………. 21-32
21.61 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES……………………………………………….. 21-33
21.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND PURPOSE.
(1) STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the
authorization in ss. 61.35 and 62.23, for villages and cities; and the requirements in s. 87.30,
Stats.
(2) PURPOSE. This chapter is intended to regulate floodplain development in
order to:
(a) Protect life, health and property;
(b) Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
(c) Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers;
(d) Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
(e) Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
(f) Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
(g) Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers;
(h) Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and
result in conflicts between property owners; and
21-2
(i) Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative
to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain.
21.02 DEFINITIONS.
(1) GENERAL. Words and phrases not defined in this section shall be given their
ordinary meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their common usage. Words used
in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural
number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not
discretionary.
(2) DEFINED TERMS. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be
interpreted according to the following definitions:
(a) A ZONES shall mean those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map
which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or
unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles,
depending on the availability of data for a given area.
(b) AH ZONE – See “AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING”.
(c) AO ZONE – See “AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING”.
(d) ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE shall mean a facility, structure, building or
use which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building.
(e) ALTERATION shall mean an enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or
modification other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilating, air conditioning and other systems within a structure.
(f) AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING – A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or
VO zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1 percent or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel
does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
(g) BASE FLOOD shall mean the flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted
on a FIRM.
(h) BASEMENT shall mean any enclosed area of a building having its floor subgrade,
i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
(i) BUILDING shall mean a structure consisting wholly or partially of walls and a
roof intended for the enclosure of persons or property.
(j) CAMPGROUND shall mean any parcel of land which is designed, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by 4 or
more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area.
21-3
(k) CAMPING UNIT shall mean any portable device, no more than 400 square feet
in area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping trailer, motor
home, bus, van, pick-up truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway
use.
(l) CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE shall mean a certification that the construction
and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in
compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
(m) CHANNEL shall mean a natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and
banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
(n) CRAWLWAY OR "CRAWL SPACE" shall mean an enclosed area below the first
usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing
and electrical utilities.
(o) DECK shall mean an unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but
has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
(p) DNR shall mean the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(q) DEVELOPMENT shall mean any artificial change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or
accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or
accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation
of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of
buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of
materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage
disposal systems or water supply facilities.
(r) DRYLAND ACCESS shall mean a vehicular access route which is above the
regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the
floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough
for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
(s) ENCROACHMENT shall mean any fill, structure, equipment, use or development
in the floodway.
(t) FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) shall mean the
federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
(u) FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) shall mean a map of a community on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(v) FLOOD or FLOODING shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions:
1. The overflow or rise of inland waters;
21-4
2. The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
3. The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated
cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior; or
4. The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural
body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force
of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event.
(w) FLOOD FREQUENCY – The probability of a flood occurrence which is
determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually
expressed as occurring, on the average once in a specified number of years or as a percent
(%) chance of occurring in any given year.
(x) FLOODFRINGE shall mean that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway
which is covered by flood waters during the regional flood and associated with standing
water rather than flowing water.
(y) FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP shall mean a map designating approximate
flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A-Zones and do not
contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the
regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until
superseded by a Flood Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(z) FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY shall mean a technical engineering examination,
evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating
those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and
base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are
designated as numbered and unnumbered A-Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps, that
accompany the Flood Insurance Study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the
insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(aa) FLOODPLAIN shall mean land which has been or may be covered by flood
water during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may
include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
(bb) FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT shall mean policy and procedures to insure
wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and
administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
(cc) FLOOD PROFILE shall mean a graph or a longitudinal profile line showing
the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface
elevations along a stream or river.
(dd) FLOODPROOFING shall mean any combination of structural provisions,
changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and
contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood
damage.
(ee) FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION shall mean an elevation of two feet of
21-5
freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. (Also
see: FREEBOARD.)
(ff) FLOOD STORAGE shall mean those floodplain areas where storage of
floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood
discharge.
(gg) FLOODWAY shall mean the channel of a river or stream and those portions
of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge.
(hh) FREEBOARD – A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of
feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood
heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action,
obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of
flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
(ii) HABITABLE STRUCTURE shall mean any structure or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
(jj) HEARING NOTICE – Publication or posting meeting the requirements of Ch. 985,
Stats. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week (7 days) before the
hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice,
published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (7 days) before the
hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these
minimums.
(kk) HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL shall mean damage that could result
from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a
structure or building and its contents.
(ll) HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE shall mean the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
(mm) HISTORIC STRUCTURE shall mean any structure that is either:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved
state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the
21-6
Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
(nn) INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT shall mean a calculated upward
rise in the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison of existing
conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the
floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness
factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge.
(oo) LAND USE shall mean any nonstructural use made of unimproved or
improved real estate. (Also see DEVELOPMENT.)
(pp) LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE – Elevation of the lowest ground surface that
touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
(qq) LOWEST FLOOR shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not
considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render
the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR
60.3.
(rr) MAINTENANCE shall mean the act or process of restoring to original
soundness, including redecorating, refinishing, non-structural repairs, or the replacement of
existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent fixtures, systems or structures.
(ss) MANUFACTURED HOME shall mean a structure transportable in one or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a "mobile recreational
vehicle."
(tt) MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION shall mean a
parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale.
(uu) MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING
shall mean a parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the
effective date of this chapter. At a minimum, this would include the installation of utilities,
the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
(vv) MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO EXISTING
shall mean the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of
utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring if concrete pads.
21-7
(ww) MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall mean a vehicle which is built on
a single chassis, measures 400 square feet or less at the largest horizontal projection,
designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty
vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not
for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land,
but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall
within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles."
(xx) MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE shall mean a hydraulic engineering
model that corrects any errors that occur in the Duplicate Effective Model, adds any
additional cross sections to the Duplicate Effective Model, or incorporates more detailed
topographic information than that used in the current effective model.
(yy) MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE shall mean a copy of the hydraulic
analysis used in the effective FIS and referred to as the effective model.
(zz) MODEL, EFFECTIVE shall mean the hydraulic engineering model that was
used to produce the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
(aaa) MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT) shall mean a modification of the
Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected Effective Model to reflect any man made
modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the effective model
but prior to the construction of the project for which the revision is being requested. If no
modification has occurred since the date of the effective model, then this model would be
identical to the Corrected Effective Model or Duplicate Effective Model.
(bbb) MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) shall mean a modification of the
Existing or Pre-Project Conditions Model, Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected Effective
Model to reflect revised or post-project conditions.
(ccc) “NAVD” or “NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM” shall mean elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
(ddd) “NGVD” or “NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM” shall mean
elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
(eee) NEW CONSTRUCTION shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations
adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the
"start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
(fff) NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE shall mean an existing lawful structure
or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this
chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential
structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower
than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
21-8
(ggg) NONCONFORMING USE shall mean an existing lawful use or accessory
use of a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter for
the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence in the floodway.)
(hhh) OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW shall mean any development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future
development will cause an increase in regional flood height.
(iii) OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP shall mean that map, adopted and
made part of this chapter, as described in §21.03(2), which has been approved by the DNR
and FEMA.
(jjj) OPEN SPACE USE shall mean those uses having a relatively low flood
damage potential and not involving structures.
(kkk) ORDINARY HIGHWATER MARK shall mean the point on the bank or shore
up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
(lll) PERSON shall mean an individual, or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, municipality or state agency.
(mmm) PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM shall mean a sewage treatment and disposal
system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same
parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the
Department of Safety and Professional Services, including a substitute for the septic tank or
soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system
located on a different parcel than the structure.
(nnn) PUBLIC UTILITIES shall mean those utilities using underground or
overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and
collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
(ooo) REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING – Means base flood waters will
not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain and that any
subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
(ppp) REGIONAL FLOOD shall mean a flood determined to be representative of
large floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the
FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
(qqq) START OF CONSTRUCTION shall mean the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
21-9
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms,
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages
or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration,
the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
(rrr) STRUCTURE shall mean any manmade object with form, shape and utility,
either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream
bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid
storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
(sss) SUBDIVISION has the meaning given in §236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
(ttt) SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
(uuu) SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT shall mean any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the
improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any
repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the work performed. The term
does not, however, include either any project for the improvement of a building required to
correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building or fire
inspectors and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any
alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure.
(vvv) UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP shall mean circumstances where special
conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict
conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density
unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the ordinance.
(www) VARIANCE shall mean an authorization by the board of adjustment or
appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is
inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the floodplain zoning
ordinance.
(xxx) VIOLATION – The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the floodplain zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without
required floodplain permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates
or required floodway encroachment calculations shall be deemed in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided.
(yyy) WATERSHED – The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
(zzz) WATER SURFACE PROFILE shall mean a graphical representation
showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach
21-10
of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used
in regulating floodplain areas.
(aaaa) WELL shall mean an excavation opening in the ground made by digging,
boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended
use.
21.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(1) AREAS REGULATED. This chapter regulates all areas that would be
covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) or other maps approved by DNR. Base flood elevations are derived from the flood
profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH Zones on
the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A and AO zones. Regional Flood
Elevations (RFE) may be derived from other studies. If more than one map or revision is
referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
(2) OFFICIAL MAPS & REVISIONS. The boundaries of all floodplain districts
are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) listed below. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to
the boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in the FIS or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA through the Letter of Map
Change process (see §1.60 Amendments) before it is effective. No changes to RFE's on
non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions
are on file in the office of the Village Clerk. If more than one map or revision is referenced,
the most restrictive information shall apply.
(a) Maps Based on the FIS: Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers
55025C0088H, 55025C0089H, 55025C0235H, 55025C0251H, 55025C0252H,
55025C0253H, 55025C0254H, 55025C0258H, 55025C0261H, 55025C0262H, dated
September 17, 2014; with corresponding profiles that are based on the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) Volumes 55025CV001D, 55025CV002D, 55025CV003D, 55025CV004D, dated
June 16, 2016.
[Am. 16-13, Eff. 5-27-16]
(b) Maps Based on Other Studies: Letter of Map Revision (not applicable).
(3) ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN ZONING DISTRICTS. The regional
floodplain areas are divided into three districts as follows:
(a) The Floodway District (FW), is the channel of a river or stream and those portions
of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters and are
contained within AE Zones as shown on the FIRM.
(b) The Floodfringe District (FF) is that area between the regional flood limits and the
floodway and displayed as AE Zones on the FIRM.
(c) The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that may be covered by
floodwater during the regional flood and which does not have a BFE or floodway boundary
determined, including A, AH and AO zones on the FIRM.
21-11
(4) DETERMINING FLOODPLAIN BOUNDARIES. Discrepancies between
boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved
by the Zoning Administrator using the criteria in pars. (a) or (b) below. If a significant
difference exists, the map shall be amended according to §21.60 Amendments. The Zoning
Administrator may rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a
zoning permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator shall
be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon
which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required
under this section. Disputes between the Zoning Administrator and an applicant over the
district boundary line shall be settled according to §21.51(5) and the criteria in (a) and (b)
below. Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a
FIRM, FEMA must approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to §21.60.
(a) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the
district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any
discrepancies.
(b) Where flood profiles do not exist for projects, the location of the boundary shall be
determined by the map scale.
(5) REMOVAL OF LANDS FROM FLOODPLAIN DESIGNATION. Compliance
with the provisions of this chapter shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain
unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is
contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to §21.60.
(6) COMPLIANCE. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this
chapter shall be in compliance with the terms of this chapter, and other applicable local,
state, and federal regulations.
(7) MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED. Unless
specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply
with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies shall comply if s.
13.48(13), Wis. Stats. applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of
state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt to the
extent provided in s. 30.2022, Wis. Stats.
(8) ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. (a) This chapter
supersedes any conflicting provisions of the Village Zoning Code enacted under §61.35
which relate to floodplains. A more restrictive ordinance shall continue in full force and effect
to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(b) This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed
restrictions, covenants or easements. If this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
(9) INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter are the minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the
Village and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes. In the case of ambiguity, the provisions hereof shall be interpreted in a manner
consistent with the intent and requirements of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code
21-12
(10) WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. The flood protection
standards in this chapter are based on engineering experience and research. Larger floods
may occur or the flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses
will be free from flooding and flood damages. This chapter does not create liability on the
part of, or a cause of action against, the Village or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damage that may result from reliance on this chapter.
(11) SEVERABILITY. Should any provision of this chapter be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter
shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect.
(12) APPLICABILITY TO ANNEXED AREAS. The Dane County floodplain zoning
provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by
the Village for all annexed areas until the lands are mapped in an appropriate district under
this Chapter. In any case where annexed land lies within a FIRM incorporated into this
chapter, it shall be subject to this chapter immediately upon annexation.
21.04 GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS.
(a) The Village Zoning Administrator shall review all permit applications to
determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, be
constructed with flood-resistant materials, be constructed to minimize flood damages and to
ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions of flooding.
(b) Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All
subdivision applications (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood
elevation and floodway data and all other information required by §21.51(2). Adequate
drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
21.05 HYDRAULIC AND HYDROLOGIC ANALYSES.
(1) No floodplain development shall:
(a) Cause any obstruction to flow, defined as development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development, causing any increase in the
regional flood height; or
(b) Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to the loss of floodplain
storage area.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall deny all permit applications if it is determined the
proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the regional flood height,
based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless such obstruction or
increase is permitted under §21.60.
21-13
21.06 WATERCOURSE ALTERATIONS.
No zoning permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be
issued until the Zoning Administrator has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities and
the DNR and FEMA regional offices, and has required the applicant to secure all necessary
state and federal permits. The standards of §21.05 must be met in all cases, and the flood
carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. As soon as is
practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or
relocation authorized under this section, the Zoning Administrator shall apply for a Letter of
Map Revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by
FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process.
21.07 CHAPTER 30, 31, WIS. STATS. DEVELOPMENT.
Development which requires a permit from the DNR, under chs. 30 and 31, Stats.,
such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be
allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodplain zoning
ordinance are made according to §21.60.
21.08 PUBLIC OR PRIVATE CAMPGROUNDS.
(1) QUALIFIED FLOODPLAIN PROPERTIES. Public or private campgrounds
located wholly or partially within a floodplain shall be permitted only by conditional use
permit issued pursuant to §15.16. No such permit shall be issued unless the Planning &
Zoning Commission finds that:
(a) The proposed campground will have a low flood damage potential;
(b) The campground is approved by the Department of Health Services;
(c) The character of the river system and the campground elevation are such that a
72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants.
(2) REQUIRED CONDITIONS. In addition to any other conditions imposed under
§15.16, permits issued for campground use within a floodplain shall assure compliance with
all of the following:
(a) There shall be an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that
offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the campground.
Prior to issuance of the conditional use permit, the adequacy of the procedures shall be
approved by the Village emergency government coordinator and the Chief of Police. The
procedure shall be in writing and shall specify the flood elevation at which evacuation shall
occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be
used, the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel
responsible for conducting the evacuation. The procedures shall be updated and approved
at least annually as a condition of the permit, and shall comply with all current laws,
administrative regulations and ordinances in effect at the time of each update.
(b) Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use
shall be allowed;
21-14
(c) No camping unit shall occupy any site in the campground for more than 180
consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a
minimum of 24 hours;
(d) Every camping unit that remains on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a
limited permit or other authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is
kept on file at the campground and made available for review by the Zoning Administrator
upon request. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to
exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section and the
conditional use permit. The Zoning Administrator shall periodically monitor the limited
authorizations issued by the campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of
this section;
(e) The campground shall have signs approved by the Planning & Zoning
Administrator clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures
for evacuation when a flood warning is issued; and
(f) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection, electrical service,
gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed
at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
21.20 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW).
(1) APPLICABILITY. This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain
zoning maps and those identified pursuant to §21.40(4).
(2) PERMITTED USES. The following open space uses are allowed in the
Floodway District and the floodway areas of the General Floodplain District provided they
comply with all applicable ordinances, including but not limited to the standards contained in
this section and the permitting requirements of §21.51.
(a) Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture,
viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
(b) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking
areas and airport landing strips.
(c) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves,
game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas
and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of §21.20(3).
(d) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic
structures that comply with sub. (3) and (4).
(e) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with sub. (3)(d).
(f) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams,
flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and
pipelines that comply with chs. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats.
21-15
(g) Public utilities, streets, boardwalks and bridges that comply with sub. (3)(c).
(3) STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENTS IN THE FLOODWAY.
(a) General.
1. Any development in the floodway shall comply with §21.04 and have a low
flood damage potential.
2. Applicants shall provide the following data to determine compliance of the
proposal with §21.05:
a. A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the
watercourse, showing whether the proposed development will obstruct
flow; or
b. An analysis calculating the effects of the proposal on regional flood height.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will
cause any increase in the flood elevations upstream or downstream, based
on the data submitted for subd. (b) above.
(b) Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally
dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if each such structure:
1. Is not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood damage
potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage;
2. Has a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the
bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The
openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
3. Is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
4. Has all mechanical and utility equipment elevated or flood proofed to or above
the flood protection elevation; and
5. Does not obstruct flow of flood waters or cause any increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the regional flood.
(c) Public utilities, streets, boardwalks and bridges. Public utilities, streets,
boardwalks and bridges may be allowed by permit, if:
1. Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection
elevation; and
2. Construction meets the development standards of §21.05.
21-16
(d) Fills or Deposition of Materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed
by permit, if:
1. The requirements of §21.05 are met;
2. No material is deposited in navigable waters except pursuant to a permit
issued by the DNR pursuant to ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and a permit pursuant to
s. 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and all other applicable legal
requirements have been met;
3. The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap,
vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
4. The fill is not classified as a solid waste or hazardous material.
(4) PROHIBITED USES. All uses not listed as permitted uses in §21.20(2) are
prohibited, including the following uses:
(a) Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not
associated with permanent open-space uses;
(b) Storage of materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or are injurious to
property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life;
(c) Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed
prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and DNR-approved
campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and ch. SPS 383, Wis.
Adm. Code;
(d) Any public or private wells that are used to obtain potable water, except those for
recreational areas that meet the requirements of all Village ordinances and chs. NR 811 and
NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
(e) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(f) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under s. NR
110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code; and
(g) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or
proposed development located outside the floodway and which comply with the regulations
for the floodplain area occupied.
21.30 FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF).
(1) APPLICABILITY. This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the
floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to §21.40(4).
(2) PERMITTED USES. Any structure, land use, or development permitted under
Chapter 15 is allowed in the Floodfringe District if the standards in §21.40 are met, the use
21-17
is not otherwise prohibited by applicable ordinances, and all permits or certificates specified
in §21.51 have been issued.
(3) STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE FLOODFRINGE. All
developments in the floodfringe district shall comply with §21.05 and the following
requirements. An existing nonconforming structure is permitted only in accordance with
§21.50.
(a) Residential Uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home, constructed in,
or moved into, the floodfringe district, shall meet or exceed the following standards.
1. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood protection
elevation on fill unless the requirements of subd. 2 are met. The fill shall be
one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet
beyond the limits of the structure in each direction.
2. The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation
if it is dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or
crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation;
3. Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from every structure to land
outside of the floodplain, except as provided in subd. 4.
4. In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make
compliance with subd. 3 impractical, the Village Board may permit new
development and substantial improvements where roads are below the
regional flood elevation, if:
a. The Village has received written assurance from police, fire and
emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the
structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or
b. The Village has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation plan.
(b) Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall be constructed on fill with the
lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation.
(c) Commercial Uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved
into the floodfringe shall meet the requirements of sub. (1). Subject to the requirements of
par. (e), storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower
elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
(d) Manufacturing and Industrial Uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure
which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to
or above the flood protection elevation or shall meet the floodproofing standards in §21.52.
Subject to the requirements of par. (e), storage yards, surface parking lots and other such
uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life
and property.
21-18
(e) Storage of Materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or
injurious to property, water quality or to human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be
stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with §21.52.
Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter any water
body during flooding.
(f) Public Utilities, Streets, Boardwalks and Bridges. All utilities, streets, boardwalks
and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development
plans; and
1. In any case where public utilities, streets, boardwalks and bridges are
deemed essential, or when the failure of such facilities would endanger the
public health or safety, construction or repair of such facilities shall only be
permitted if they are designed to comply with §21.52.
2. Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if
they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation.
(g) Sewage Systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood water into the system to the flood protection elevation and meet
the provisions of all other Village ordinances and ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
(h) Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system, pursuant to §21.52, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet
the provisions of chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(i) Solid Waste Disposal Sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in
floodfringe areas.
(j) Deposition Of Materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of
this ordinance.
(k) Manufactured Homes.
1. Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare,
secure approval of, and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access
and escape routes, with the Village’s emergency management coordinator.
2. In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on
existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall:
a. have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and
b. be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood.
3. Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured
home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new,
replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the
residential development standards in sub. (3)(a).
21-19
(l) Mobile Recreational Vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for
180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet
the elevation and anchoring requirements in pars. (k)2 and 3. A mobile recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
21.40 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP).
(1) APPLICABILITY. This section shall apply to all properties within floodplains
mapped as A, AO or AH zones.
(2) PERMITTED USES. Pursuant to §21.40(4), it shall be determined whether the
proposed use is located within the floodway or floodfringe.
Those uses permitted in the Floodway [§21.20(2)] and Floodfringe [§21.30(2)]
Districts are allowed within the General Floodplain District, according to the standards of
sub. (3), provided that all permits or certificates required under §21.51 have been issued.
(3) STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE GENERAL FLOODPLAIN
DISTRICT. The standards contained in §21.20 apply to developments in the Floodway
District and §21.30 applies to developments within the Floodfringe District. This subsection
applies to all floodplain districts.
(a) In AO/AH Zones the structure’s lowest floor must meet one of the conditions
listed below whichever is higher:
1. at or above the flood protection elevation; or
2. two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade around the structure; or
3. the depth as shown on the FIRM
(b) In AO/AH zones, an applicant for a permit permitting development shall provide
plans showing adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters around structures.
(4) DETERMINING FLOODWAY AND FLOODFRINGE LIMITS. Upon receiving an
application for development within the general floodplain district, the Zoning Administrator
shall:
(a) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan
which shows the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits,
stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the
property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and flood proofing measures; and
the flood zone as shown on the FIRM.
(b) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed
necessary by the DNR to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood
flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries.
1. A Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study as specified in §21.51(2)(c).
21-20
2. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent
structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed
and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water
supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information;
3. Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling,
dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities.
21.50 NONCONFORMING USES.
(1) GENERAL
(a) APPLICABILITY. If these standards conform with s. 62.23(7)(h), Stats., for cities
and villages, they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or
structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of
this chapter or any amendment thereto.
(b) The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may continue subject to the following
conditions:
1. No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be
permitted unless they comply with this chapter. The words "modification" and
"addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification,
structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure
or accessory structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification;
this includes painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural
components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private
sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. The
construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is
adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension,
modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion
of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal
structure.
2. If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any
future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall
conform to the applicable requirements of this chapter;
3. No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or
exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless
the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a
conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this
chapter, including the provision of contiguous dry land access in compliance
with §21.30(3)(a) or (c). The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a
nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood
protection elevation are excluded from the 50% provisions of this paragraph.
21-21
4. No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed 50% of its
present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire
structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming
use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial
uses in compliance with §21.30(3)(a) or (c).
5. If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done under (d) and (e)
equals or exceeds 50% of the present equalized assessed value the work
shall not be permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a
conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be provided
for residential and commercial uses in compliance with §21.30(a).
6. Except as provided in subd. 7, if any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use that is destroyed or substantially damaged, it
cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure
meet the current ordinance requirements. A structure is considered
substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its predamaged
condition equals or exceeds 50% of the structure’s present
equalized assessed value.
7. For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or destroyed by a
nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming
building shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size and use in effect
prior to the damage event, provided that the minimum federal code
requirements below are met and all required permits have been granted prior
to the start of construction.
a. Residential Structures
i. Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the
base flood elevation using fill, pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls.
Perimeter walls must meet the requirements of §21.52(2).
ii. Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy and shall be constructed with methods and materials
resistant to flood damage.
iii. Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
iv. In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data available from a
federal, state or other source.
v. In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, meet the standards in §21.40(3)(a).
21-22
vi. in AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure.
b. Nonresidential Structures
i. Shall meet the requirements of §21.50(1)(b)7ai-ii and v-vi.
ii. Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
the regional flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet the standards in §21.52(1) or (2).
iii. In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, meet the standards in §21.40(3)(a).
(c) The Village Zoning Administrator shall keep a record which lists all
nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures subject to this chapter, their present
equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been
permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications
represent.
(d) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not
preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will
comply with s. §21.20(3)(a), flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices
and floodproofing methods that comply with §21.52 are used. Repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures shall be exempt from the development standards of §21.50(b)7a if it is
determined that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
(2) FLOODWAY DISTRICT. (a) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any
nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the Floodway District,
unless such modification or addition:
1. Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance
requirements;
2. Meets the requirements of sub. (1);
3. Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height;
4 Will be floodproofed, pursuant to §21.52, by means other than the use of fill,
to the flood protection elevation; and
5 Any enclosed part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation will
conform to the following standards:
a. The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer
to allow for the efficient entry and exit of flood waters without human
intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a
minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of
21-23
the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening shall be no more than
12 inches above the adjacent grade;
b. The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
c. Mechanical and utility equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to or
above the flood protection elevation; and
d. The use must be limited to parking, building access or limited storage.
(b) No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site
sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government
agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in the Floodway District. Any
replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a
floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all Village ordinances and ch. SPS
383, Wis. Adm. Code and be floodproofed in compliance with §21.52.
(c) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall
be allowed in the Floodway District. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing
well in the Floodway District shall meet the applicable requirements of all Village ordinances
and chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code and be floodproofed in compliance with
§21.52.
(3) FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT. (a) No modification or addition shall be allowed to
any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the Floodfringe
District unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the
Village, and meets the requirements of §21.30(3) or of a variance granted under par. (b).
(b) Where compliance with the provisions of par. (a) would result in unnecessary
hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be
associated with a high flood damage potential, the Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a
variance from such provisions for modifications or additions applying the criteria listed
below. Modifications or additions that are protected to elevations lower than the flood
protection elevation may be permitted if:
1. No floor in a residential or commercial structure is allowed below the regional
flood elevation;
2. Human lives will not be endangered;
3. Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed;
4. Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
5. Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
6. The structure shall not be used for storage of materials as described in
§21.30(3)(e).
21-24
(c) All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or
maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of
all Village ordinances and ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code and be floodproofed as provided in
§21.52.
(d) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall
meet the applicable provisions of this chapter, and chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm.
Code and be floodproofed as provided in §21.52.
21.51 ADMINISTRATION.
(1) ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to
administer this chapter and shall have the following duties and powers:
(a) Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing permit
applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed
development is shown on all permit applications.
(b) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this
chapter and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate.
(c) Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine if substantial
damage to the structures has occurred.
(d) Keep records of all official actions such as:
1. All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved.
2. Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations.
3. Floodproofing certificates.
4. Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming
uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
5. All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures.
6. List of nonconforming structures and uses.
(e) Submit copies of the following items to the DNR Regional office:
1. Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals
for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments.
2. Copies of case-by-case analyses and other required information including an
annual summary of floodplain zoning actions taken.
3. Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related
correspondence concerning the assessments.
21-25
(f) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this chapter to the Planning
& Zoning Commission and the Village Attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall
also be sent to the DNR Regional office.
(g) Submit copies of amendments and biennial reports to the FEMA Regional office.
(2) ZONING PERMITS. A zoning permit shall be obtained before any new
development, repair, modification or addition to an existing structure, or change in the use of
a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, within the Floodway or
Floodfringe Districts may be initiated. Applications shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator and shall include:
(a) General Information.
1. Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor; and
2. Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a
modification.
(b) Site Development Plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the
permit application form and shall contain:
1. Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
2. Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable waterways;
3. Location of any existing and proposed structures with distances measured
from the lot lines and street center lines;
4. Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water
supply systems;
5. Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
6. Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official
floodplain zoning maps;
7. The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using the
vertical datum from the adopted study – either National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD);
8. Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD at
the location of the development and to determine whether or not the
requirements of §21.20 or 21.30 are met; and
9. Data to determine whether the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge
according to §21.05. This may include any of the information noted in
§21.20(3)(a).
21-26
(c) Hydraulic and Hydrologic Studies. All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be
completed under the direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in Wisconsin.
The engineer shall be responsible for the technical adequacy and accuracy of the study. All
studies shall be reviewed and approved by the DNR. The required studies shall include:
1. Zone A floodplains:
a. Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the standards in ch.
NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of
Regional Flood Discharge.
b. Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the
standards in ch. NR 116.07(4), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydraulic Analysis:
Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following standards:
.
i. A determination of the required limits of the hydraulic model shall be
based on detailed study information for downstream structures (dam,
bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting WSEL for the study.
ii. A survey of channel sections shall be included.
iii. A minimum four foot contour data in the overbanks shall be used for
the development of cross section overbank and floodplain mapping.
iv. A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross sections is allowed in
developed areas with additional intermediate cross sections required
at transitions in channel bottom slope including a survey of the
channel at each location.
v. The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used.
vi. A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of road is
required at each structure shall be prepared.
vii. Additional cross sections are required at the downstream and
upstream limits of the proposed development and any necessary
intermediate locations based on the length of the reach if greater than
500 feet.
viii. Standard accepted engineering practices shall be used when
assigning parameters for the base model such as flow, Manning’s N
values, expansion and contraction coefficients or effective flow limits.
The base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data such as high
water marks to determine the reasonableness of the model results. If
no historical data is available, adequate justification shall be provided
for any parameters outside standard accepted engineering practices.
ix. The model must extend past the upstream limit of the difference in the
existing and proposed flood profiles in order to provide a tie-in to
existing studies. The height difference between the proposed flood
profile and the existing study profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet.
21-27
c. Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be provided, showing all
cross section locations, floodway/floodplain limits based on best available
topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed development and
whether the proposed development is located in the floodway.
i. If the proposed development is located outside of the floodway, then it
is determined to have no impact on the regional flood elevation.
ii. If any part of the proposed development is in the floodway, it must be
added to the base model to show the difference between existing and
proposed conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients
remain the same as in the existing model, unless adequate justification
based on standard accepted engineering practices is provided.
2. Zone AE Floodplains.
a. Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the existing study, the
appropriate method to be used shall be based on ch. NR 116.07(3), Wis.
Admin. Code, Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Discharge.
b. Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the
standards in ch. NR 116.07(4), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydraulic Analysis:
Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following:
i. Duplicate Effective Model. The effective model shall be reproduced to
ensure correct transference of the model data and to allow integration
of the revised data to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and
downstream of the revised reach. If data from the effective model is
available, models shall be generated that duplicate the FIS profiles
and the elevations shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS
report to within 0.1 foot.
ii. Corrected Effective Model. The Corrected Effective Model shall not
include any man-made physical changes since the effective model
date, but shall import the model into the most current version of HECRAS
for DNR review.
iii. Existing (Pre-Project Conditions) Model. The Existing Model shall be
required to support conclusions about the actual impacts of the project
associated with the Revised (Post-Project) Model or to establish more
up-to-date models on which to base the Revised (Post-Project) Model.
iv. Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model. The Revised (Post-Project
Conditions) Model shall incorporate the Existing Model and any
proposed changes to the topography caused by the proposed
development. This model shall reflect proposed conditions.
21-28
v. All changes to the Duplicate Effective Model and subsequent models
must be supported by certified topographic information, bridge plans,
construction plans and survey notes.
vi. Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to the stream reach
for which the revision is being requested. Cross sections upstream
and downstream of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the
effective model and result in water surface elevations and topwidths
computed by the revised models matching those in the effective
models upstream and downstream of the revised reach as required.
The Effective Model shall not be truncated.
c. Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be submitted to the
DNR for review which meet the following conditions:
i. Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the revised
floodplain and floodway delineations, the revised flood profiles,
topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary
Floodway Maps (FBFMs), construction plans, bridge plans.
ii. Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour interval, and a
planimetric map showing the applicable items. If a digital version of
the map is available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM may
be more easily revised.
iii. Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised 1% and 0.2% annual
chance floodplains and floodway boundaries.
iv. If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital mapping data (GIS or
CADD) are used then all supporting documentation or metadata must
be included with the data submission along with the Universal
Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and State Plane Coordinate
System in accordance with FEMA mapping specifications.
v. The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the effective floodplain
boundaries.
vi. All cross sections from the effective model shall be labeled in
accordance with the effective map and a cross section lookup table
shall be included to relate to the model input numbering scheme.
vii. Both the current and proposed floodways shall be shown on the map.
viii. The stream centerline, or profile baseline used to measure stream
distances in the model shall be visible on the map.
(d) Expiration. All permits issued under this chapter shall expire no more
than 180 days after issuance. The permit may be extended by the Zoning Administrator for a
maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient cause.
21-29
(3) CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. No land subject to this chapter shall be
occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to,
modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied, until a certificate of compliance is
issued by the Zoning Administrator. The following provisions apply to certificates issued
under this section.
(a) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part
thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this chapter;
(b) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a
permit;
(c) If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued
within 10 days after written notification that the permitted work is completed;
(d) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional
engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are
in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the requirements of §21.52 are met.
(4) OTHER PERMITS. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit the
applicant shall secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies,
including but not limited to those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under §404
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. §1344.
(5) BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
(a) Powers and Duties. The powers, duties and procedures applicable to the Board
of Zoning Appeals as provided in §15.03(4) shall apply with respect to the enforcement of
this chapter.
(b) Additional Requirements for Appeals and Variances affecting Floodplains. In the
case of any appeal or application for variance relating to the provisions of this chapter, the
following provisions shall apply:
1. Notice of Hearings. Notice of all hearings shall be mailed to the DNR
Regional office at least 10 days in advance of the hearing.
2. Notice of Decisions. Copies of all decisions by the board shall be sent to the
DNR Regional office within 10 days of the decision.
3. Boundary Disputes. The following provisions shall apply to all decisions by
the board relating to the determination of floodplain district boundaries:
a. If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed
floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating
the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be examined;
b. The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the board;
and
21-30
c. If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the board shall notify the Zoning
Administrator and the person contesting the boundary location that they
may petition the Village Board for a map amendment pursuant to §21.60.
4. Variances. In addition to the standards for variances contained in §15.03(6),
the following provisions shall apply to variances from the regulations
contained in this chapter:
a. No variance shall:
i. Allow any increase in the regional flood elevation;
ii. Be granted for any lot that is one-half acre or larger or that is not
contiguous to an existing structure;
iii. Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district;
iv. Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss;
v. Be granted for a hardship which is self-created;
vi. Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area;
vii. Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or map(s)
required pursuant to §21.60; or
viii. Allow any alteration of a historic structure, including its use, which
would preclude its continued designation as a historic structure.
b. Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient
cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased
risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and
relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the ordinance;
c. When a floodplain variance is granted, the board shall notify the applicant
in writing that it may increase risks to life and property and flood
insurance premiums could increase up to $25.00 per $100.00 of
coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record.
5. Appeals from Denial of Permits. In reviewing the denial of any permits
required under this chapter based on the determination that the permit would
allow an increase in the regional flood elevation, the board shall:
a. Uphold the denial if the board determines that the data demonstrates that
an increase in flood elevation will occur and that an appropriate
amendment has not been made as required by §21.60; or
b. Grant the appeal and direct the issuance of the permit if the board
determines that the data properly demonstrates that the project will not
cause an increase, provided no other reasons for denial exist.
21-31
21.52 FLOODPROOFING STANDARDS FOR NONCOMFORMING STRUCTURES
OR USES.
(1) No permit or variance shall be issued for a non-residential structure designed to
be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the applicant submits a plan certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect
the structure or development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA
Floodproofing Certificate.
(2) For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or variance
shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan which:
(a) Is certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; and
(b) Meets or exceeds the following standards:
1. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding will be
provided;
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
3. If the openings are equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings
or devices, they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(3) Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
(a) Withstand anticipated flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces
and other regional flood factors;
(b) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
(c) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement;
(d) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters; and
(e) Minimize or eliminate discharges into flood waters.
21.53 PUBLIC INFORMATION.
(1) Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional
flood.
(2) All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely
distributed.
(3) Real estate transfers should show what floodplain district any real property is in.
21-32
21.60 AMENDMENTS.
(1) REQUIRED AMENDMENTS. Obstructions or increases in regional flood
elevation shall only be permitted if appropriate amendments are made to this chapter, the
official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with
this section. In addition to such amendments, a Letter of Map Revision from FEMA is
required, and all amendments shall be effective only upon approval by the DNR and FEMA
for all:
(a) obstructions or increases in the AE Zones; and
(b) increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot in A Zones.
(2) MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS. Actions which require an amendment to
floodplain district boundaries or this chapter and/ or require submittal of a Letter of Map
Change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the
regional flood height;
2. Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations on the
FIRM;
3. Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in §21.03(2)(b);
4. Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or
above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the
floodplain;
5. Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain
maps;
6. Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by s. NR 116.05, Wis.
Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the Village; and
7. All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to
remove an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base
flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
(3) AMENDMENT PROCEDURES. (a) Petition. Map and text amendments may be
initiated as provided in §15.03(7)(b). Any petition for amendment to this chapter or any maps
incorporated herein shall include all data required by §21.40(4) and 21.51(2).
(b) Hearing and Determination. Proposed amendments shall be referred to the
Planning & Zoning Commission for review and recommendation as provided in §15.03(7)(d)
and (e). The Zoning Administrator shall assure that the proposed amendment and notice of
public hearing is submitted to the DNR Regional office for review prior to the hearing.
21-33
(c) Effective Date of Amendments. No amendment to this chapter, or the maps
incorporated herein, shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the DNR. No
zoning permit requiring an amendment shall be issued until a Letter of Map Revision is
issued by FEMA for the proposed changes.
(d) Required Easements. Any person petitioning for a map amendment that would
allow an obstruction to flow causing any increase in the regional flood height, shall obtain
flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected
property owners and provide copies thereof to the Zoning Administrator before the
amendment is acted upon by the Village Board.
21.61 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be referred to the Village Attorney
for prosecution. A violator shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than
$25.00 and not more than $50.00, together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of
a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this chapter is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and its creation or continuation may be enjoined
and the maintenance may be abated by action by the Village, the state, or any citizen
thereof pursuant to §87.30, Wis. Stats.
22-1
CHAPTER 22
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
[Repl. & Recr. 09-14, Eff. 6-5-09]
22.01 General Provisions .......................................................................................... 22-1
22.02 Declaration of Policy ....................................................................................... 22-1
22.03 Definitions ........................................................................................................ 22-1
22.04 Mandatory Separation and Recycling ............................................................ 22-5
22.05 Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials Storage ............................................. 22-8
22.06 Collection by Village Contractor .................................................................... 22-8
22.07 Approved Collection Containers .................................................................... 22-9
22.08 Prohibited Activities ...................................................................................... 22-10
22.09 Violations; Notices; Special Collections for Violations ............................. 22-11
22.20 Licensing of Solid Waste and Recyclable Material Collectors ................... 22-12
22.21 Collection Vehicle Regulations .................................................................... 22-12
22.22 Disposal of Yard Wastes ............................................................................... 22-13
22.23 Public Education ........................................................................................... 22-14
22.24 Enforcement .................................................................................................. 22-14
22.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(1) TITLE. This Chapter shall be known as the DeForest Solid Waste Management
Ordinance of the Village of DeForest.
(2) COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER. It shall be unlawful to store, collect, transport,
transfer, recover, incinerate or dispose of any solid waste or recyclable materials within the
boundaries of the Village contrary to the provisions of this Chapter.
(3) LICENSING. All collectors shall be licensed by the W.D.N.R. and all collected
garbage and refuse shall be disposed of in a WDNR licensed disposal site.
(4) SUPERVISION. The handling and collection of solid waste and recyclable
materials shall be under the supervision of the Village Board, the Director of Public Services,
and the Village Administrator. They shall make and enforce such regulations and
administrative rules as are necessary regarding the handling and collection of such
materials.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(5) PRIVATE DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE. Nothing in this Chapter shall be
construed to prohibit the actual producers of garbage or refuse or the owners of residential
units upon which garbage or refuse has been accumulated from personally collecting,
conveying and disposing of garbage or refuse at a W.D.N.R. licensed landfill site provided
that recyclable materials are not so disposed.
22.02 DECLARATION OF POLICY. It is hereby declared to be the purpose and
intent of this Chapter to enhance and improve the environment and promote the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Village by establishing minimum standards for the
storage, collection, transport, processing, separation, recovery and disposal of solid waste.
22.03 DEFINITIONS. As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings given herein unless different meanings are clearly indicated by the context:
22-2
(1) Bi-metal Container means a container for carbonated or malt beverages that is
made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
(2) Collectable Solid Waste means all solid waste that is subject to collection by the
Village-authorized contractor by contract and does not include yard waste, recyclable
materials, special haul items and materials defined as uncollectable wastes.
(3) Collector means the person or persons specifically authorized by the Village
Board to collect garbage, refuse and recyclable materials and dispose of the same.
(4) Collection means the act of removing solid waste or recyclable materials from
the storage area at the source of generation.
(5) Container Board means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products. This does not include waxed cardboard.
(6) Demolition/Construction Waste means that portion of solid wastes consisting of
wastes from the construction, repair, remodeling or reconstruction of buildings, such as
lumber, roofing and sheathing scraps, rubble, broken concrete, asphalt and plaster, conduit,
pipe, wire, insulation and any other materials resulting from the demolition of buildings and
improvements.
(7) Disposal means the orderly process of discarding useless or unwanted material.
(8) Foam Polystyrene Packaging means packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
1. Is designed for serving food or beverages.
2. Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
3. Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged article in
a shipping container.
(9) Garbage means any waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter,
liquid or solid that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish,
fowl, fruit or vegetables, including that from houses, butcher shops and similar
establishments and including in both cases natural content of moisture. Any combination of
garbage and refuse shall always be deemed to be garbage for the purpose of licensing
under this section.
(10) Hazardous Waste means any radioactive, volatile, highly flammable, explosive,
toxic or hazardous materials. Hazardous materials shall include, but not be limited to, any
amount of waste listed or characterized hazardous by the U.S. Environment Protection
Agency or any state agency pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of
1976, as amended, and applicable state law.
(11) HDPE means high density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #2.
22-3
(12) Industrial Waste means waste material, except garbage and refuse, directly or
indirectly resulting from an industrial processing or manufacturing operation.
(13) LDPE means low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4.
(14) Magazine means any magazine or other materials printed on similar paper.
(15) Major Appliance means a residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, refrigerator, furnace,
boiler, dehumidifier, water heater or stove.
(16) Multiple Family Dwelling means a property containing more than two (2)
residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
(17) Newspaper means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
(18) Non-Recyclable Material means all pyrex glass, window glass, light bulbs,
mirrors, broken glass and china, melamine type plastics, all waxed paper, waxed cardboard,
envelopes with gum labels, envelopes with plastic windows, garbage and refuse, telephone
directories, etc., not defined as recyclable materials.
(19) Non-residential Facilities and Properties include any commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. This term does not include
multiple family dwellings.
(20) Non-Residential Solid Waste means solid waste from agricultural, commercial,
governmental, industrial or institutional activities.
(21) Office Paper means high-grade printing and writing papers from offices in nonresidential
facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer printout are
examples of office paper generally accepted as high-grade. This term does not include
industrial process waste.
(22) Other Resins or Multiple Resins mean plastic resins labeled by the SPI code
#7.
(23) Person includes individuals, firms, corporations and associations, and includes
the plural as well as the singular.
(24) PETE means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code #1.
(25) Plastic Container means an individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar or
carton, except a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a product that is the subject of
a retail sale.
(26) Post-consumer Waste means any solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods, hazardous waste as defined in §291.01(7), Wis. Stats.,
demolition/construction wastes, scrap automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as
defined in s. 289.01(17), Wis. Stats.
22-4
(27) PP means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code #5.
(28) Private Collection Services means collection services provided by a person
licensed to do so by the D.N.R.
(29) PS means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code #6.
(30) PVC means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code #3.
(31) Recyclable Container means a container authorized and provided by the
Village for use in the collection of recyclable materials from residential properties.
(32) Recyclable Materials include lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil,
yard waste, aluminum containers, corrugated paper or other container board, foam
polystyrene packaging, glass containers, magazines, newspaper, office paper, rigid plastic
containers (including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or
multiple resins), steel containers, waste tires, and bi-metal containers, but does not include
any hazardous household wastes.
(33) Refuse means any combustible or noncombustible waste including discarded,
relatively dry, miscellaneous materials, comprising chiefly wood, paper, rags, excelsior,
straw, leather, boxes, sweepings from buildings and similar discarded articles of combustible
and noncombustible nature.
(34) Residential Solid Waste means all solid waste that normally originates in a
residential environment from residential dwelling units.
(35) Scavenge means to remove materials placed for collection by one other than a
licensed collector at any point in solid waste disposal process.
(36) Solid Waste means garbage, refuse and other useless, unwanted or discarded
material, except recyclable materials, from agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional activities. Solid waste does not include solid or dissolved material in domestic
sewage.
(37) Solid Waste Treatment means any method, technique or process which is
designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of solid
waste. "Treatment" includes incineration.
(38) Special Haul Items include body waste, dead animals, large vehicle parts, large
equipment, large appliances, large discarded furniture and bulky construction/demolition
waste shall be considered items subject to special haul services and charges and are not
considered residential waste subject to regular weekly collection.
(39) Storage means the interim containment of solid waste in an approved manner
after generation and prior to collection and ultimate disposal.
(40) Storage Areas mean areas where persons place containers during noncollection
days as well as areas where containers are set out on collection day.
22-5
(41) Uncollectable Waste means all of the following waste materials that are not
subject to collection by the Village:
(a) Hazardous waste;
(b) Toxic waste;
(c) Chemicals;
(d) Explosives or ammunition;
(e) Drain oil or flammable liquids;
(f) Paint;
(g) Dead animals or parts thereof, except wastes generated in the process of meal
preparation;
(h) Animal or human waste except as provided in §22.09(7); and
(i) Demolition/construction wastes.
(42) Waste Container means a container authorized and provided by the Village for
use in the collection of garbage, refuse and other collectable solid waste from residential
properties.
(43) Waste Tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
(44) WDNR means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(45) Yard Waste means that part of solid waste consisting of leaves, grass clippings,
sawdust, shrubs and garden debris and brush, including clean woody vegetative material no
greater than 6 inches in diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with
intact root balls.
22.04 MANDATORY SEPARATION AND RECYCLING.
(1) GENERAL PROVISIONS. The owner and each occupant of every residential
unit, place of business, industry, commerce, school, governmental building or other place
providing goods or services of any type shall cooperate in the collection, separation from
solid waste, and recycling of recyclable materials as provided in this section, except with
respect to industrial wastes not collected by or for the Village. Waste not separated as
required in this section will not be collected and the generator or owner of the waste shall be
subject to forfeitures and other remedies provided in this Chapter.
(2) SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. All persons within the Village
shall separate the following materials from their post-consumer waste:
(a) Lead acid batteries;
22-6
(b) Major appliances;
(c) Waste oil;
(d) Yard waste;
(e) Aluminum containers;
(f) Bi-metal containers;
(g) Corrugated paper or other container board;
(h) Foam polystyrene packaging;
(i) Glass containers;
(j) Magazines;
(k) Newspaper;
(l) Office paper;
(m) Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other
resins or multiple resins;
(n) Steel containers; and
(o) Waste tires.
(3) EXEMPTIONS FROM SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS. The separation
requirements of sub. (1) above do not apply to the following:
(a) Persons who send their post-consumer waste to a processing facility licensed by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that recovers the materials specified in this
section from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
(b) Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less than 30%
of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste burned as supplemental fuel.
(c) A recyclable material specified in (2)(e) through (2)(n) for which a variance has
been granted by the Department of Natural Resources under s. 287.11, Wis. Stats., or s. NR
544.14, Wis. Administrative Code.
(4) CARE OF SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. To the greatest extent
practicable, the recyclable materials separated in accordance with this section shall be clean
and kept free of contaminants such as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other nonrecyclable
materials, including but not limited to household hazardous waste, medical waste,
and agricultural chemicals.
22-7
(5) MANAGEMENT OF LEAD ACID BATTERIES, MAJOR APPLIANCES, WASTE
TIRES AND WASTE OIL. Lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste tires and waste oil
shall be disposed of as follows:
(a) Lead acid batteries, major appliances and waste tires shall be recycled by
contacting a licensed collector to arrange pick-up or by delivering them to a licensed
recycling facility. Microwave ovens with capacitors removed may be disposed of in properly
licensed landfills.
(b) Waste oil shall be recycled by disposing of it at the Village of DeForest Public
Service Building in the tanks provided by the Village or by delivery to another established
waste oil collection facility.
(6) PREPARATION AND COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Except
as otherwise directed by the DeForest Village Board, occupants of single family and 2 to 4
unit residences shall do the following for the preparation and collection of the separated
materials listed below:
(a) Aluminum, bi-metal and steel cans shall have paper labels removed and shall be
rinsed clean of product residue and placed in the recyclables container provided.
(b) Glass bottles and jars shall be rinsed clean of product residue and shall have
caps removed and shall be placed, unbroken if possible, in the recyclables container
provided. Labels, caps, window glass, light bulbs and ceramics shall not be placed in the
recyclables container.
(c) Plastic bottles and rigid plastic containers made of HDPE, PETE, PVC, LDPE,
PP or PS and other resins or multiple resins shall be rinsed free of product residue and caps
shall be removed and discarded. The plastic bottles and containers shall be placed in the
recyclables container.
(7) RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR DESIGNATED AGENTS OF
NONRESIDENTIAL AND LARGE MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS. (a) Owners or
designated agents of multiple-family dwellings containing 5 or more units and of all
properties containing one or more non-residential units shall do all of the following to recycle
the materials specified in (2)(e) through (2)(n):
1. Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
2. Notify in writing, at least semi-annually, all users, tenants and
occupants of the properties about the established recycling program.
3. Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
4. Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle,
which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in order to
meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites,
locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or company,
including a name, address and telephone number.
22-8
(b) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to the owners or designated
agents of non-residential facilities and properties if the post-consumer waste generated
within the facility or property is treated at a processing facility licensed by the Department of
Natural Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in (2)(e) through (2)(n)
from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
(8) RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OF 2-4 UNIT MULTIPLE-FAMILY
DWELLINGS. Owners of multiple-family dwellings not subject to sub. (7) are hereby
required to provide adequate, separate containers for the disposal of recyclables. Such
owners are further required to notify tenants on "move-in" and on a semi-annual basis
thereafter of all Village recycling requirements.
(9) PROHIBITIONS ON DISPOSAL OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS SEPARATED
FOR RECYCLING. (a) No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn
in a solid waste treatment facility any of the materials specified in subs. (2)(e) through (2)(n)
which have been separated for recycling, except waste tires may be burned with energy
recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
22.05 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS STORAGE.
(1) MAINTENANCE OF STORAGE AREAS. Storage areas and containers for solid
waste and recycling materials shall be kept in a nuisance-free and odor-free condition. All
containers shall be kept closed except when material is being deposited or collected such
that deposited material does not escape from the container. Solid waste and recyclable
materials will not be collected unless contained within an approved container at the time of
scheduled collection.
(2) NUISANCE DECLARED. The accumulation or deposit of garbage, refuse or
putrescible animal or vegetable matter in or upon any lot or land or any public or private
place within the Village which causes the air or environment to become noxious or offensive
or to be in such a condition as to promote a breeding place for rodents or other animals, or
which otherwise becomes injurious to the public health is prohibited and declared to
constitute a nuisance. For purposes of this section, a condition of property shall be deemed
a nuisance if it is offensive to a person of average sensibilities.
22.06 COLLECTION BY VILLAGE CONTRACTOR. (a) Solid Waste and
Recyclable Material Collection. Collectable solid waste generated by residential or
commercial properties within the Village shall be collected weekly, and all recyclable
materials shall be collected from such properties biweekly, on a schedule established by the
Village Board in accordance with a contract between the Village and a licensed collector.
(b) Special Haul Items. Special haul items shall not be included in normal collection
provided by the Village and shall be disposed of by the owner thereof under separate
arrangements with the Village’s authorized collector or another licensed collector. The
Director of Public Services shall make available to the public information on arranging for
special haul item collection upon request.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
22-9
22.07 APPROVED COLLECTION CONTAINERS. (1) APPROVED CONTAINERS
REQUIRED. (a) Standard Containers. All collectable solid waste placed for collection by
the Village shall be placed within a single waste container approved and provided by the
Village. All recyclable materials for collection by the Village shall be placed within a single,
separate recyclable container approved and provided by the Village. New residential units
shall be provided with a waste container and recyclable container at no charge. Additional
approved containers may be placed for collection by any person who has arranged with the
Village-authorized collector for the collection of additional waste or recyclables at such
person’s sole expense. No container shall be subject to collection if the combined weight of
the container and contents exceeds 175 lbs.
[Am. 10-21, Eff. 3-18-10].
(b) Special Exceptions. In any case where a property contains more than 4
residential or commercial units in the aggregate, and where, due to the size, location,
configuration or other features of the property the Village Administrator shall determine that
the number of containers would present a danger to the public safety or a significant
impediment to efficient collection, the Administrator may authorize and/or require the use of
a specified non-standard container or alternative collection methods provided that the
property owner is provided an equivalent level of disposal capacity and that the alternative
method does not result in any additional cost to the property owner. Non-standard
containers shall be subject to any weight limitation determined necessary by the
Administrator, but the total weight limit shall not be less than the aggregate weight allowed
for all units if using standard containers.
(2) OWNERSHIP OF CONTAINERS. All waste containers and recyclable
containers provided by the Village shall remain the property of the Village at all times, and
shall be returned to the Village at the direction of the Village Board. No person shall remove
any container provided to a particular property from that property without the consent of the
Village, except that the owner or occupant of such property may temporarily remove a
container provided that it is returned to the original location prior to the next scheduled
collection date. No containers shall be removed from the Village limits at any time without
the written approval of the Director of Public Services or Village Administrator. Each owner
of property shall be responsible for the protection of all containers provided by the Village for
use at such property from damage, theft or other loss and the cost of repair or replacement
if necessitated by any cause.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(3) ADDITIONAL OR REPLACEMENT CONTAINERS.
(a) Replacement Containers. Damaged, stolen or lost containers shall be
replaced by the Village at a cost to the property owner established by the Village Board from
time to time to reflect the cost to the Village of providing such replacements.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, containers damaged solely by Village-operated snow plows
shall be replaced by the Village at no cost provided that the damage is reported to the
Village within 72 hours of its occurrence and the cause of the damage can be verified.
(b) Additional Containers. Additional containers may be purchased from the
Village’s authorized collector.
(c) Exchange of Containers. The Village Board may authorize the voluntary
exchange of containers for similar containers of a different size and may establish an
22-10
exchange fee to defray the cost of administering the exchange program from time to time.
Purchasers of existing residential units shall be exempt from the exchange fee for a single
exchange during the first thirty (30) days following the closing on the purchase. Exchanges
of containers issued for rental units may be authorized only by the owner of the units and
the exchange fee shall apply on a per unit basis. All additional, replacement or exchanged
containers shall remain the property of the Village notwithstanding any fee paid to the
Village.
[Am. 10-21, Eff. 3-18-10].
(4) PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS FOR COLLECTION. Containers for collection
shall be placed near the street and in or near a driveway, where applicable, in a location that
is at least four (4) feet from any other above-ground object and at least ten (10) feet from
any parked vehicle and outside of the traveled portion of the roadway. In cases where such
placement is not practicable due to accumulated snow or other conditions, containers may
be placed in the gutter as close to the curb as possible. Containers shall be placed with the
lid securely closed and the lid opening toward the street to facilitate mechanized collection.
In the case of non-standard containers approved by the Village Administrator pursuant to
sub. (1), the placement of the containers for collection shall be directed by the Administrator.
Containers may be placed for collection not earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the
scheduled collection day and shall be removed not later than 10:00 a.m. on the day
following scheduled collection.
[Am. 10-21, Eff. 3-18-10].
(5) PROHIBITED WASTES. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any
recyclable materials within a waste container, or to place any solid waste within a recyclable
container. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any uncollectable waste in any
container for collection by the Village.
(6) CONTRACT INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE. The terms of any contract
from time to time entered into by the Village for waste and recyclable material collection,
transfer or disposal under this Chapter shall be incorporated by reference and made an
integral part of this Chapter. The contract shall be subject to the same penalties and
enforcement provisions as any other section of this Chapter. Any conflict between the
existing ordinance and a contract shall be resolved in favor of the contract.
22.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
(1) ASHES. It shall be unlawful to place hot ashes for collection. Ashes that are
cool and dry may be placed for collection, but only in noncombustible containers.
(2) IMPROPER DISPOSAL. No persons shall deposit, throw or place any garbage,
offal, dead animals, combustible refuse or other deleterious matter in any park, lane, alley,
street, public grounds or public place within the Village, nor place any garbage, offal, dead
animals or other refuse matter upon any private property not owned by such person.
(3) IMPROPER TRANSPORTATION. It shall be unlawful to transport any solid
waste in any vehicle which permits the contents to blow, sift, leak or fall therefrom. In the
event spillage occurs from any cause, the person transporting the material shall immediately
return spilled materials to the vehicle and shall properly clean, or have cleaned, the area of
such material. All vehicles used for the collection and transportation of solid waste shall be
durable, easily cleanable and leak-proof, if necessary, considering the type of waste and its
22-11
moisture content. Collection vehicles shall be cleaned frequently to prevent nuisances and
insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair.
(4) INTERFERENCE WITH AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR. No person other than an
authorized collector shall collect or interfere with any solid waste or recyclable material after
it shall have been put into an approved container and placed for collection, nor shall any
person molest, hinder, delay or in any manner interfere with an authorized garbage collector
in the discharge of his duties.
(5) SCAVENGING. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any solid waste
or recyclable material placed for collection.
(6) BURNING OF WASTE. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste in
any manner, except as expressly authorized in this Code.
(7) ANIMAL OR HUMAN WASTES. It shall be unlawful for any person to place
animal and/or human wastes for collection unless wrapped securely in plastic bags. Such
items as cat litter and disposable diapers may be placed for collection pursuant to this
provision.
(8) HOSPITAL WASTES. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection
any pathogenic hospital wastes. Such items as needles and syringes may be placed in
waste containers provided they are contained within a rigid material to eliminate the risk of
injury to collection crews.
(9) REFUSE FROM OUTSIDE THE VILLAGE. It shall be unlawful for any person to
deposit for collection within the Village any solid waste, yard waste or recyclable materials
generated or collected outside of the Village limits.
(10) MANURE STORAGE. No manure from any animal shall be stored within the
Village except in fly-proof and impervious containers which are kept and maintained in good
repair.
22.09 VIOLATIONS; NOTICES; SPECIAL COLLECTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS.
(1) NOTICES. In the event of any violation of this Chapter and/or the regulations
and administrative rules authorized herein or the statutes of the State of Wisconsin, any law
enforcement officer, the Director of Public Services, the Village Building Inspector or Village
Administrator shall issue a written notice of each violation and the corrective measures to be
taken, together with the time in which such corrections shall be made. Time limits set for the
correction of violations shall be reasonable and consistent. The Police Department, the
Director of Public Services and Village Administrator shall consider time needed for repairs
or purchases to correct deficiencies, public health and consistent time limits for like
violations. Time limits shall not be greater than ten (10) working days nor less than twentyfour
(24) hours. All such notices shall be kept in a clearly marked file at the Police
Department and shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(2) SPECIAL COLLECTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS. If any entity, including those
receiving collection from a private firm, is found in violation of the collection and storage
requirements of this Chapter and fails to comply with a notification and/or requirements of
22-12
this Chapter and fails to comply with a notification and/or citation, the Police Department, the
Director of Public Services or Village Administrator shall be empowered to order a special
collection to remove such violation. The person shall be notified of such special collection
and the charges therefor. The special collection shall be made and if billing is unpaid, the bill
shall be levied as a special charge against the property and shall be placed on the tax roll.
A person shall not use the special collection provisions of this Chapter to circumvent
requirements for collection by a private firm.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
22.20 LICENSING OF SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIAL
COLLECTORS.
(1) LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall engage in the business of collecting
solid waste or recyclable materials in the Village without first obtaining from the Village a
license to do so. Applications for licenses shall be presented to the Village Board on forms
prepared by the Village Clerk and shall be accompanied by the license fee of One Hundred
and Twenty-five Dollars ($125.00).
(2) TRANSFER OF LICENSES. Licenses may not be transferred except upon
approval by the Village Board.
(3) COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS. It is a condition of
all licenses granted under this Chapter that the license holder shall comply with the
ordinances of the Village, the rules, regulations and orders of the local and State Boards of
Health, and the Wisconsin Statutes relating to the collecting, hauling and disposal of waste.
(4) REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE. The Village Board may revoke
or suspend any license issued under this Chapter for cause after hearing held on not less
than three (3) days' notice to the holder thereof. No person whose license or permit has
been revoked shall again be issued such license or permit under this Chapter within one (1)
year from the date of revocation.
(5) EXPANSION OF COLLECTION BY VILLAGE. In the event that a program for
industrial garbage collection by the Village is established, the Village Board may terminate
any license issued under this Chapter without hearing on thirty (30) days' written notice to
the license holder that any such collection is being established. Such collection and
termination would be subject to any private contracts in effect at the time service would be
established.
(6) LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED. No license shall be issued until the
applicant has furnished satisfactory proof that he has in full force and effect a public liability
insurance policy issued by an insurer authorized to do business in the State of Wisconsin for
the applicant’s total operation in amounts at least Two Hundred Thousand Dollars
($200,000.00) per person and Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) per
occurrence for bodily injury, including accidental death, and Five Hundred Thousand Dollars
($500,000.00) per occurrence for property damage.
22.21 COLLECTION VEHICLE REGULATIONS.
(1) VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS. All trucks or other vehicles used by waste
collectors shall be of substantial construction, and the body shall be watertight or shall be a
22-13
type commonly known as "packers." All vehicles shall be properly designed, constructed,
equipped and loaded so that the contents shall fall or blow from the vehicle.
(2) PARKING RESTRICTIONS. No person shall park or cause to be parked any
such vehicle as described in subsection (1) and used by such waste collectors in any
Residential, Commercial, or Conservancy District of the Village for more than one (1) hour,
unless disabled, or awaiting repair at a repair garage. This section shall not apply to any
Village vehicle.
(3) VEHICLE SIGNAGE. Vehicles used by licensed collectors shall have painted or
otherwise securely affixed on both sides of the vehicle used the name and contact
information of the owner and the Village license number in letters and numbers not less than
three (3) inches in height, in contrasting colors and ordinarily visible at a distance of fifty (50)
feet.
22.22 DISPOSAL OF YARD WASTES. (1) PERMITTED METHODS OF
DISPOSAL
(a) Yard waste shall be disposed of in one of the following ways:
1. Transporting the waste to the Village Yard Waste Facility;
2. Composting the waste at the site of generation; or
3. Contracting privately for removal and disposal.
(b) Brush. In addition to the methods authorized by par. (a), brush may be disposed
of by placement for pick-up by the Village as provided in sub. (3).
(2) VILLAGE YARD WASTE FACILITY REGULATIONS. (a) Permitted Materials.
No person shall deposit any yard waste or other material at the Village Yard Waste Facility
other than material generated on real property located within the Village. No person shall
deposit any material other than yard waste at such site, unless the Village Board shall
authorize collection of additional materials on either a regular or special collection basis by
resolution.
(b) Administrative Regulations. The Village Administrator or Director of Public
Services may establish administrative regulations governing the operation of the facility.
Such regulations shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the facility. A violation of any
such regulations shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(c) Hours of Operation. No person shall enter, deposit any materials or otherwise
use the facility other than during the established hours of operation. Hours of operation may
be established from time to time by the Village Board or by administrative regulation as
provided in par. (b).
(d) Deposit of Materials. No person shall deposit any materials at the facility except
in designated containers, bunkers or other locations specified by regulation.
22-14
(3) BRUSH COLLECTION. Tree and shrub trimmings, holiday trees, and brush
shall be collected from individual properties by the Village according to a schedule
established by the Village Board. To qualify for collection, such materials shall be placed on
the terrace or other location adjacent to the street, perpendicular to the street, with the butt
end of all branches aligned in the same direction. Branches shall not exceed 8' in length or
6” in diameter. Any brush not placed in conformance with this subsection will not be
collected.
22.23 PUBLIC EDUCATION. The Village Board will have the responsibility of
informing the Public on the benefits and prescribed methods of recycling. All notices as to
variations in pickup, times and places of public recycling meetings and public education
seminars will be published in the official Village newspaper and/or posted on the Village’s
web site.
22.24 ENFORCEMENT.
(1) For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
any authorized officer, employee or representative of the Village may inspect recyclable
materials separated for recycling, post-consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling
collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwellings
and non-residential facilities and properties, and any records relating to recycling activities.
No person may refuse access to any authorized officer, employee or authorized
representative of the Village who requests access for purposes of inspection, and who
presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such
an inspection.
(2) Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to forfeitures as
provided herein. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude enforcement under any other
ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter. Proceedings under any other
ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of
a citation under this subsection.
[Am. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
(3) Penalties for violating this chapter shall be assessed as follows:
(a) Any person who violates §22.04 shall forfeit up to $50 for a first violation,
not less than $50 nor more than $200 for a second violation, and not less
than $200 nor more than $2000 for a third or any subsequent violation
together with the costs of prosecution.
(b) Any person who violates a provision of this Chapter other than§22.04shall
forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $1000 for each violation together
with the costs of prosecution.
(c) The Village Board may, upon notice and hearing, administratively suspend
the solid waste and recycling material collection of any person in the
Village for non-compliance with this Chapter.
(4) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
24-1
CHAPTER 24
EROSION CONTROL AND STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
[Repealed & Recreated 10-28, Eff. 10-1-10]
24.01 Title ................................................................................................................... 24-1
24.02 Authority .......................................................................................................... 24-1
24.025 Additional Standards ...................................................................................... 24-1
24.03 Findings and Declaration of Policy ................................................................ 24-1
24.04 Purpose and Intent .......................................................................................... 24-2
24.05 Definitions ........................................................................................................ 24-3
24.06 Scope of Geographic Coverage ..................................................................... 24-8
24.07 Erosion Control Permits – When Required .................................................... 24-9
24.08 Storm Water Management Permits – When Required ................................... 24-9
24.09 Exemptions and Clarifications ..................................................................... 24-10
24.10 Pre-Application Conference.......................................................................... 24-11
24.11 Erosion Control and Storm Water Management Permits
and Administration .................................................................................. 24-11
24.12 Erosion Control Plan Requirements ............................................................ 24-17
24.13 Storm Water Management Plan Requirements............................................ 24-19
24.14 Off-Site Storm Water Management ............................................................... 24-27
24.15 Technical Standards and Specifications ..................................................... 24-28
24.16 Appeals and Variances ................................................................................. 24-28
24.165 Violations and Enforcement ......................................................................... 24-30
24.17 Permit Fees .................................................................................................... 24-31
24.18 Penalties ........................................................................................................ 24-31
24.01 TITLE. This Chapter shall be known as, referred to, and may be cited as
the “Erosion Control And Storm Water Management Ordinance” of the Village of DeForest.
24.02 AUTHORITY. This Chapter is adopted by the Village of DeForest under the
authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 61.354.
24.025 ADDITIONAL STANDARDS. In addition to the requirements of this Chapter,
every person required to obtain a permit hereunder shall comply with all applicable
regulations promulgated by state or federal agencies governing construction site erosion
control and storm water runoff, as they may be amended from time to time, including, but not
limited to, the regulations contained in Chapter NR 151, Wis. Admin. Code. Wherever the
requirements of this chapter conflict with the applicable state or federal requirements, the
more restrictive standard shall apply. Every application for a permit under this Chapter shall
demonstrate compliance with all applicable standards.
24.03 FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY. (1) FINDINGS. The Village
Board finds that construction site erosion and uncontrolled storm water runoff from land
development activities adversely affect the water resources and the health, safety, property,
and general welfare of the community, and diminish the public enjoyment and use of natural
resources. Soil erosion and storm water runoff specifically can:
24-2
(a) Carry sediment, nutrients, pathogens, organic matter, heavy metals, toxins
and other pollutants to regional lakes, streams, creeks, and wetlands;
(b) Diminish the capacity of water resources to support recreational uses and a
natural diversity of plant and animal life;
(c) Obstruct the Village’s existing storm water drainage system, increasing
maintenance problems and costs;
(d) Cause bank and channel erosion;
(e) Increase downstream flooding;
(f) Reduce groundwater recharge, thereby potentially diminishing stream base
flows and lowering water levels in regional lakes, ponds, and wetlands;
(g) Increase the risk of property damage and personal injury; and
(h) Cause damage to agricultural fields and crops.
(2) DECLARATION OF POLICY. The Village Board finds and declares that
effective erosion control and storm water management depends on proper planning and
design, and the timely installation of conservation and management practices and their
continuing maintenance.
24.04 PURPOSE AND INTENT. (1) PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to
diminish threats to public health and safety, public and private property, and the natural
resources of the Village and the territory subject to its extraterritorial review by prescribing
minimum requirements for safe construction site erosion control and storm water
management.
(2) INTENT. This Chapter is intended to regulate construction site erosion and
storm water runoff and to accomplish the following objectives:
(a) Promote storm water management within the areas subject to this Chapter;
(b) Minimize the effects of sedimentation, water pollution from nutrients, heavy
metals, chemical and petroleum products and other contaminants, flooding, and thermal
impacts to the areas subject to this Chapter;
(c) Promote infiltration and groundwater recharge;
(d) Protect functional values of natural water courses and wetlands;
(e) Provide a set of performance standards that are consistent with the standards
set forth by Dane County;
(f) Achieve the following reductions in average annual sediment loads to the
surface waters in and near the Village and outlying waters as compared to no controls being
implemented:
24-3
1. 80% for all new land development;
2. 40% for all redevelopment and street reconstruction;
3. 20% for existing developments;
(g) Ensure there will be no increase in temperature of storm water postconstruction
in order to protect cold water communities;
(h) Ensure there will be no increase in the rate of surface water drainage from
sites during or after construction; and
(i) Protect public and private property from damage resulting from runoff or
erosion.
24.05 DEFINITIONS. As used in this Chapter, the following terms are defined as
follows:
(1) “AFFECTED” or “AFFECT” means that a regulated activity:
(a) Has significantly caused or may cause negative impacts on water quality or on
the use or maintenance of a property or business; or
(b) Has endangered or may endanger one’s health, safety, or general welfare.
(2) “AGRICULTURAL” means related to or used for the production of food or
fiber, including, but not limited to, general farming, livestock and poultry enterprises, grazing,
nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod production, cranberry
productions and wild crop harvesting, and includes lands used for on-site buildings and
other structures necessary to carry out such activities.
(2g) “AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL” means measured precipitation in Madison,
Wisconsin between March 12 and December 2, 1981.
(2m) “BANK EROSION” means the removal of soil or rock fragments along the
banks or bed of a stream channel resulting from high flow after rain events.
(3) “BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE” means the most up-to-date practice,
technique, or measure that is an effective, practical means of preventing or reducing soil
erosion or water pollution, or both, from runoff both during and after land development
activities. Such practices can include structural, vegetative or operational practices.
(4) “COLD WATER COMMUNITY” means surface waters capable of supporting
a community of cold water fish and other aquatic life, or serving as a spawning area for cold
water fish species (NR 102.04(3)(a) Wisconsin Administrative Code).
(4m) “CONNECTED IMPERVIOUSNESS” means an impervious surface that is
directly connected to a separate storm sewer or water of the state via an impervious flow
path.
24-4
(5) “CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL” means a method of
preventing or reducing soil erosion and sedimentation from land disturbing activity.
(5m) “EFFECTIVE INFILTRATION AREA” means the area of the infiltration system
that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access, berms or
pretreatment.
(6) “EROSION” or “SOIL EROSION” means the detachment and movement of
soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity.
(7) “EXCAVATION” means any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel,
rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed, and shall include the resulting conditions.
(8) “EXISTING DEVELOPMENT” means any building, structure, or other
impervious areas existing prior to August 21, 2001.
(9) “FILL” means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new
location, other than by acts of nature, and shall include the resulting conditions.
(10) “FINANCIAL SECURITY INSTRUMENT” means a surety bond, performance
bond, maintenance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash escrow, or similar guarantee
submitted to the Village to assure that the requirements of this Chapter are carried out in
compliance with an approved plan. The form of any required financial security shall be
determined at the sole discretion of the Village.
(11) “GRADING” means the alteration of the elevation of a land surface by
stripping, excavating, filling, or stockpiling of soil materials, or any combination of such
activities, and shall include the land from which the material was taken and upon which it
was placed.
(12) “GULLY EROSION” means a severe loss of soil caused by or resulting in
concentrated surface water flow of sufficient velocity to create a defined flow channel.
(13) “HEAVILY DISTURBED SITE” means a site where an area of land is
subjected to significant compaction due to the removal of vegetative cover or earthmoving
activities, including filling.
(14) “HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG)” has the meaning used in the runoff
calculation methodology promulgated by the United States Natural Resources Conservation
Service Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices.
(15) “IMPERVIOUS SURFACE” means any land cover preventing rain or melting
snow from soaking into the ground, such as buildings and structures, roads, sidewalks,
patios, driveways, and parking lots. For purposes of this Chapter, all road, driveway or
parking surfaces, including gravel surfaces, shall be considered impervious, unless such
surface cover is specifically designed to encourage infiltration and the design of the surface
cover is approved by the Local Approval Authority.
24-5
(16) “IMPROVEMENT” means any structure, fixture, erection, construction,
demolition, alteration, excavation, filling, grading, tiling, planting, clearing or landscaping that
is built, erected, made, or done on or to a parcel for its permanent benefit.
(17) “INFILTRATION,” for the purposes of this Chapter, refers to any precipitation
that does not leave the site as surface runoff.
(17m) “INFILTRATION SYSTEM” means a device or practice such as a basin,
trench, rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not
include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop
downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices such as swales or road side
channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only.
(17r) “KARST FEATURE” means an area or surficial geologic feature subject to
bedrock dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may include
caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces, sinkholes, springs,
seeps or swallets.
(18) “LAND DEVELOPMENT” or “DEVELOPMENT” means any of the following
activities:
(a) Structural development, including the construction of a new building or other
structures or improvements;
(b) The expansion or alteration of an existing structure resulting in an increase in
the surface dimensions of the building or structure;
(c) Land disturbing activities; or
(d) The creation, construction, installation, or expansion of impervious surfaces.
(19) “LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITIES” means any land alterations or
disturbances that may result in soil erosion, sedimentation, or change in runoff, including,
but not limited to, tilling, removal of ground cover or other vegetation, grading, excavating,
and filling of land.
(20) “LAND DIVISION CODE” means Chapter 13 of the Village’s Municipal Code
adopted for the purpose of regulating the division of land.
(21) “LANDOWNER” or “OWNER OF PROPERTY” means any person having any
pecuniary interest in lands regulated by this Chapter.
(22) “LOCAL APPROVAL AUTHORITY” means the municipal staff or contracted
entity charged by the Village of DeForest with the responsibility for enforcing this erosion
control and storm water ordinance. For the purposes of development or redevelopment on
private property, the Building Inspector or contracted entity approved by the Building
Inspector is designated as the Local Approval Authority. For development or redevelopment
on public rights-of-way and/or public easements, the Director of Public Services or
24-6
contracted entity approved by the Director of Public Services is designated as the Local
Approval Authority.
[Am. 15-33, Eff. 07-07-15]
(22m) “MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP)” A level of implementing best
management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified in this chapter
which takes into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness and other
competing issues such as human safety and welfare, endangered and threatened
resources, historic properties and geographic features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to
meet performance standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site
conditions.
(23) “NEW LAND DEVELOPMENT” means any land development activities
occurring after the effective date of this Chapter.
(24) “NON-EROSIVE VELOCITY” means a rate of flow of storm water runoff,
usually measured in feet per second, that does not erode soils. Non-erosive velocities vary
for individual sites due to differences in topography, soil type, and/or runoff rates.
(25) “PARCEL” means any defined area of land regardless of the manner of its
legal description.
(26) “PEAK FLOW” means the maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a
channel, watercourse, or conduit resulting from the predetermined storm or flood.
(27) “PERMITTEE” means any person to whom a permit is issued under this
Chapter.
(28) “PERSON” means any natural person, limited partnership, limited liability
company, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity.
(29) “PERVIOUS SURFACE” means any land cover that permits rain or melting
snow to soak into the ground.
(30) “PLAN” means an erosion control plan required by sec. 24.12 or a storm
water management plan required by sec. 24.13.
(31) “POST-DEVELOPMENT” refers to the extent and distribution of land cover
types anticipated to occur under conditions of full development of the submitted plan. This
term is used to match pre- and post-development storm water peak flows as required by this
Chapter.
(32) “PRE-DEVELOPMENT” refers to the extent and distribution of land cover
types present before the initiation of the proposed land development activity, assuming that
all land uses prior to land disturbing activity are in “good” condition as described in the
Natural Resources Conservation Service Technical Release 55, “Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds” (commonly known as TR-55). This term is used to match pre- and postdevelopment
storm water peak flows as required by this Chapter. In a situation where
cumulative impervious surfaces created after August 21, 2001 exceeds the 20,000 sq. ft
24-7
threshold, the pre-development conditions shall be those prior to the proposed land
disturbance.
(32a) “RECHARGE” means the portion of the average annual rainfall that infiltrates
the soil and becomes groundwater. Recharge does not include evapotranspiration,
transpiration, or runoff from the site.
(33) “REDEVELOPMENT” means any construction, alteration or improvement
exceeding four thousand (4,000) square feet of land disturbance performed on sites where
the existing site is predominantly developed as commercial, industrial, institutional or
multifamily residential uses. Projects may include a mix of redevelopment and new
impervious surfaces. New impervious surfaces added as a result of redevelopment are
subject to sec. 24.08.
(34) “RUNOFF CURVE NUMBER (RCN)” has the meaning used in the runoff
calculation methodology promulgated by the United States Natural Resources Conservation
Service Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices.
(35) “SEDIMENT” means solid earth material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water,
gravity or ice, and has come to rest on the earth’s surface at a different site.
(36) “SEDIMENTATION” means the deposition of eroded soils at a site different
from the one where the erosion occurred.
(37) “SHEET AND RILL EROSION” means a loss of soil caused by sheet flow or
shallow concentrated flow, and is characterized by an absence of channeling or a relatively
uniform loss across the exposed upper layer of the soil or shallow irregular scouring of the
soil surface.
(38) “SITE” means the bounded area described in an erosion control plan or storm
water management plan.
(39) “SLOPE” means the net vertical rise over horizontal run, expressed as a
percentage, that represents a relatively homogeneous surface incline or decline over the
area disturbed.
(40) “SOIL LOSS RATE” means the rate, usually measured in tons per acre per
year, at which soil is transported beyond the perimeter of a given control site and which
occurs as a result of sheet and rill erosion. This term does not apply to soil movement
resulting from concentrated flow such as gully or bank erosion.
(41) “STORM EVENTS” mean the precipitation amounts that occur over a 24-hour
period having a specified recurrence interval for Dane County, Wisconsin. For example,
one-year, two-year, 10-year and 100-year storm events mean the precipitation amounts that
occur over a 24-hour period that have a recurrence interval of one, two, 10 and 100 years,
respectively.
(42) “STORM WATER” means the flow of water resulting from, and occurring
during and immediately following, a rainfall, snow-melt or ice-melt event.
24-8
(43) “STORM SEWER” means a closed conduit for conveying collected storm
water.
(44) “STORM WATER DRAINAGE FACILITY” means any constructed element in
a storm water drainage system.
(45) “STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM” means all of the facilities used for
conducting storm water to, through or from a drainage area to the point of final outlet,
including but not limited to, any of the following: conduits and appurtenant features, canals,
channels, ditches, streams, culverts, reservoirs, detention basins or ponds, streets, storm
sewers, and pumping stations.
(46) “STORM WATER MANAGEMENT” means any measures taken to
permanently reduce or minimize the negative impacts of storm water runoff quantity and
quality after land development activities.
(47) “STORM WATER RUNOFF”/ “RUNOFF” means the waters derived from
rains falling or snow or ice melting within a drainage area, flowing over the surface of the
ground and collected in channels, watercourses, or conduits.
(48) “STREET RECONSTRUCTION” means removal and replacement of the road
subgrade, where existing storm water drainage facilities are modified.
(49) “STRUCTURE” means any human-made object with form, shape and utility,
either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon, or set into the ground, stream
bed, or lake bed.
(50) “UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP” means that circumstance where special
conditions, not created by the current or past property owner(s), affect a particular property
and make strict conformity with the regulations of this Chapter unnecessarily burdensome or
unreasonable in light of the purposes of this Chapter.
(51) “VILLAGE ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY” means the Local Approval
Authority or any Village employee or contracted entity authorized by the Local Approval
Authority to administer any of the requirements of this Chapter.
(52) “WETLANDS” mean an area where water is at, near, or above the land
surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and
which has soils indicative of wet conditions. Wetlands include natural, mitigation and
restored wetlands.
(53) “ZONING CODE” means Chapter 15 of the Village’s Municipal Code adopted
for the purpose of regulating the use of land.
24.06 SCOPE OF GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE. (1) WITHIN THE VILLAGE.
Unless specifically excluded herein, this Chapter applies to all land disturbing and land
developing activities occurring within the corporate limits of the Village.
24-9
(2) WITHIN THE EXTRATERRITORIAL AREA. This Chapter shall apply outside
the Village limits within the extraterritorial plat review area provided by Chapter 236, Wis.
Stats., and Chapter 13 of this Code.
24.07 EROSION CONTROL PERMITS – WHEN REQUIRED. (1) WITHIN THE
VILLAGE. Unless expressly exempted by sec. 24.09, an erosion control permit under sec.
24.11 shall be required for, and all construction site erosion control provisions of this
Chapter shall apply, to any of the following activities in the Village:
(a) Any land disturbing activity in excess of 4,000 square feet.
(b) Any land disturbing activity on a slope of greater than 12%.
(c) Any land disturbing activity involving the excavation or filling, or a
combination of excavation and filling, of material in excess of 400 cubic yards.
(d) Any land disturbing activity that disturbs more than 100 lineal feet of road
ditch, grass waterway, or other land area where the surface drainage flows in a defined
open channel, including the placement, repair or removal of any underground pipe, utility or
other facility within the cross-section of the channel.
(e) Any new public or private road or access drives longer than 125 feet.
(f) Any development of a parcel subject to the requirements of, and regulated
by, Chapter 13 of this Code.
(g) Any land disturbing activity that disturbs less than 4,000 square feet of land, if
the Local Approval Authority determines that such activity has a high risk of soil erosion or
water pollution, or may adversely affect a lake, stream, creek, wetland area, or adjacent
properties. Examples of activities with a high risk of soil erosion or water pollution may
include, but are not limited to, land disturbance on erodible soil or disturbance adjacent to
lakes, rivers, streams, creeks, or wetlands. All such determinations made by the Local
Approval Authority shall be in writing, unless waived by the applicant.
(2) OUTSIDE THE VILLAGE. Unless expressly exempted by sec. 24.09, all
construction site erosion control provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all divisions of land
within the Village’s extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction as specified under Chapter 13 of
this Code.
24.08 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PERMITS -- WHEN REQUIRED. (1)
WITHIN THE VILLAGE. Unless expressly exempted by sec. 24.09, a storm water
management permit under sec. 24.11 shall be required for, and all storm water management
provisions of this chapter shall apply to, any of the following activities within the Village:
(a) Any development(s) after August 22, 2001 that result(s) in the cumulative
addition of 20,000 or more square feet of impervious surface to the site.
(am) Agricultural development that creates new impervious surface area
exceeding 20,000 square feet on the site.
24-10
(b) Any division of land for development which is subject to the provisions of
Chapter 13 of this Code. Any final plat not approved on or before the effective date of this
Chapter shall be subject to the storm water management performance standards prescribed
by this Chapter, whether or not those standards are met by an approved preliminary plat.
(c) Any other land development activities, including but not limited to
redevelopment or alteration of existing buildings and other structures, that the Local
Approval Authority determines may significantly increase downstream runoff volumes,
flooding, soil erosion, water pollution, or property damage, or may adversely affect a lake,
stream, creek, wetland area, or adjacent properties. All such determinations by the Local
Approval Authority shall be made in writing unless waived by the applicant.
(2) OUTSIDE THE VILLAGE. Unless expressly exempted by sec. 24.09, all
storm water management provisions of this Chapter shall additionally apply to all divisions of
land within the Village’s extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction as specified under Chapter
13 of this Code.
24.09 EXEMPTIONS AND CLARIFICATIONS. (1) ALL REQUIREMENTS. The
following activities are exempt from all requirements of this Chapter:
(a) Any activity directly related to the planting, growing and harvesting of
agricultural crops, unless such activity, as determined by the Local Approval Authority, may
result in undue erosion of or sedimentation on any adjoining property, may adversely affect
a lake, stream, creek, or wetland area, or may otherwise endanger the downstream property
owners or their property. All such determinations by the Local Approval Authority shall be
made in writing.
(2) EROSION CONTROL. The following activities are exempt from the
construction site erosion control provisions of secs. 24.07, 24.11 and 24.12:
(a) One- and two-family dwelling unit projects regulated under the Wisconsin
Uniform Dwelling Code (“UDC”). Land disturbing activities in excess of one (1) acre, or not
associated with the construction of a dwelling, are not exempt from this chapter.
(b) Projects specifically exempted from local erosion control ordinances under
state or federal statute. It is the responsibility of the landowner to demonstrate such
exemption with documentation acceptable to the local approval authority.
(c) Projects subject to an approved shoreline erosion control permit under
Chapter 21.
(d) Agricultural development not subject to sec. 24.08 (am).
(e) Municipal road or county highway projects not exempted under sec.
24.09(2)(b) are exempt from sec. 24.13(2)(b)(3) where all of the following conditions are
met:
1. The purpose of the project is only to meet current state or federal design or
safety guidelines;
24-11
2. All activity takes place within existing public right-of-way;
3. All other requirements of sec. 24.13 are met; and
4. The project does not include the addition of any new driving lanes.
(3) The following activities are exempt from the infiltration standards described in
sec. 24.13(2)(b)6:
(a) Redevelopment sites.
(b) New development sites with less than 10% connected imperviousness based
on complete development of the post construction site, provided the cumulative area of all
impervious surfaces is less than one acre.
(c) Agricultural facilities and practices.
(d) Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.6 inches/hour
measured at the bottom of the proposed infiltration system where the soil layer is not easily
moved or manipulated.
(e) Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for commercial
and industrial development.
(f) Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land uses, and arterial roads.
24.10 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE. An applicant for a permit issued
under this Chapter may request a pre-application conference with Village staff. The purpose
of a pre-application conference is to afford the applicant an opportunity to become familiar
with the purpose and objectives of this Chapter and to allow Village staff to become familiar
with the proposed activity. This meeting is intended to assist an applicant in preparing
general site plans and other submittals necessary to obtain a required permit under this
Chapter. A pre-application conference does not guarantee that an erosion or storm water
control plan will be approved or that a permit will be issued. Erosion and storm water control
plans and permit applications must meet all applicable standards and criteria for approval.
24.11 EROSION CONTROL AND STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PERMITS
AND ADMINISTRATION. (1) START OF LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. No activity
meeting the criteria described in sec. 24.07 or 24.08 shall occur and no zoning permit may
be issued, until an erosion control and storm water management permit is issued by the
Local Approval Authority.
(2) APPLICATION MATERIALS. The applicant shall provide all of the following
as part of an application for a permit:
(a) A completed application form:
1. The application must be signed by the landowner or include a notarized
statement signed by the landowner authorizing the applicant to act as the
landowner’s agent and to submit the application on the landowner’s behalf.
24-12
Such notarized statement shall also clearly state that the landowner agrees to
be bound by all of the requirements of this Chapter and the terms of any
permit issued to the agent. By signing the application, the landowner and,
whenever appropriate, the landowner’s agent also expressly grant permission
to any Village Administrative Authority to enter the property at any reasonable
time for the purpose of gathering any information or data needed to assist the
Village in evaluating the application and its supporting documentation or
enforcing any permit subsequently issued.
2. If a landowner appoints an agent to submit an application pursuant to
(2)(a)(1), the landowner shall be bound by all of the requirements of this
chapter and the terms of any permit issued to the agent.
(b) Fees as required by sec. 24.17;
(c) If required by sec. 24.07, an erosion control plan meeting all the standards of
sec. 24.12, or a simplified checklist if permitted by sec. 24.12;
(d) If required by sec. 24.08, a storm water management plan meeting all of the
standards of sec. 24.13 and a draft maintenance agreement as described in sec. 24.13(1)(j);
(e) Copies of permits or permit applications or approvals required by any other
governmental entity;
(f) A proposed timetable and schedule for completion and installation of all
elements of approved erosion control and storm water management plans and a detailed
schedule for completion of all construction on the project;
(g) An estimate of the cost of completion and installation of all elements of the
proposed erosion control and storm water management plans;
(h) Evidence of financial responsibility to complete the work proposed in the plan.
As a condition of permit approval, the Village may require the filing of a financial security
instrument sufficient to guarantee completion of the project. If the Village intends to accept
dedication of the improvements after completion, the filing of such a security shall be
mandatory. When required, the security shall be furnished on or before the date of actual
issuance of the permit. It shall be in an amount equal to 110% of the estimated actual cost
of all of the required elements of the approved plan and shall specifically guarantee (i) the
installation and completion of all the required work specified in the approved plan and (ii) the
quality and workmanship of the work and improvements for one year following their
acceptance by the Village, if the Village agrees to accept such dedication. The cost of all
elements of the work, including quantities and unit prices, shall be furnished by the applicant
and shall be verified by the Local Approval Authority. The financial security instrument, if
required, shall remain in force until all of the work has been completed and inspected by the
Local Approval Authority or for a period of one year after completion and inspection of the
required improvements if the Village accepts dedication, unless the Village partially releases
the guaranty under sub. (6)(e).
(3) APPLICATION REVIEW / APPROVAL PROCESS. (a) The Local Approval
Authority shall verify that the permit application is complete under sec. 24.11(2). The Local
24-13
Approval Authority shall review the plan(s) for compliance with the standards identified in
secs. 24.12 - 24.13.
(b) Within 30 business days after submission of a complete application, the Local
Approval Authority shall either approve the submitted plan or notify the applicant of any
deficiencies. Staff engaged in this review and approval process shall be certified where
appropriate by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce for this purpose.
(c) The Local Approval Authority shall notify the applicant in writing of any
deficiency in the proposed plan and the applicant shall be given an opportunity to correct
any deficiency.
(d) Where installed storm water practices will be privately-owned, an affidavit
which describes the property by legal description, notifying future prospective purchasers of
the existence of a storm water permit issued under this Chapter and applicable plan,
timetables and potential liability imposed by sec. 24.165(3) for failure to bring the property
into compliance with this Chapter after notification, shall be recorded with the Dane County
Register of Deeds prior to final approval. The foregoing information shall also be noted on
every plat and certified survey map.
(e) Upon approval of the plan, the erosion control or storm water management
permit shall be issued by the Local Approval Authority after the applicant has met all other
requirements of this Chapter.
(4) PERMIT CONDITIONS. The permittee shall be subject to the following
conditions:
(a) The erosion control elements of the plan shall be implemented prior to the
start of any land development activity and shall be maintained over the duration of the
project. Storm water management components of the plan shall be maintained in perpetuity.
All elements of the plan shall be constructed or installed in full compliance with the plan as
approved.
(b) The permittee shall be responsible for the successful implementation and
completion of all elements of the approved plan and all costs associated with such project.
The permittee shall be liable for all property damage and costs incurred, including
environmental restoration costs, resulting from noncompliance with an approved plan.
(c) As explicitly provided by the application form, an issued permit shall
constitute express permission by the permittee and the landowner for any Village
Administrative Authority to enter the property for purposes of inspection under sub. (5) or
corrective action under sec. 24.165(3).
(d) All incidental mud-tracking off-site onto adjacent public thoroughfares shall be
cleaned up and removed by the end of each working day using proper disposal methods.
(e) The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining all roads, road right-ofways,
streets, and storm water drainage facilities as specified in the approved plan until they
are accepted and become the responsibility of the Village or other governmental entity.
24-14
(f) Permit Duration.
1. Unless the Local Approval Authority otherwise stipulates, an approved
permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance
and all work must be completed prior to the expiration date of the permit.
The Local Approval Authority may extend the expiration date of the permit
upon finding that such an extension will not cause an increase in erosion,
sedimentation, or runoff beyond the amounts approved in the original
permit. The Local Approval Authority may require modifications to the
plan to prevent any increase in sedimentation, erosion, or runoff resulting
from extension of the permit duration.
2. Permit time extension requests must be made in writing and received by
the Local Approval Authority at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the
permit. A request for a permit time extension shall include a statement
explaining the need for a time extension and specify any necessary
changes to the plan.
(g) The Local Approval Authority may revoke any permit granted under this
Chapter if he/she finds that the permittee:
1. has misrepresented any material fact in the permit application or plan,
2. has failed to comply with the provisions of this Chapter,
3. has failed to comply with the plan as originally approved or as
subsequently modified, or
4. has violated any of the other terms of the permit imposed as a condition
of its approval.
(h) A copy of the approved permit and erosion control plan shall be kept on the
project site, in a place readily accessible to contractors, engineers, local approval authority
inspection staff and other authorized personnel.
(5) INSPECTIONS, SECURITY, ACCEPTANCE AND MAINTENANCE. (a)
Entry Permitted. A permit issued under this section shall constitute permission by the
permittee and landowner for any Village Administrative Authority to enter the property and
inspect any phase of the permitted activity, including any construction or installation work, to
confirm its compliance with the approved plan and the requirements of this Chapter.
(b) Erosion Control and Storm Water Management Inspections. The Local
Approval Authority or its designated representative shall perform inspections during the
construction or installation phase of any permitted activity to determine the permittee’s
compliance with the approved plan and the requirements of this Chapter. Inspections shall
be made a minimum of once every 30 days, or more frequently as determined by the Local
Approval Authority during the plan approval process.
(c) Final Inspection – Erosion Control. Within 10 days after installation of all
practices in an erosion control plan and achievement of soil stabilization, the permittee shall
24-15
notify the Local Approval Authority of final completion of the erosion control permit
requirements. The Local Approval Authority shall inspect the property within 10 days of
notification to verify compliance with the erosion control plan.
(d) Final Inspection - Storm Water Management. Within 10 days after the
installation of all of the storm water management measures specified in an approved plan,
the permittee shall notify the Local Approval Authority of such completed installation and
submit record drawings documenting the construction. The person who designed the storm
water management measures for the permittee shall submit a certification that the
constructed storm water management practices and conveyance systems substantially
comply with the specifications included in the approved plan. At a minimum, the certification
shall include a set of record drawings comparing the approved storm water management
measures with those constructed. The permittee shall submit any other information as
required by the Local Approval Authority within 10 days after such request. A Village
Administrative Authority shall then inspect the property to verify compliance with the plan
within 10 days after such notification or within 10 days after all additionally requested
information has been submitted.
(e) Acceptance of Improvements.
1. The Village Board may accept dedication of all storm water management
measures and conveyance facilities and systems after fully constructed,
inspected, and approved. The Village’s acceptance of such improvements
may be conditioned on the permittee filing lien waivers and appropriate
affidavits as evidence that no claims, actions, or demands for damages
arising out of or in any way related to the installation of the storm water
management measures and conveyance systems exist and that no
monies are owed to any contractor, surveyor, mechanic, subcontractor,
supplier, or laborer in connection with the installation.
2. The Village may, at its option, require the landowner to retain ownership
of all storm water management measures and conveyance facilities and
systems and to maintain them after fully constructed, inspected, and
approved. Such improvements, however, shall be subject to periodic
Village inspections and, as necessary, Village orders for repairs. In the
event the owner shall fail to comply with any order issued by the Village
for such repairs, the Village shall have the option to complete the repairs
and collect the full cost thereof from the owner by levy of a special charge
against the property.
(f) Security.
1. Partial Release. Upon completion and approval of any improvement, the
Village may release a portion of any furnished security if:
a. A written application for a partial release is filed with the
Village Clerk; and
b. The remaining security will be sufficient to cover any potential
corrective work required during the guaranty as determined by
24-16
the Local Approval Authority. Under no circumstances shall
more than 90% of the furnished security be released before
the expiration of the guaranty period.
2. Guaranty Period. The security furnished by the permittee, whether
subject to a partial release or not, shall be retained by the Village for a
period of one year following the Village’s acceptance of the required
improvements to guarantee them against defects in workmanship and
materials. If any defect appears during the guaranty period, the permittee
shall, at his or her expense, install replacements or perform acceptable
repairs. If the permittee fails to make reparations, the Village may do so
and deduct the cost of such work from the security on deposit. Unless
defects have appeared and have not been repaired, the Village shall
release the security to the permittee upon expiration of the one-year
guaranty period.
(6) PERMIT TRANSFERS. (a) Definition. For purposes of this sub. (6), the
term “landowner” includes both the current owner of property subject to a permit issued
under this section and the current permittee if the permit was issued to an agent of the
property owner, unless the context or subject matter clearly indicates otherwise.
(b) Notification of Plan and Transfer. If a landowner intends to transfer
ownership, possession or control of property subject to an approved plan, the landowner
shall provide a copy of the plan to the intended successor in interest, inform the intended
successor in interest in writing of the current status of compliance with the plan, and notify
the Local Approval Authority in writing of the intended transfer. Until such intended transfer
is effectuated, the landowner shall continue to be responsible for controlling soil erosion and
runoff and complying with the requirements of the approved plan and the standards
provided in this Chapter.
(c) Method of Transfer.
1. If a landowner transfers ownership, possession, or control of property subject
to an approved plan, the outstanding permit shall be deemed null and void, all
land development activity shall cease, and the property shall be restored to
its original, pre-land development condition subject to the requirements of this
Chapter, including the controlling of soil erosion and runoff, unless any of the
following conditions is met prior to the actual date of transfer:
a. Subject to the requirements of sub. (3) and (4), the transferee files and
secures approval of a new permit and plan;
b. Subject to Subparagraph 2, the Local Approval Authority agrees to
name the transferee as an additional permittee on the outstanding
permit and allows the transferee to complete that portion of the
approved plan regulating soil erosion and runoff on the transferee’s
property. As a condition of naming the transferee on the outstanding
permit, the Local Approval Authority may require that the transferee or
the landowner furnish an irrevocable letter of credit or certified check in
an amount equal to 110% of the estimated cost to complete the work
24-17
proposed in the approved plan as determined by the Local Approval
Authority, if the landowner was not required to furnish any security at
the time the permit was originally issued, or if the previously furnished
security by its terms is for any reason rendered void by the transfer.
The letter of credit shall be in a form approved by the Village and shall
name the Village as the beneficiary. If an approved plan is not
completed as proposed, the Village may use the letter of credit or
certified check provided by the transferee or landowner to complete the
remaining work to achieve plan compliance.
2. Even if a transferee is named as additional permittee under Subparagraph
1.b, the Village shall continue to deem the landowner as being equally
responsible for controlling soil erosion and runoff and complying with the
requirements of the approved plan and the standards provided in this Chapter
until the plan work is completed on the transferee’s property.
(7) PLAN OR PERMIT AMENDMENTS. Any proposed modifications to approved
plans, construction schedules or alterations to accepted sequencing of land disturbing site
activities shall be approved by the Local Approval Authority prior to implementation of said
changes.
24.12 EROSION CONTROL PLAN REQUIREMENTS. (1) PLAN MATERIALS.
Erosion control plans required under sec. 24.07 may include the consideration of the
cooperative efforts of adjoining landowners to control the transport of sediment, and except
as specifically exempted in sub. (2), shall include at a minimum the following information:
(a) Property lines, lot dimensions, and limits of disturbed area;
(b) Limits of impervious area, including buildings. Include all public and private
roads, interior roads, driveways, parking lots, and indicate type of paving and surface
material;
(c) All natural and artificial water features including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds,
streams (including intermittent streams), and ditches; and areas of natural woodland or
prairie. The plan must show ordinary high-water marks of all navigable waters, 100-year
flood elevations and delineated wetland boundaries. A certified flood zone determination
and/or wetland delineation may be required at the applicant’s expense;
(d) Cross sections of and profiles of channels, swales, and road ditches;
(e) Culvert sizes;
(f) Direction of flow of runoff;
(g) Watershed size for each drainage area;
(h) Design discharge for ditches and structural measures;
(i) Runoff velocities;
24-18
(j) Fertilizer and seeding rates and recommendations;
(k) Time schedules for stabilization of ditches and slopes;
(l) Description of methods by which sites are to be developed and a detailed land
disturbance schedule including time schedules for stabilization of ditches and slopes;
(m) Provision for sequential steps mitigating erosive effect of land disturbing
activities to be followed in appropriate order and in a manner consistent with accepted
erosion control methodology suitable to proposed sites and amenable to prompt revegetation,
including runoff calculations as appropriate;
(n) Provisions to prevent mud-tracking off-site onto public thoroughfares during the
construction period;
(o) Provisions to disconnect impervious surfaces, where feasible;
(p) Provisions to prevent sediment delivery to, and accumulation in, any proposed or
existing stormwater conveyance systems;
(q) Copies of permits or permit applications required by any other unit of government
or agency;
(r) Existing and proposed elevations (referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum of 1929) and existing and proposed contours in the area, where deemed necessary;
(s) Calculations demonstrating that the erosion control performance standards under
sec. 24.12(3) will be met;
(t) Any other information necessary to reasonably determine the location, nature and
condition of any physical or environmental features of the site.
(2) SIMPLIFIED PLAN CHECKLIST. (a) Applicants may submit erosion control
proposals using simplified checklists of standard erosion control practices on a standard
form approved by the Village, wherever all of the following conditions exist:
1. The site does not exceed 20,000 square feet in area;
2. The site is not adjacent to and does not drain directly into any sensitive areas
nearby, such as streams, lakes, or wetlands; and
3. The slope of the land does not exceed six percent (6%).
(b) Each submitted simplified plan checklist shall be reviewed by the Local
Approval Authority for completeness and accuracy.
(3) EROSION CONTROL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. (a) Generally. The
proposed design, suggested location, and phased implementation of the erosion control
measures specified in a plan shall be designed, engineered and ultimately implemented to
achieve those results as provided under Paragraph (b). The Local Approval Authority, or its
24-19
designee shall evaluate the plan measures to determine that they follow currently accepted
design criteria and the technical standards specified under sec. 24.15 and that they will
achieve the required results under Paragraph (b).
(b) Erosion Control Performance Standards. The erosion control plan measures
shall at a minimum achieve the following results:
1. Prevent gully and bank erosion.
2. Limit total off-site permissible annual aggregate soil loss for exposed areas
resulting from sheet and rill erosion to an annual, cumulative soil loss rate not
to exceed 7.5 tons per acre.
3. Discharges from new construction sites must have a stable outlet capable of
carrying designed flow as required in sec. 24.13(2)(b)(4), at a non-erosive
velocity. Outlet design must consider flow capacity and flow duration. This
requirement applies to both the site outlet and the ultimate outlet to
stormwater conveyance or water body.
(c) A plan’s compliance with the requirements specified under Paragraph (b)
shall be determined by using the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service Technical
Guide or another commonly accepted soil erosion methodology approved by the Dane
County Conservationist that considers season of year, site characteristics, soil erodibility,
and slope.
(d) Erosion control measures for plan approval need not attempt to regulate soil
transportation within the boundaries of the applicant’s site.
24.13 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS. (1)
PLANMATERIALS. Storm water management plans shall satisfy all of the requirements in
sub. (2), and shall provide at a minimum the following information:
(a) A narrative describing the proposed project, including an implementation
schedule for the planned practices.
(b) Identification of the entity responsible for long-term maintenance of the
project.
(c) A map showing the drainage areas for each project site under predevelopment
land conditions and a map showing the drainage areas for each project site
under post-development land conditions.
(d) A summary of runoff peak flow rate calculations, by watershed area,
including:
1. Pre-development peak flow rates for the required design storms;
2. Post-development peak flow rates with no detention for the required design
storms;
24-20
3. Post-development peak flow rates with detention for the required design
storms;
4. Assumed runoff curve numbers (RCNs) for pre-development and postdevelopment
conditions; and
5. Time of concentration (TC) used in calculations.
(e) A complete site plan and specifications, signed by the person who designed
the plan. All plans shall be drawn to an easily legible scale, shall be clearly labeled, and
shall include, at a minimum, all of the following information:
1. Property lines and lot dimensions;
2. All buildings and outdoor uses, existing and proposed, including all
dimensions and setbacks;
3. All public and private roads, interior roads, driveways and parking lots. The
traffic patterns and types of paving and surfacing material shall be labeled;
4. All natural and artificial water features, including, but not limited to, lakes,
ponds, streams (including intermittent streams), creeks, and ditches. The
ordinary high water marks of all navigable waters, the 100-year flood
elevations, and the delineated wetland boundaries, if any, shall be shown. If
not available, an appropriate flood zone determination or wetland delineation,
or both, shall be prepared by the applicant at his or her expense;
5. Depth to bedrock;
6. Depth to seasonal high water table;
7. The extent and location of all soil types as described in the Dane County Soil
Survey, slopes exceeding 12%, and areas of woodland or prairie;
8. Existing and proposed elevations (referenced to the North American Vertical
Datum of 1988, where available) and existing and proposed contours in the
area requiring a grading and filling permit;
9. Elevations, sections, profiles, and details as needed to describe all natural
and artificial features of the project;
10. Soil erosion control and overland runoff control measures, including runoff
calculations as appropriate;
11. Detailed construction schedule;
12. Copies of permits or permit applications required by any other governmental
entity or agency;
24-21
13. Any other information necessary to reasonably determine the location, nature
and condition of any physical or environmental features;
14. Location of all storm water management practices;
15. All existing and proposed drainage features;
16. The location and area of all proposed impervious surfaces; and
17. The limits and area of the disturbed area.
(f) Calculations demonstrating that the storm water management performance
standards under sec. 24.13 (2) will be met.
(g) A description of the methods to control oil and grease or written justification for
not providing such control.
(h) Engineered designs for all structural management practices.
(i) If required under sub. (2)(b)7, a description and plans to control the temperature
of storm water runoff.
(j) A maintenance plan and schedule for all permanent storm water management
measures as would be recorded on the affidavit required in sec. 24.11(3)(d).
(2) STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. (a)
Generally. The proposed design, suggested location, and phased implementation of the
storm water management measures specified in a plan should be designed, engineered and
ultimately implemented to achieve the results as provided under Paragraph (b). The Local
Approval Authority shall evaluate the plan measures to determine that they follow currently
accepted design criteria and the technical standards specified under sec. 24.15 and that
they will achieve the required results under Paragraph (b).
(b) Storm Water Management Performance Standards.
1. Sediment Control.
a. For new development, the applicant shall design the storm water
management measures to retain soil particles greater than 5 microns on
the site (80% reduction) resulting from a one-year 24-hour storm event
(2.5 inches over 24-hour duration), according to approved procedures,
and assuming no sediment resuspension.
b. For redevelopment resulting in exposed surface parking lots and
associated traffic areas, the applicant shall design the storm water
management measures to retain soil particles greater than 20 microns on
the entire site (40% reduction) resulting from a one-year 24-hour storm
event, according to approved procedures, and assuming no sediment
resuspension. Under no circumstances shall the existing sediment control
24-22
level or trapping efficiency of the site be reduced as a result of the
redevelopment.
2. Oil and Grease Control. For all storm water management plans for
commercial or industrial developments and all other uses where the potential
for pollution by oil or grease, or both, exists, the applicant shall design the
storm water management measures so that the first 0.5 inches of runoff will
be treated using the best oil and grease removal technology available. The
oil and grease treatment requirement may be waived by the Village if the
applicant can demonstrate that installation of such practices is not necessary.
3. Runoff rate control - hydrologic calculations.
a. All runoff calculations shall be computed according to the methodology
described in the Natural Resources Conservation Service’s Technical
Release 55, “Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds” (commonly known
as TR-55), or any other methodology approved by both the Local
Approval Authority and the Dane County Conservationist.
b. Pre-development runoff shall be calculated using a maximum runoff curve
number (RCN) of 51 for HSG A soils, and 68 for HSG B, C, and D soils.
c. Post-development runoff shall be calculated using the appropriate RCN
for the land and soil hydrologic group on the site as described in the
Natural Resources Conservation Service’s Technical Release 55, “Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds.” When calculating post-development
runoff, heavily disturbed sites will be lowered one permeability class for
hydrologic calculations. Lightly disturbed areas require no modification.
A lightly disturbed area is an area of land subjected to minor compaction
due to the limited removal of vegetative cover or earthmoving. Where
practices have been implemented to restore soil structure to predeveloped
conditions, no permeability class modification is required.
4. Runoff rate control - design standards.
a. Except for redevelopment projects, all storm water facilities shall be
designed, installed and maintained to effectively accomplish the following
under post-development conditions:
i. Maintain pre-development peak runoff rates for the 1-year, 24-hour
storm event (2.5 inches over 24 hours duration).
ii. Maintain pre-development peak runoff rates for the 2-year, 24-hour
storm event (2.9 inches over 24 hours duration).
iii. Maintain pre-development peak runoff rates for the 5-year, 24-hour
storm event (3.6 inches over 24 hours duration).
iv. Maintain pre-development peak runoff rates for the 10-year, 24-hour
storm event (4.2 inches over 24 hours duration).
24-23
v. Maintain pre-development peak runoff rates for the 25-year, 24-hour
storm event (4.8 inches over 24 hours duration).
vi. Maintain pre-development peak runoff rates for the 100 year, 24-hour
storm event (6.0 inches over 24 hours duration).
b. If the requirements specified in Subdivision a and Subparagraph 3 do not
provide for the safe passage of the 100-year storm in the downstream
conveyance system, the peak rate of runoff from the site shall then be
reduced to a rate that will not exceed the safe capacity of the downstream
conveyance system.
c. If off-site areas also contribute flow to the location where the downstream
conveyance capacity is exceeded, the allowable flow from on-site shall be
prorated based on the judgment of the Local Approval Authority.
d. If implementing storm water management measures to meet the
requirements of this Paragraph (b) would have a detrimental effect on
flood conditions at downstream locations, the requirements may be
waived or altered, provided such waiver or alteration is approved through
the variance procedures set forth in sec. 24.16(2).
e. Retention or detention basins and other facilities necessary to meet the
requirements of Paragraph (b) may be provided by the landowner or
permittee onsite or off-site. If the Village provides such off-site facilities,
the landowner shall be responsible for a prorated share of the costs of
that improvement as determined by the Village based on such factors as
the cost of needed land, engineering design, and construction of the
facilities.
5. Outlets. Discharges from land development activities must have a stable
outlet capable of carrying the designed flow as required in Subparagraph 4,
at a non-erosive velocity. Outlet design must consider flow capacity and flow
duration. This requirement applies to both the site outlet and the ultimate
outlet to a storm water conveyance or water body.
6. Runoff Volume Control.
a. For all new Residential and Nonresidential development, storm water
management practices shall be designed such that the post-developed
stay-on volume equals or exceeds 100% of the pre-developed stay-on
volume as determined by the 1-year Average Annual Rainfall series for
Madison, WI.
b. Groundwater Recharge. For all new development, infiltration systems and
pervious areas shall be designed at a minimum to meet or exceed the
estimated average annual groundwater recharge rate as shown in the
Wisconsin Geological and Natural History Survey (WGNHS) report
“Groundwater Recharge in Dane County, Wisconsin, Estimated by a GIS24-
24
Based Water Balance Model” or its successor, or by a site specific
analysis, regardless of the effective area of the infiltration system.
c. Fee in Lieu of Compliance. If Volume Control practices required for a site
exceed 1% of the total site area in Residential or 2% in Non-Residential
developments, a fee in lieu of providing additional areas for volume
control will be accepted. The Fee in Lieu of shall be determined based on
the difference in area needed to meet the stay-on volume required and
the actual area provided on-site. The area calculation to determine the
fee in lieu shall be based on the difference between actual and required
infiltration volumes, assuming the infiltration rate of the proposed on-site
BMP’s. The cost per square foot shall be established at $0.50 per square
foot as of September 20, 2010 subject to periodic review and adjustment
by the Village Board. This shall be a one-time only fee.
d. Existing Platted Lots as of September 20, 2010. Residential and Non-
Residential lots platted under the 90% (Residential) and 60% (Non-
Residential) volume control standards that were platted with an approved
Storm Water Management Plan shall meet the following standards:
1. Residential. Maintain the 90% standard where all required
infrastructure has been constructed as of September 20, 2010.
Achieve the 100% standard where all of the required infrastructure
has not been installed.
2. Non-Residential. Maintain the 60% standard where all of the required
infrastructure has been constructed as of September 20, 2010.
Achieve the 100% infiltration standard where all of the required
infrastructure has not been installed.
3. Existing platted areas will be evaluated on the use of BMP’s to meet
this standard in existing dedicated right-of-ways, outlots or easements
for storm water management. It is not the intent of this section to
require additional land dedications (excluding easements) or replatting.
The use of Low Impact Development Techniques (rain
gardens, Bio-swales, pervious pavements, etc. is encouraged.
a. Pre-treatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pre-treatment shall be
required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road
construction in commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will
enter an infiltration system. The pre-treatment shall be designed to
protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled
maintenance and to protect groundwater quality.
b. Prohibitions. Notwithstanding subparagraphs a. through c., infiltration
systems may not be installed in any of the following areas:
1. Areas associated with tier 1 industrial facilities identified in NR
216.21(2)(a), Wis. Admin. Code, including storage, loading,
rooftop and parking.
24-25
2. Storage and loading areas of tier 2 industrial facilities identified
in NR 216.21(2)(b), Wis. Admin. Code.
3. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas.
4. Areas within 1,000 feet up gradient or within 100 feet down
gradient of karst features.
5. Areas with less than three feet separation distance from bottom
of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high
groundwater or the top of bedrock, except that this provision
does not prohibit infiltration of rooftop runoff.
6. Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and institutional
parking lots and roads and residential arterial roads with less
than five feet separation distance from the bottom of the
infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater
or the top of bedrock.
7. Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as
specified in sec. NR 811.16(4), Wis. Admin. Code, for runoff
infiltrated from commercial, industrial and institutional land uses
or regional devices for residential development.
8. Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in sec. NR
720.03(2), Wis. Admin. Code, are present in the soil through
which infiltration will occur.
9. Any area where the soil does not exhibit at least a 5 foot soil
layer with 10% fines or greater between the bottom of the
infiltration system and the seasonal high groundwater or top of
bedrock. This provision does not apply where the soil medium
within the infiltration system provides an equivalent level of
protection, and this provision does not prohibit infiltration of roof
runoff.
10. Areas where high groundwater levels exist shall be evaluated to
ensure that Volume Control measures do not increase the
occurrence of groundwater induced flooding on new or existing
developments.
c. Alternate use of runoff. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed,
such as for toilet flushing, laundry or irrigation, such alternate use
shall be given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by
this section.
d. Minimizing groundwater pollution. According to ch. NR 151, Wis.
Admin. Code, infiltration systems designed in accordance with this
section shall, to the extent technically and economically feasible,
24-26
minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall
maintain compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of
standards application in accordance with ch. NR 140, Wis. Admin.
Code. However, if site-specific information indicates that compliance
with the preventive action limit is not achievable, the infiltration system
may not be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the
maximum extent practicable.
e. Deep tilling or similar practices shall be implemented to restore soil
structure to pre-developed conditions. The depth of tilling shall be at
least 2 inches below the hardpan layer or compacted zone, as
determined by a soil probe or soil penetrometer, up to a maximum
depth of 36 inches. The maximum spacing of the cuts shall be 5 feet.
7. Basement Flooding. Where basements are planned within the proposed
development, soil borings shall be completed to determine seasonal high
groundwater elevations. Soil profiles shall be evaluated by a Certified Soil
Tester or equivalent. Borings shall be completed at intervals sufficient to
provide an accurate representation of the site being developed. Boring
locations and intervals are subject to review by the Village on a site-bysite
basis. All sites or lots proposed in areas that are anticipated to have
Hydric Soils shall be evaluated. Basement elevations shall be set a
minimum of 2-feet above the seasonal high groundwater elevation as
determined by the soil borings. The soil evaluations shall be incorporated
into the required Storm Water Management Report.
8. Thermal control. The storm water management plan shall include
provisions and practices to reduce the temperature of runoff for sites
located within the watershed of a river or stream identified by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources as:
a. A Cold Water Community as identified through NR 102.04(3)(a), NR
104, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and Class I, Class II, and Class
III Trout Streams identified in “Wisconsin Trout Streams,” DNR
publication PUB-FH-806-2002 or its successor.
b. Rivers or streams proposed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources as Cold Water Communities and Class I, II, and III Trout
Streams.
9. Thermal control; continued. The storm water management plan does not
have to meet the requirement in sub. (2)(b)(7) if the applicant can justify
by use of a model approved by the Dane County Conservationist that
practices are not necessary because the temperature increase of runoff
from the site post-development will be zero.
10. Thermal control; continued. A current list and maps of affected
watersheds shall be available for reference at the office of the Local
Approval Authority.
24-27
(3) WETLANDS. Wetlands shall not be used to meet any of the requirements of
this Chapter.
(4) INFILTRATION. Infiltration of storm water to reduce the volume of runoff will
be encouraged where technically feasible through the most current Best Management
Practices. If measurable infiltration can be demonstrated, the reduced runoff volume may
be taken into account when designing practices to meet the peak flow and pollution control
requirements of this Chapter.
(5) STORM WATER MANAGEMENT GOALS. The following standards shall be
met whenever technically feasible, without substantial financial hardship as determined by
the Local Approval Authority. The proposed design, suggested location and implementation
methods of practices to meet these goals shall be included in the plans:
(a) For existing development, design practices to retain soil particles greater than
40 microns on the site (20% reduction) resulting from a one-year, 24-hour storm event (2.5
inches over 24 hour duration), according to approved procedures, and assuming no
sediment resuspension.
(b) For street reconstruction, design practices to retain soil particles greater than
20 microns on the site (40% reduction) resulting from a one-year, 24-hour storm event (2.5
inches over 24 hour duration), according to approved procedures, and assuming no
sediment resuspension.
24.14 OFF-SITE STORM WATER MANAGEMENT (1) OFF-SITE STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITY IN PLACE. Off-site storm water management is allowed,
provided that all of the following conditions for the off-site facility are met:
(a) The facility is in place.
(b) The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of storm water
control that at least meets the standards established by this Chapter.
(c) The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term
operation and maintenance.
(2) OFF-SITE STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY NOT YET IN PLACE. At the
discretion of the Local Approval Authority, new development will be allowed where the offsite
storm water management facility is not yet in place provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
(a) A temporary on-site storm water management facility is constructed meeting
the requirements of sec. 24.13(2), except sec. 24.13(2)(b)4.iii.
(b) The permanent off-site storm water management facility is constructed within
one year of completing the new development.
(c) The temporary on-site storm water management facility is maintained until
the permanent off-site storm water management facility is completed.
24-28
24.15 TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS. The design of all best
management practices required to meet the requirements of this Chapter shall comply with
the following technical standards:
(1) Natural Resources Conservation Service’s “Wisconsin Field Office Technical
Guide, Chapter 4” or its successor.
(2) Applicable construction or erosion control standards by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
(3) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources’ “Wisconsin Storm Water
Manual” or its successor.
(4) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources’ “Wet Detention Basin
Conservation Practice Standard Code 1001” or its successor.
(5) The “Dane County Erosion Control and Storm Water Management Manual” or
any other technical methodology approved by the Dane County Conservationist.
(6) The use of Low Impact Development (LID) techniques is encouraged in the
design of the infrastructure and site improvements. Variations to the infrastructure design
standards will be considered in incorporating LID techniques into the storm water BMP
design.
24.16 APPEALS AND VARIANCES. (1) APPEALS. (a) Appeal By. Any
person aggrieved or any officer, department, or board of the Village affected by the order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Local Approval Authority under this
Chapter may appeal such action to the Village Board. For the purpose of this Chapter, an
aggrieved person shall include the applicant and, if different, the owner of the land subject to
this Chapter.
(b) When. An appeal shall be filed with the Village Clerk within 30 days after the
date of the challenged decision, determination or order. A nonrefundable filing fee of an
amount specified in the Village’s annual fee schedule resolution shall be paid at the same
time the appeal is filed. The appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth the specific grounds
for the appeal. A copy of the appeal shall also be filed with the Village officer who made or
issued the challenged decision, determination, or order. Within 10 days after an appeal is
filed, the Local Approval Authority shall file with the Village Clerk the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
(c) Procedure. After an appeal is filed, the Village Board shall fix a time for
hearing the appeal and shall cause to be published a class 2 notice of the hearing under
Wis. Stats. Ch. 985. Personal notice of the hearing shall also be given to all parties in
interest. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney at the hearing. The Village
Board shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time after the hearing.
(d) Decision. The Village Board may, in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as necessary, and shall have all of the powers of the officer from whom the
24-29
appeal is taken. The concurring vote of a majority of the Village Board shall be required to
reverse the order, requirement, decision or determination.
(2) VARIANCES. (a) Standards. An applicant may include in an application
for a permit a request for a variance from the requirements of sec. 24.12 or sec. 24.13. No
variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates, and the Local Approval
Authority finds, that all of the following conditions are present:
1. Enforcement of the standards set forth in this Chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship to the landowner or the permittee if not the same.
2. The hardship is due to exceptional physical conditions unique to the
property.
3. The granting of the variance will not adversely affect the public health,
safety or welfare, nor be contrary to the spirit, purpose and intent of this
Chapter.
4. The project will have no effect on any of the stated purposes of this
Chapter as set forth in sec. 24.04.
5. The applicant has proposed an alternative to the requirement from which
the variance is sought that will provide equivalent protection of the public
health, safety and welfare, the environment and public, and the private
property.
6. The net cumulative effect of the variance will not affect downstream
conditions.
7. Existing regional facilities are shown to meet the performance standards
of this Chapter.
(b) If all of the conditions set forth in Paragraph (a) are met, a variance may be
granted only to the minimum extent necessary to afford relief from the unnecessary
hardship, with primary consideration to water quality.
(c) A variance from the provisions of sec. 24.13(2)(a) and (b) may only be
granted if:
1. The applicant has met the requirements of Paragraph (a); and
2. The applicant will be denied all reasonable and beneficial use of the
property if the variance is denied.
(d) A person aggrieved by a variance determination may appeal the decision to
the Village Board under sub. (1).
(e) A person aggrieved by a decision of the Village Board regarding a variance
may appeal that decision to the Village’s Board of Zoning Appeals.
24-30
24.165 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT. (1) Stop Work Order. (a) Whenever
the local approval authority finds any noncompliance with the provisions of this ordinance,
the local approval authority shall attempt to communicate with the owner or person
performing the work to obtain immediate and voluntary compliance if such person is readily
available. If the owner or person performing the work is not readily available, that person
refuses to voluntarily comply immediately or the noncompliance presents an immediate
danger or will cause or threatens to cause bodily injury or damage to off-site property
including but not limited to, off-site runoff, the local approval authority shall post in a
conspicuous place on the premises, a stop work order which shall cause all activity not
necessary to correct the noncompliance to cease until noncompliance is corrected.
(b) The stop work order shall provide the following information:
1. date of issuance;
2. town and section number or equivalent information within a municipality;
3. reason for posting; and
4. signature of inspector posting the order.
(c) Unauthorized removal of a stop work order from the premises shall be a violation
of this ordinance.
(2) In addition to posting a stop work order, the local approval authority shall provide
notification to the owner or contractor by personal service, written notice by certified mail,
electronic mail, or facsimile transmission.
(a) The permittee, landowner and contractor shall have 24 hours from time of
notification by the local approval authority to correct any noncompliance with the plan when
notification is by either personal communication of noncompliance to the owner or contractor
or their respective agents, or written notice sent by certified mail to owner or contractor.
(b) If notice is not provided under sub. (2)(a), the permittee and landowner shall have
72 hours to correct any noncompliance with the plan when notification is by posting notice in
a conspicuous place on the site or sending notice by facsimile transmission to the owner or
contractor.
(3) If the noncompliance is not corrected within the time periods specified in sub.
(2)(a) or (b), the permittee and landowner authorize the local approval authority to take any
action, to perform any work, or commence any operations necessary to correct
noncompliance on the subject property where notice of noncompliance has been issued to
bring the property into conformance with plan requirements. The permittee and landowner
further consent to reimburse the authority for the total costs and expenses of the corrective
actions. Reimbursement may be collected as a special charge upon the property for current
services rendered as provided by law.
(4) If the permittee has filed an appeal under sec. 24.16(1)(a) prior to the expiration
of the time for compliance under sub. (2)(a) or (b), the local approval authority may take
action, perform work or correct conditions only to the extent necessary to protect against an
24-31
imminent hazard or condition that will cause or threatens to cause personal injury or
damage to off-site property.
24.17 PERMIT FEES. (1) PERMIT FEES. For an erosion control permit or a
storm water control permit, a nonrefundable application fee shall be paid by the applicant in
an amount as specified in the Village’s current fee schedule ordinance. If the permit is
granted, no additional fee is required, except as provided under sub. (2).
(2) OTHER FEES. In addition to the fees specified under sub. (1), the applicant
for an erosion control permit or a storm water control permit shall reimburse the Village for
all engineering, inspection, consulting, and legal fees incurred by the Village in connection
with the entire permit and installation process under sec. 24.11. Any such fees shall be paid
by the applicant within thirty (30) days of the date of an invoice from the Village. If the
applicant fails to timely reimburse the Village, the Village shall cease all work on and review
of the application until the outstanding bill is paid in full. Delinquent or unpaid charges shall
constitute a special charge for services rendered subject to imposition and collection under
Wis. Stats. § 66.0703(16).
[Am. 16-44, Eff. 11-16-16]
24.18 PENALTIES. (1) Any person or persons, firm, company or corporation,
owner, occupant or other user of the premises who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall be subject to a forfeiture as specified below, together with the costs of prosecution and
applicable penalty assessments, fees and surcharges. The forfeiture, fees, costs,
assessments and surcharges shall be ordered paid within 60 days. Each day of violation or
noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense.
Simplified Erosion Control Permit Erosion Control and/or Storm Water
Management Permit
$150/day – 1st Notice $500/day – 1st Notice
$400/day – 2nd Notice $1,000/day – 2nd Notice
$800/day – 3rd Notice $2,000/day – 3rd Notice
(2) Any person who has the ability to pay any forfeiture entered against him or her
under this Chapter but refuses to do so may be confined in the county jail until such
forfeiture is paid, but in no event to exceed ninety (90) days. In determining whether an
individual has the ability to pay a forfeiture, all items of income and all assets may be
considered regardless of whether or not such income or assets are subject to garnishment,
lien or attachment by creditors.
(3) As a substitute for or as an addition to forfeiture actions under sub. (1) or corrective
action under sec. 24.165, the Village Attorney is authorized to seek enforcement of any part
of this Chapter by court action seeking injunctive relief. It shall not be necessary for the
village attorney to take corrective action or prosecute for forfeiture before resorting to
injunctive relief.
[Am. 07-02; Eff. 03-23-07]
25-1
CHAPTER 25
SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING
25.01 Title ................................................................................................................... 25-1
25.02 Declaration of Policy and Finding of Fact ...................................................... 25-1
25.03 Definitions ........................................................................................................ 25-2
25.04 Shoreland Wetland Zoning Maps ................................................................... 25-4
25.05 Shoreland Wetland Zoning District Boundaries ............................................ 25-5
25.06 Filled Wetlands ................................................................................................ 25-5
25.07 Wetlands Landward of a Bulkhead Line ........................................................ 25-5
25.08 Permitted Uses ................................................................................................ 25-6
25.09 Uses Requiring Zoning Permit ....................................................................... 25-7
25.10 Prohibited Uses ............................................................................................... 25-8
25.11 Nonconforming Structures and Uses ............................................................ 25-8
25.12 Amending Shoreland Wetland Zoning Regulations ...................................... 25-9
25.13 Fees ................................................................................................................ 25-10
25.14 Zoning Permits .............................................................................................. 25-10
25.15 Conditional Use Permits ............................................................................... 25-10
25.16 Certificates of Compliance ........................................................................... 25-11
25.17 Recording....................................................................................................... 25-11
25.18 Revocation ..................................................................................................... 25-11
25.19 Duration ......................................................................................................... 25-11
25.20 Inspections .................................................................................................... 25-11
25.21 Violations, Enforcement and Penalties ........................................................ 25-12
25.22 Appeal and Variances ................................................................................... 25-13
25.23 Design Criteria, Standards & Specifications for Control Measures ........... 25-14
25.24 Maintenance of Control Measures................................................................ 25-15
25.25 Planning and Zoning Administrator ............................................................. 25-15
25.26 Statutory Authority ........................................................................................ 25-16
25.27 Compliance .................................................................................................... 25-16
25.28 Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated ............................................. 25-16
25.29 Scope of Geographic Coverage ................................................................... 25-16
25.30 Severability .................................................................................................... 25-16
25.31 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions ........................................................... 25-16
25.32 Interpretation ................................................................................................. 25-16
25.33 Annexed Areas .............................................................................................. 25-17
ADDENDUM – Application .......................................................................................... 25-18
25.01 TITLE. This chapter shall be known as the "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
Ordinance" of the Village of DeForest.
25.02 DECLARATION OF POLICY AND FINDING OF FACT. The Village of
DeForest Board and the Village Planning and Zoning Commission have found after
extensive study and Public Hearings that the uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands
and pollution of the navigable waters of the Village would adversely affect the public health,
25-2
safety, convenience and general welfare and impair the tax base. Thus, the Legislature of
Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to:
(1) Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare;
(2) Maintain the storm and flood water storage capacity of wetlands;
(3) Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store
sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into
navigable waters;
(4) Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife by preserving
wetland and other aquatic habitat;
(5) Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and
(6) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural
shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth moving
activities.
25.03 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter,
the terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the present
tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural number; words in
the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory, not
permissive. All distance, unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally.
(1) "ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE" means a detached subordinate structure
or a use which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, the principle
structure or use to which it is related and which is located on the same lot as that of the
principle structure or use.
(2) "BOATHOUSE" as defined in §30.01(1d), Wis. Stats., means a permanent
structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and includes all
structures which are totally enclosed, have roofs or walls or any combination of structural
parts.
(3) "CONDITIONAL USE" means a use which is permitted by this chapter provided
that certain conditions specified in this chapter are met and a permit is granted by the
Village of DeForest Planning and Zoning Commission.
(4) "DEPARTMENT" means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(5) "DEVELOPMENT" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings, structures or accessory
structures; the construction of additions or substantial alternations to buildings, structures or
accessory structures; the placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of
earthen materials.
25-3
(6) "DRAINAGE SYSTEM" means one or more artificial ditches, title drains or similar
devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge.
(7) "ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL FACILITY" means any facility, temporary or
permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention,
measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid waste and thermal
pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement
or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable
pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution
control facilities.
(8) "LANDOWNER" means any person holding title to or having an ownership
interest in land.
(9) "LAND USER" means any person who uses land collectively or individually as
owner, operator, lessor or renter, or who occupies land by providing work or service that
requires alteration of the land, or any person who has made other arrangements with a
landowner which gives them the right and/or responsibility to use of the land.
(10) "NAVIGABLE WATERS" means Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, and all natural
inland lakes within Wisconsin. This also includes, but is not limited to, all streams, ponds,
sloughs, flowage and other waters within the territorial limits of the State of Wisconsin,
including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are considered navigable under
the laws of this state. Under §281.31, Wis. Stats., notwithstanding any other provisions of
law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under
§61.351, Wis. Stats., and Chapter NR117, Wis. Admin. Code, do not apply to lands adjacent
to farm drainage ditches if:
(a) Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river;
(b) Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable
streams before ditching; and
(c) Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
It should be noted that the "Wisconsin's Supreme Court has declared navigable
bodies of water that have a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and levels or flow
sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an annually
recurring basis [Muench v. Public Service Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952) and DeGaynor
and Co., Inc. v. Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis. 2d 936 (1975)]. For example, a
stream which is navigable by skiff or canoe during normal spring high water is navigable, in
fact, under the laws of this state though it may be dry during other seasons."
(11) "ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK" means the point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive
mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention or terrestrial vegetation, predominance
of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
(12) "PARCEL" means all contiguous lands under the ownership or control of a land
occupier or land user.
25-4
(13) "PERSON" means any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture,
agency, unincorporated association, municipal corporation, county or state agency within
Wisconsin, the federal government, or any combination thereof.
(14) "PLANNING AGENCY" means the Village of DeForest Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(15) "SHORELANDS" means lands within the following distances from the ordinary
high-water mark of navigable waters; 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or flowage; and 300 feet
from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever is greater.
(16) "SHORELAND-WETLAND DISTRICT" means the Zoning District, created in
this Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Ordinance, comprised of shorelands that are designated as
wetlands on the wetlands inventory maps which have been adopted and made a part of this
chapter.
(17) "UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP" means that circumstances where special
conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict
conformity with restrictions governing the area, setbacks, frontage height or density
unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this chapter.
(18) "VARIANCE" means an authorization granted by the Board of Appeals to
construct or alter a building or structure in a manner that deviates from the dimensional
standards of this chapter.
(19) "VILLAGE ENGINEER" means the person or a representative of the firm
appointed and retained by the Village Board to provide engineering services.
(20) "WETLANDS" means those areas where water is at, near or above the land
surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils
indicative or wet conditions.
(21) "WETLAND ALTERATION" means any filling, flooding, draining, dredging,
ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam
construction in a wetland area.
(22) "WORKING DAY" means Monday , Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday,
excluding, however, any such day officially observed by the Village as a legal holiday. Also
referred to as "business day".
(23) "PLANNING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR" means the Village
Administrator for the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter.
25.04 SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING MAPS. The following maps are hereby
adopted and made part of this chapter and are on file in the office of the Village Clerk:
(1) Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Maps stamped “REVISED” on July 26, 1994.
[Am. 96-45, Eff. 12-02-96]
(2) Floodplain zoning maps titled "DNR Floodplain Study Map based on the Flood
Insurance study by HUD," and dated March 1978, as revised August 5, 1988.
25-5
(3) United States Geological Survey Maps dated 1987.
25.05 SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. The
Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District includes all wetlands in the Village which are shown on
the final Wetland Inventory Map that has been adopted and made a part of this chapter and
which are:
(1) Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable
lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the Village shall be presumed to be
navigable if they are shown on the Unites States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or
other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this
chapter.
(2) Within three hundred (300) feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable
rivers or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either
continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle
maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a
part of this chapter. Floodplain zoning maps adopted in sec. 23.04(2) shall be used to
determine the extent of floodplain areas.
Determination of navigability and ordinary high-water mark location shall initially be
made by the Zoning Administrator. When questions arise, the Planning and Zoning
Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the Department for a final
determination of navigability or ordinary high-water mark.
When an apparent discrepancy exists between the Shoreland-Wetland District
Boundary shown on the official zoning maps and actual field conditions at the time the maps
were adopted, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district
office of the Department to determine if the Shoreland-Wetland District Boundary as
mapped is in error. If Department staff concurs with the Planning and Zoning Administrator
that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the Planning and Zoning
Administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a zoning permit in
accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct
wetland mapping errors or acknowledge exempted wetlands designated in secs. 25.06 and
25.07, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for initiating a map
amendment within a reasonable period.
25.06 FILLED WETLANDS. Wetlands which are filled prior to March 9, 1990, the
date on which the Village of DeForest received final wetland inventory maps, in a manner
which affects their wetland characteristics to the extent that the area can no longer be
defined as wetland, are not subject to this chapter.
25.07 WETLANDS LANDWARD OF A BULKHEAD LINE. Wetlands located
between the original ordinary high water mark and a bulkhead line established prior to May
7, 1982 under §30.11, Wis. Stats., are not subject to this chapter.
25-6
25.08 PERMITTED USES. The following uses are permitted subject to the
provisions of Chapters 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., and the provisions of other local, state and
federal laws, where applicable:
(1) Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a Zoning Permit,
provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
(a) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and boating;
(b) The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries,
tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of
such crops;
(c) The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of
timber;
(d) The pasturing of livestock;
(e) The cultivation of agricultural crops; and
(f) The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
(2) Uses which do not require the issuance of a Zoning Permit and which may
involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below:
(a) The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization
measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have
an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected;
(b) The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for
the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries;
(c) The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore pre-existing
levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged
spoil, provided that the filling is otherwise permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on
existing spoil banks where possible;
(d) The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock,
including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance;
(e) The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways, observation decks
and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such
construction or maintenance;
(f) The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands
outside the Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District provided that such installation or
maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural
functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in sec. 25.12(3) of this chapter; and
25-7
(g) The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways
and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair,
replacement or reconstruction.
25.09 USES REQUIRING ZONING PERMIT. Uses which are allowed upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit and which may include wetland alterations only to the
extent specifically provided below:
(1) The construction and maintenance of streets which are necessary for the
continuity of the Village of DeForest street system, the provision of essential utility and
emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted under secs. 25.08 and 25.09 of
this chapter, provided that:
(a) The street cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
(b) The street is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts upon the
natural functions of the wetland listed in sec. 25.12(3) of this chapter;
(c) The street is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional area
practical to serve the intended use;
(d) Street construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed
only; and
(e) Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of
the road.
(2) The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings provided that:
(a) The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the Shoreland-
Wetland District or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals;
(b) The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
(c) The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and
(d) Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for the
building is allowed.
(3) The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation
areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific areas, game bird and animal
farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that:
(a) Any private development allowed under this paragraph shall be used exclusively
for the permitted purpose;
(b) Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat
launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar
structures is allowed;
25-8
(c) The construction and maintenance of streets necessary for the uses permitted
under this paragraph are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the
criteria in sec. 25.09(1) of this chapter; and
(d) Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat
improvement projects, game bird and animal farms and wildlife preserves shall be for the
purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values.
(4) The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines,
water and gas distribution lines and sewage collection lines and related facilities and the
construction and maintenance of railroad lines provided that:
(a) The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad lines cannot, as a
practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
(b) Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or maintenance
is allowed; and
(c) Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize
adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in sec. 25.12(3) of this
chapter.
25.10 PROHIBITED USES. Any use not listed in secs. 25.08 and 25.09 of this
chapter is prohibited, unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by
amendment of this chapter in accordance with sec. 25.12 of this chapter.
The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a
boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters
are prohibited.
25.11 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES. The lawful use of a
building, structure or property which existed at the time this chapter, or an applicable
amendment to this chapter, took effect and which is not in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter, including the routine maintenance of such a building or structure, may be
continued, subject to the following conditions that the shoreland-wetland provisions of this
chapter authorized by §61.351, Wis. Stats., shall not limit the repair, reconstruction,
renovation, remodeling or expansion of a nonconforming structure or of any environmental
control facility related to such a structure in existence on the effective date of the shorelandwetland
provisions. All other modifications to nonconforming structures are subject to
§62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., which limits total lifetime structural repairs and alterations to fifty
percent (50%) of current fair market value.
If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for twelve
(12) consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform
to this chapter.
Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and
which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this chapter adopted
under §61.351, Wis. Stats., may be continued although such use does not conform with the
provisions of this chapter. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended.
25-9
The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are located below the
ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of
§30.121, Wis. Stats.
25.12 AMENDING SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING REGULATIONS. The
Village Board upon recommendation of the Village of DeForest Planning and Zoning
Commission may alter, supplement or change the District Boundaries and the regulations
contained in this chapter in accordance with the requirements of §62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Stats.,
and sec. NR117, Wis. Admin. Code.
This procedure for amending shall also be followed:
(1) A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the
appropriate district office of the Department within five days of the submission of the
proposed amendment to the Village of DeForest Planning and Zoning Commission;
(2) All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland zoning
regulations shall be referred to the Village of DeForest Planning and Zoning Commission,
and a Public Hearing shall be held after Class II notice as required by §62.23(7)(d)2., Wis.
Stats. The appropriate district office of the Department shall be provided with written notice
of the Public Hearing at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing.
(3) In order to insure that this chapter will remain consistent with the shoreland
protection objectives of §281.31, Wis. Stats., the Village of DeForest Board may not rezone
a wetland in a Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District, or any portion thereof, where the
proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following
wetland functions.
(a) Storm and flood water storage capacity;
(b) Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a
wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of
groundwater through a wetland;
(c) Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds
that would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
(d) Shoreline protection against erosion;
(e) Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
(f) Wildlife habitat; or
(g) Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce
wetland types and habitat of endangered species.
(4) Where the District Office of the Department determines that a proposed rezoning
may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in sec. 25.12(3) of this
chapter, the Department shall so notify the Village of DeForest of its determination either
prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed amendment.
25-10
The appropriate District Office of the Department shall be provided with:
(a) A copy of the recommendation and report, if any, of the Village of DeForest
Planning and Zoning Commission on a proposed text or map amendment, within ten (10)
days after the submission of those recommendations to the Village of DeForest Board.
(b) Written notice of the action on the proposed text or map amendment within ten
(10) days after the action is taken.
If the Department notified the Village of DeForest Planning and Zoning Commission
in writing that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of
the criteria listed in sec. 25.12(3) of this chapter, that proposed amendment, if approved by
the Village of DeForest Board, shall not become effective until more than thirty (30) days
have elapsed since written notice of the municipal approval was mailed to the Department,
as required by sec. 25.12(4)(b) of this chapter. If within the thirty (30) day period, the
Department notifies the Village of DeForest that the Department intends to adopt a
superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the Village of DeForest as provided by
§61.351(6), Wis. Stats., the proposed procedure under §61.351(6), Wis. Stats., is completed
or otherwise terminated. The Village of DeForest shall notify the applicant of the Department
intent and the proposed amendment.
25.13 FEES.
(1) ZONING PERMITS. The application fee for a zoning permit as defined under
this chapter shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). In addition to this fee for a zoning
permit, before any permit will be issued, the applicant must pay the actual engineering fees
or expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the review of the permit and the
engineering fees or expenses estimated to be incurred for any on-site inspection during the
project. These additional charges shall be obtained from the Finance Committee
Chairperson and the Village Administrator.
(2) CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS The application fee for conditional use permits
shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(3) ADDITIONAL FEES. The cost of all legal notice and Public Hearings shall be
paid prior to the issuance of the permit by the applicant. If after fourteen (14) days the
applicant has not paid the above fees, the permit shall be considered revoked.
25.14 ZONING PERMITS. Unless another section of this chapter specifically
exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a Zoning Permit shall be
obtained from the Planning and Zoning Administrator before any new development, as
defined in sec. 25.03(5) of this chapter, or any change in the use of an existing building or
structure is initiated.
25.15 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS. Any use listed as a conditional use in this
chapter shall be permitted only after an application has been submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Administrator and a conditional use permit has been so recommended by the Village
of DeForest Planning and Zoning Commission and passed by resolution by the DeForest
Village Board. Appeals must be taken to the Board of Appeals following the procedures of
this chapter.
25-11
25.16 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE. Except where no zoning permit or
conditional use permit is required, no land shall be occupied or used, and no building which
is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied,
until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, subject
to the following provisions.
(1) The Certificates of Compliance shall show that the building or premises or part
thereof, and the proposed use thereof, conform to the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a
Zoning or Conditional Use Permit.
(3) The Certificate of Compliance shall be issued with ten (10) days after notification
of the completion of the work specified in the Zoning or Conditional Use Permit, providing
the building or premises and proposed use thereof conform with all the provisions of this
chapter.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary Certificate of Compliance for
a building, premises or part thereof pursuant to rules and regulations established by the
Village of DeForest Board.
Upon written request from the owner, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall issue a
certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of ordinance
adoption, certifying after inspection, the extent and type of use made of the building or
premises and whether or not such use conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
25.17 RECORDING. Where a Zoning Permit, Conditional Use Permit or Certificate
of Compliance is approved, an appropriate record shall be made by the Planning and
Zoning Administrator of the land use and structures permitted.
25.18 REVOCATION. Where the conditions of a Zoning Permit or Conditional Use
Permit are violated or where the appropriate fees are not paid as per sec. 25.13 of this
chapter, the permit shall be revoked by the Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
25.19 DURATION. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter shall be
valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of issuance. All work must be
completed prior to expiration of the permit. If activity is to continue beyond the expiration of
the permit, then reapplication and review pursuant to this chapter is required.
25.20 INSPECTIONS. The Village Engineer, Planning and Zoning Administrator,
Planning and Zoning Chairperson or their authorized agents shall inspect all permits and
conditional use activities in order to ensure compliance with the Permit and this chapter.
If the land disturbing or land development activities are being carried out without a valid
permit, i.e., unauthorized, the Planning and Zoning Administrator, Village Engineer,
Chairperson of Planning and Zoning, Building Inspector, Chief of Police or their authorized
agents, if refused entry to the land in question, shall seek special inspection warrant
provisions of §66.0119, Wis. Stats. to enter said lands.
25-12
25.21 VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
(1) VIOLATIONS. Any development, building, structure or accessory building or
structure constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced or any use or
accessory use established after the effective date of this chapter in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, by any person, firm, association, corporation (including building
contractors or their agents shall be deemed a violation and thus subject to the enforcement
and penalty provisions contained herein.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall refer violations to the Village of DeForest
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Village Attorney, who shall prosecute such
violations.
(2) ENFORCEMENT. This chapter shall be enforced consistent with the policies
and purposes underlying its adoption. The following enforcement actions, or any
combination thereof, may be taken in case of a violation of this chapter.
(a) Stop Work Order. A stop work order may be issued by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator, Planning and Zoning Chairperson, Village Engineer, Village Attorney or their
authorized agents, after an inspection if:
1. Any activity regulated under this chapter is being undertaken without a
permit;
2. The permit is not being implemented in a good faith manner; or
3. The conditions of the permit are not being met.
Stop work orders may be retracted when compliance with this chapter is obtained. The
Village Engineer, Planning and Zoning Administrator, Planning and Zoning Chairperson or
their designee has the authority to retract a stop work order as issued above.
(b) Revocation of Permit. Including where otherwise noted in this chapter where a
stop work order has been issued in order to obtain compliance with a permit, the Village
may revoke the permit if the permittee does not cease the illegal activity or obtain
compliance with the permit conditions within five (5) days from issuance of the stop work
order. Permits may be revoked by the Village Engineer, Planning and Zoning Administrator
or Planning and Zoning Chairperson or their designee.
(c) Village to Perform Work. Five (5) days after posting a stop work order, the
Village may issue a notice of intent to the permittee or landowner or land user of the
Village's intent to perform work necessary to comply with this chapter. Upon receipt of
permission from the landowner or pursuant to a court order, the Village Engineer and/or
other designated Village officials or agents as determined by the Village Board performed by
the Village, plus interest, shall be billed to the permittee. In the event a permittee or
landowner otherwise fails to pay the amount due, the Clerk shall enter the amount due on
the tax rolls and collect as a special assessment against the property pursuant to §66.0703,
Wis. Stats.
(d) Injunction and Other Judicial Remedies. Compliance with the provisions of this
chapter may also be obtained by the Village Board authorizing the Village Attorney to
25-13
commence appropriate action to enjoin violations, compel compliance, or pursue other
appropriate judicial relief.
(e) Private Remedies Preserved. These enforcement provisions are not intended in
any way to restrict or limit the rights of private parties to pursue whatever private legal
remedies they may have available as a result of any erosion, sediment or water runoff.
3. PENALTIES. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to forfeitures as follows: Not less than $500 nor more than $2,000 plus the actual costs of
prosecution for each offense. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
The Village Board will determine when prosecution action should be taken based on its own
initiative or upon reports made by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Before
commencing a forfeiture action, the Village Board shall issue a written warning to the person
believed to be violating this chapter, granting the person two (2) business days in which to
remedy the violation and avoid the commencement of a forfeiture action.
25.22 APPEAL AND VARIANCES.
(1) BOARD OF APPEALS. The Village President shall appoint a Board of Appeals
under §62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., consisting of five (5) members subject to confirmation by the
Village of DeForest Board. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules for the conduct of its
business as required by §62.23(7)(e)3, Wis. Stats. The Board of Appeals shall hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
(2) APPEALS TO THE BOARD. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the community
affected by any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Planning and Zoning
Administrator or other administrative official. Such appeals shall be taken by filing with the
official whose decision is in question, and with the Board of Appeals, a notice of appeal
specifying the reasons for the appeal. The Planning and Zoning Administrator or other
official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the Board all the papers constituting
the record on the matter appealed.
The appeal must state written grounds for the appeal. A copy of any citizen appeal shall be
delivered or mailed to the applicant or permittee by the Planning and Zoning Administrator
within five (5) business days of its filing with the Village. The filing of a citizen appeal, by
itself, does not prohibit the commencement or continuation of any work or activity.
(a) Appeal Deadline. Appeals by applicants, permittees or citizens must be filed
within forty-five (45) days of the order, decision, determination or inaction being appealed.
(b) Multiple Appeals Prohibited. Once an appeal has been filed on a matter, no
other appeal on the same order, decision, determination or action will be allowed. The
Appeals Board shall consolidate appeals wherever possible to avoid a multiplicity of appeal
proceedings and to hasten the final resolution of a matter. The Appeals Board may allow
additional parties to join a pending appeal where appropriate and where such addition will
not delay the proceedings.
25-14
(3) VARIANCES. The Board of Appeals must approve variances under
§62.23(7)(e)7 Wis. Stats..
The Village Board of Appeals shall hear and decide within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
written request and payment of the appeal fee, if any, unless an extension is agreed upon
by the Appellant and Appeals Board.
(4) ENFORCEMENT STAYED. The filing of an appeal shall stay all legal
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed. §62.23(7)(e)5 Wis. Stats..
25.23 DESIGN CRITERIA, STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR
CONTROL MEASURES. Unless otherwise specified herein, all control measures required
to comply with this chapter shall meet the design criteria, standards and specifications for
the control measures based on accepted design criteria, standards and specifications
periodically established by the United States Soil Conservation Service, Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources or otherwise identified as acceptable by the Village
Engineer. Where design criteria, standards or specifications conflict, the most restrictive
provisions shall apply.
(1) CONDITIONAL USE. Upon consideration of the permit application and the
standards applicable to the conditional uses designated in sec. 25.15 of this chapter, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall attach such conditions to a conditional use permit, in
addition to those required elsewhere in this chapter, as are necessary to further the purpose
of this chapter as listed in sec. 25.02. Such conditions may include specifications for, without
limitation because of specific enumeration; type of shore cover; erosion controls; increased
setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and planting
screens; period of operation; operational control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of
piers, docks, parking areas and signs; and type of construction. To secure information upon
which to base its determination, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require the
applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a Zoning Permit, other
pertinent information which is necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent with
the purpose of this chapter.
(2) ZONING PERMIT. An application for a Zoning Permit shall be made to the
Planning and Zoning Administrator upon forms furnished by the Village of DeForest and
shall include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations, the following
information:
(a) General Information
1. Name, address and telephone number of applicant, property owner and
contractor, where applicable.
2. Legal description of the property and a general description of the proposed
use or development.
3. Whether or not a private water supply or sewage system is to be installed.
(b) Site Development Plan The site development plan shall be submitted as a part
of the permit application and shall contain the following information drawn to scale:
25-15
1. Dimensions and area of the lot;
2. Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and
center line of all abutting streets or highways;
3. Description of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private
water supply systems;
4. Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting navigable
waterways;
5. Boundaries of all wetlands;
6. Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative
cover;
7. Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined
from floodplain zoning maps;
8. Location of existing or future access roads, as shown on the Village of
DeForest Master Plan;
9. Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration.
25.24 MAINTENANCE OF CONTROL MEASURES. All control measures
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be maintained by the landowner at
his/her cost in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate performance and to prevent
nuisance conditions during the period of the land development or for such longer period of
time as specified in the Permit.
25.25 PLANNING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Village Administrator is
appointed Planning and Zoning Administrator for the purpose of administering and enforcing
this chapter.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties and powers:
(1) Advise applicants as to the provisions of this chapter and assist them in
preparing permit applications and appeal forms.
(2) Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for
compliance with this chapter.
(3) Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other
official actions.
(4) Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8 a.m. and 6
p.m. for the purpose of performing these duties, or his/or designee.
(5) Submit written notice to public hearings to the appropriate district office of the
Department 10 days prior to such hearings and submit copies of decisions on Variances,
Conditional Use Permits, appeals for a map or text interpretation and map or text
25-16
amendments within ten (10) days after they are granted or denied, to the appropriate district
office of the Department.
(6) Investigate and report violations of this chapter to the Village Board and the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Village Attorney.
25.26 STATUTORY AUTHORITY. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the
authorization in §§61.35 and 61.351, Wis. Stats.
25.27 COMPLIANCE. The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within the
shoreland area of the Village of DeForest shall be in full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable local, state or federal regulations. (However, see sec. 25.11 of
this chapter, for the standards applicable to nonconforming uses.) All permitted development
shall require the issuance of a Zoning Permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a
provision of this chapter.
25.28 MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED. Unless
specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply
with this ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply
if §13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applied. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair
of the state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are
exempt when §30.12(4)(a), Wis. Stats., applies.
25.29 SCOPE OF GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE
(1) WITHIN THE VILLAGE. Unless specifically excluded herein, this chapter applies
to all land disturbing and land developing activities occurring within the corporate limits of
the Village and which are within defined wetlands.
(2) WITHIN THE EXTRATERRITORIAL AREA. This chapter shall apply outside the
Village limits within the extraterritorial plat review area provided by Chapter 236, Wis. Stats.,
and Chapter 15, DeForest Municipal Code, but only to those land disturbing activities
relating to, arising from, or connected with a subdivision as defined in §236.02(12), Wis.
Stats., and which are within defined wetlands.
25.30 SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this chapter is invalid or unconstitutional
or if the application of this chapter to any person or circumstance is invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or
applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional
provisions or applications.
25.31 APPLICATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. It is not intended by this
chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements,
covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, ordinances or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this chapter imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
25.32 INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wis. Stats. Where any terms or
25-17
requirements of this chapter may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more restrictive
requirement or interpretation shall control.
25.33 ANNEXED AREAS. The Dane County Shoreland Zoning Provisions in effect
on the date of annexation remain in effect administered by the Village of DeForest for all
areas annexed by the Village of DeForest after May 7, 1992. These annexed lands are
described on the Village of DeForest Official Map and the Village of DeForest Board
Minutes. The Dane County Shoreland Zoning Provisions are incorporated by reference for
the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the Village of
DeForest Planning and Zoning Administrator.
25-18
ADDENDUM
SHORELAND-WETLAND PERMIT APPLICATION
PROJECT NAME
APPLICANT Name Daytime Telephone Number
Address
LANDOWNER Name Daytime Telephone Number
Address
LOCATION OF LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY (ATTACH LOCATION MAP):
Quarter, Sec. N. R. E.
Street Address or Plat Name
DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITY:
Excavating filling cubic yards
Trenching linear feet
Grading or removal of ground cover square feet
Other (Describe)
Total area to be disturbed: square feet
PROJECT FILE NO.:
APPLICATION DATE:
AMOUNT OF FEE: $150.00
NOTIFICATION DATE TO APPLICANT:
PERMIT EXPIRATION DATE (TO BE FILLED IN UPON APPROVAL AND NOTIFICATION
OF APPLICATION):
26-1
CHAPTER 26
TRUANCY AND HABITUAL TRUANCY
26.01 Title ................................................................................................................... 26-1
26.02 Definitions ........................................................................................................ 26-1
26.03 Habitual Truancy Prohibited ........................................................................... 26-1
26.031 Truancy Prohibited .......................................................................................... 26-2
26.04 Disposition and Penalties ............................................................................... 26-2
26.05 Contributing to Truancy .................................................................................. 26-3
26.06 Parent or Guardian Liability for Truancy ....................................................... 26-4
26.07 Failure to Control Habitual Truant .................................................................. 26-4
26.08 Severability ...................................................................................................... 26-4
26.09 Interpretation ................................................................................................... 26-4
26.10 Effective Date ................................................................................................... 26-4
26.11 Establishment of Ordinance ........................................................................... 26-4
26.12 [Repealed 92-33, Eff. 11-2-92] ................................................................................... 26-4
26.13 Establishment of Drug Free Zones Within the Village of DeForest .............. 26-4
26.14 School Dropout ............................................................................................... 26-5
ADDENDUM Affidavit of Truancy ............................................................................. 26-6
26.01 ENFORCEMENT. The Village of DeForest Police Department is authorized
to enforce this Chapter as permitted by law, including, but not limited to, the issuance of
municipal citations.
[Am. 12-05, Eff.3-2-12]
26.02 DEFINITIONS. In this Chapter:
(1) “Habitual Truant” means a pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable
excuse for part or all of 5 or more days on which school is held during a school semester.
(2) “Truant” means a pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse
for part or all of any day on which school is held during a school semester.
(3) “Acceptable Excuse” means as the term is defined in §§118.15 and 118.16(4),
Wis. Stats.
[Am. 12-05, Eff.3-2-12]
26.03 HABITUAL TRUANCY PROHIBITED.
(1) No person under 18 years of age may be a habitual truant.
(2) Prior to the issuance of a citation for violation of this section, the school
attendance officer shall comply with the requirements of §118.16(5), Wis. Stats., except as
provided under §118.16(5m), Wis. Stats. The “Affidavit of Truancy” labeled as Addendum I
to this Chapter, may be used by the school attendance officer to comply with the
requirements of this subsection.
26-2
(3) Citations issued for violation of this section shall be returnable to the Village of
DeForest Municipal Court. The citation shall require a mandatory appearance but no
deposit amount.
[Am. 12-05, Eff.3-2-12]
26.031 TRUANCY PROHIBITED.
(1) No person under 18 years of age may be a truant.
(2) Citations issued for violation of this section shall be returnable to the Village of
DeForest Municipal Court. The citation shall require a mandatory appearance but no
deposit amount.
[Cr. 12-05, Eff.3-2-12]
26.04 DISPOSITION AND PENALTIES.
(1) Upon finding a person habitually truant, the municipal court may enter an order
making one or more of the following dispositions:
(a) Suspend the person's operating privilege, as defined in §340.01(40), Wis. Stats.,
for not less than 30 days nor more than one year.
(b) Order the person to participate in counseling or a supervised work program other
than community service work under §938.34(5g), Wis. Stats.
(c) Order the person to remain at home except during hours in which the person is
attending religious worship or a school program, including travel time required to get to and
from the school program or place of worship. The order may permit a person to leave his or
her home if the person is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
(d) Order the person to attend an educational program under §938.34(7d), Wis.
Stats.
(e) Order the Department of Workforce Development to revoke, under §103.72, Wis.
Stats., a work permit authorizing the employment of the person.
(f) Order the person to be placed in a teen court program if all of the following
conditions apply:
1. The chief judge of the judicial administrative district has approved a teen
court program established in the person 's county of residence and the
judge determines that participation in the teen court program will likely
benefit the person and the community.
2. The person admits or pleads no contest in open court, with the person's
parent, guardian or legal custodian present, to the allegations of habitual
truancy.
26-3
3. The person has not successfully completed participation in a teen court
program during the 2 years before the date of the alleged violation.
(g) Order the person to attend school.
(h) A forfeiture of not more than $500 plus costs. All or part of the forfeiture plus
costs may be assessed against the person, the parents, or the guardian of the person or
both.
(i) Any other reasonable conditions consistent with the prevention of habitual
truancy, including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or remaining on specified premises
and restrictions on associating with other children or adults.
(j) Order the person to be placed under formal or informal supervision, as described
in §938.34(2) Wis. Stats., for up to one year.
(k) Order the person’s parent, guardian or legal custodian to participate in
counseling at the parent’s, guardian or legal custodian’s own expense or to attend school
with the person, or both.
(2) Upon finding a person under 18 years of age to be truant, as defined in
§118.163, Wis. Stats., the municipal court may enter an order making one or more of the
following dispositions:
(a) Order the person to attend school.
(b) A forfeiture of not more than $50 plus costs for a first violation, or a forfeiture of
not more than $100 plus costs for any 2nd or subsequent violation committed within 12
months of a previous violation, subject to the provisions of §938.37, Wis. Stats., and subject
to a maximum cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than $500 for all violations
committed during a school semester. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be
assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both.
[Am. 00-16, Eff. 5-19-00]
26.05 CONTRIBUTING TO TRUANCY.
(1) Except as provided in sec. 26.05(2) below, any person eighteen years of age or
older, who, by an act or omission, knowingly encourages or contributes to the truancy, as
defined in 26.02, of a child shall be subject to a forfeiture of up to five hundred dollars
($500.00).
(2) Section 26.05(1) above does not apply to a person who has under his/her control
a child who has been sanctioned under §49.26(1)(h), Wis. Stats.
(3) An act or omission contributes to the truancy of a child, whether or not the child
is adjudged to be in need of protection or services, if the natural and probable
consequences of that act or omission would be to cause the child to be a truant.
26-4
26.06 PARENT OR GUARDIAN LIABILITY FOR TRUANCY.
(1) Unless the child is excepted or excused under §118.15, Wis. Stats. or has
graduated from high school, any person having under control a child who is between the
ages of six (6) and eighteen (18) years shall cause the child to attend school regularly
during the full period of hours, religious holidays excepted, that the public or private school
in which the child should be enrolled is in session until the end of the school term, quarter or
semester of the school year in which the child becomes eighteen (18) years of age.
(2) A person found to have violated 26.06(1) above, after evidence is provided by a
school official that the activities under §118.16(5), Wis. Stats. have been completed, shall be
subject to a forfeitures of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(3) Section 26.06(2) above, does not apply to a person who has been sanctioned
under §49.26(1)(h), Wis. Stats. nor does it apply if the person provides that he/she is unable
to comply with sec. 26.06(1) because of the disobedience of the child.
26.07 FAILURE TO CONTROL HABITUAL TRUANT. Whoever having under
his/her control a child who is between the ages of six (6) and eighteen (18) years and whose
child is not in compliance with §118.15, Wis. Stats. shall be subject to a forfeiture of five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
26.08 SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this chapter is invalid or unconstitutional
or if the application of this chapter to any person or circumstance is invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or
applications of this Chapter which can be given effect with the invalid or unconstitutional
provisions or applications.
26.09 INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where any terms
or requirements of this chapter may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more restrictive
requirement or interpretation shall control.
26.10 EFFECTIVE DATE. This chapter shall take effect following passage and
publication as provided by law. This chapter shall be Chapter 26 “Habitual Truancy,” of the
Municipal Code of the Village of DeForest.
26.11 ESTABLISHMENT OF ORDINANCE. WHEREAS the Village of DeForest
Board recognizes the best interests of the community are served by working with the
DeForest Area School District in adopting, following and the joint implementation of the
aforementioned chapter on “Habitual Truancy.”
26.12 [Cr. 92-20, Eff. 11-4-91; Repl. 92-33, Eff. 11-2-92]
26.13 ESTABLISHMENT OF DRUG FREE ZONES WITHIN THE VILLAGE OF
DEFOREST.
[Cr. 91-21, Eff. 11-4-91]
(1) The following areas shall be considered Drug Free Zones as defined in §§961.49
and 961.495, Wis. Stats.: While in or otherwise within one thousand feet (1000’) of a village
26-5
park, a swimming pool open to members of the public, a youth center or community center,
while on or otherwise within one thousand feet (1000’) of any private or public school
premises or while on or otherwise within one thousand feet (1000’) of a school bus.
(2) The Superintendent of Streets, Sanitation and Parks and Chief of Police, are so
authorized to post signs designating “Drug Free Zones” at the direction of the Village of
DeForest Board. The lack of a sign designating a “Drug Free Zone” shall not constitute lack
of notice. The signs are to be considered only as informational.
(3) SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this chapter is invalid or unconstitutional or if
the application of this chapter to any person or circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications of
this chapter which can be given effect with the invalid or unconstitutional provisions or
applications.
26.14 SCHOOL DROPOUT.
(1) The Village of DeForest by this ordinance prohibits any juvenile from being a
“dropout” as that term is defined in this section.
(2) “Dropout” means a child who has ceased to attend school, does not attend a
public or private school, technical college or home-based private educational program on a
full-time basis, has not graduated from high school and does not have an acceptable excuse
under §118.15(1)(b) to (d) or (3), Wis. Stats.
(3)(a) If the municipal court finds a juvenile has violated this section, the court shall
enter an order suspending the juvenile’s operating privilege, as defined in §340.01(40), Wis.
Stats., until the juvenile reaches the age of 18.
(b) The court may enter an order making any of the dispositions specified in sec.
26.04(1) if the court finds that suspension of the juvenile’s operating privilege, as defined in
§340.01(40), Wis. Stats., until the juvenile reaches the age of 18 would cause an undue
hardship to the juvenile or the juvenile’s family.
[Cr. 96-44, Eff. 11-22-96]
26-6
ADDENDUM I
AFFIDAVIT OF TRUANCY
In the interest of: ______________________________ Date of
Birth:_________________
A Minor Child Between The Ages of 6 and 18 Years of Age.
State of Wisconsin )
County of Dane )
______________________________, Being duly sworn on oath deposes and says that
he/she is a resident of the City/Village/Town of ____________________, Dane County, Wisconsin,
for the past __________ years and that he/she is the School Attendance Officer as employed by the
DeForest Area School District.
That ____________________ is truant from the DeForest Area School District as truancy is
defined by sections 118.163 and 948.45 of the Wisconsin Statutes and DeForest Municipal Code,
Chapter 26.
That ____________________ is habitually truant from the DeForest Area School District as
so defined by the Wisconsin Statutes, section 118.163 and 948.45 and Village of DeForest Municipal
Code. That ____________________, has not provided the DeForest Area School District with a legal
excuse that is within the DeForest Area School District Board policies and Wisconsin Statutes,
section 118.15 and section 118.16(4). That ____________________ and ____________________,
Legal Guardian, have received notices of ____________________ habitual truancy on
_______________.
That ____________________ is a DeForest Area School District employee, and has
attempted to meet with or has personally met with ____________________ and
____________________, Legal Guardian, in an attempt to resolve the child’s truancy.
That ____________________ is a DeForest Area School District employee and has provided
an opportunity for educational counseling to the above named child to determine whether a change in
the child’s curriculum would resolve the child’s truancy, and considered curriculum modifications as
per the Wisconsin Statutes.
That ____________________ is a DeForest Area School District employee, and has
evaluated the child to determine whether learning problems may be a cause of the child’s truancy.
That ____________________ is a DeForest Area School District employee, and has
evaluated the child to determine whether social problems may be the cause of the child’s truancy.
That this affidavit is given for the purpose of affirming that it is not possible to resolve
____________________, the above named child, educational needs without court intervention.
DeForest Area School District
Attendance Officer
Subscribed and sworn to before me
this ___ day of __________, 20__.
_________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC, STATE OF WISCONSIN
My Commission ___________________
27-1
CHAPTER 27
MINIMUM HOUSING AND
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
[Cr. 91-39, Eff. 12-19-91]
27.01 Title ................................................................................................................... 27-1
27.02 Declaration of Policy and Finding of Fact ...................................................... 27-1
27.03 Rules and Definitions ...................................................................................... 27-1
27.04 Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment, Lighting,
Ventilation, Heating and Electrical Service ............................................... 27-5
27.05 Safe and Sanitary Maintenance of Property .................................................. 27-9
27.051 Planned Natural Landscaping. ..................................................................... 27-12
[Cr. 16-15, Eff. 06-17-16]
27.06 Fixing the Responsibility of Owners, Operators, and Occupants .............. 27-13
27.07 Designation of Unfit Buildings or Structures and Legal
Procedures of Repair or Razing .............................................................. 27-14
27.08 Administration and Enforcement ................................................................. 27-15
27.09 [Repealed 96-41, Eff. 10-21-96] ................................................................................ 27-16
27.10 Severability .................................................................................................... 27-16
27.11 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions ........................................................... 27-16
27.12 Interpretation ................................................................................................. 27-16
27.01 TITLE. This Chapter shall be known as the "Minimum Housing and Property
Maintenance Code" of the Village of DeForest.
27.02 DECLARATION OF POLICY AND FINDING OF FACT. The Village of
DeForest Village Board and the Village Planning and Zoning Commission have found after
extensive study and Public Hearings that:
(1) This chapter is adopted for the purpose of preserving and promoting the
public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the
people of the Village and its environs. This includes, among others, physical, aesthetic,
spiritual and monetary values.
(2) It is recognized that there may now be, or may in the future be, residential
and nonresidential buildings, structures, yards or vacant areas and combinations thereof
which are so dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unhygienic, overcrowded, inadequately
maintained or lacking in basic equipment or facilities, light, ventilation and heating so as to
constitute a menace to the health, safety, and general welfare of the people. The
establishment and enforcement of minimum housing and property maintenance standards is
necessary to preserve and promote the private and public interest of the community.
27.03 RULES AND DEFINITIONS.
(1) RULES: In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied except when the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
(a) Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
27-2
(b) Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the
plural the singular.
(c) The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
(d) The word "may" is permissive.
(e) The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for,"
"intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for."
(2) DEFINITIONS
(a) Adequate. "Adequate" shall mean adequate as determined by the Administrative
Officer under the regulations of this chapter or adequate as determined by an authority
designated by law or this chapter. "Adequately" shall mean the same as adequate.
(b) Apartment. "Apartment" means one (1) or more rooms with provisions for living,
cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for use by one (1) family.
(c) Approved. "Approved" shall mean approved by the Administrative Officer under
the regulations of this chapter or approved by an authority designated by law or this chapter.
(d) Attractive Appearance. "Attractive appearance" refers to the exterior appearance
of buildings, structures, stairs, porches, and similar appurtenances and the improvement,
planting and landscaping of yards and vacant areas. The determination of "attractive" used
herein shall be as determined by the Administrative Officer under the regulations of this
chapter or as determined by an authority designated by law or this chapter.
(e) Basement. "Basement" means that portion of a dwelling between floor and
ceiling which is below or partly below and partly above grade but so located that the vertical
distance from the grade to the floor below is more than the vertical distance from grade to
ceiling.
(f) Boarding House: See Lodging House and Lodging Room.
(g) Building. "Building" means a combination of materials to form a construction that
is safe and stable, and adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy for assembly,
business, education, high hazard, industrial, institutional, mercantile, residential, or storage
purpose; the term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or portion
thereof." For the purpose of this CODE each portion of a building completely separated from
other portions by an unpierced fire wall shall be considered as a separate building.
(h) Capacity in Persons: The "capacity in persons" of a building is the maximum
number of persons that can occupy such building, as determined by the required floor space
per person as established in the DeForest Municipal Code or by the DeForest Area Fire
Chief.
(i) Compliance Inspection. An inspection performed in conjunction with a lawful
order of the Chairperson of the DeForest Planning and Zoning Commission, Village
27-3
Administrator or Building Inspector for the purpose of certifying the fulfillment of an official
requirement listed in the order.
(j) Cooperative Living Arrangement. A “cooperative living arrangement” shall mean
a collective number of individuals connected by membership in a cooperative, who equally
share ownership, occupancy and control of a dwelling and who live, cook and share
expenses as a bona fide single housekeeping unit. For the purposes of determining the
applicability of the Village of DeForest Municipal Code relating to construction and
maintenance of buildings, a building occupied by a cooperative living arrangement shall be
construed to be a lodging house and shall meet all the requirements of same, except where
an exception is explicitly provided in the ordinances.
(k) Dwelling. "Dwelling" is a place of abode, a residence or house for use by one (1)
or more persons, excluding hotels or motels.
(l) Dwelling Unit. "Dwelling unit" means one (1) or more rooms with provisions for
living, cooking, sanitary, and sleeping facilities arranged for use by one (1) family.
(m) Extermination. "Extermination" shall mean the control or elimination of
infestation by eliminating harboring places and removing or making inaccessible materials
that may serve as food, and by poisoning, spraying, trapping, fumigation by a licensed
fumigator or any other effective elimination procedure.
(n) Family. A “family” is an individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood,
marriage or legal adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit,
including foster children, domestic servants and not more than four (4) roomers, except that
the term family shall not, in R1, R2, R2A, R3, and R4 residence districts, include more than
one roomer except where such dwelling unit is owner-occupied. In any residence district, a
family may consist of two unrelated adults and the minor children of each. Such family may
not include any roomers except where the dwelling unit is owner-occupied. For the purpose
of this section, "children" means natural children, grandchildren, legally adopted children,
stepchildren, foster children, or a ward as determined in a legal guardianship proceeding.
Up to two (2) personal attendants who provide services for family members or roomers who,
because of advanced age or a physical or mental disability, need assistance with activities
of daily living shall be considered part of the "family." Such services may include personal
care, housekeeping, meal preparation, laundry or companionship.
(o) Friable Material. "Friable material" shall mean any material applied on ceilings,
walls, structural members, piping, duct work, or any other part of a building which when dry
may be crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder by hand pressure. The term includes
non-friable material after such previously non-friable material becomes damaged to the
extent that when dry it may be crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder by hand
pressure.
(p) Good Working Condition. "Good working condition" shall mean capable of
performing the task for which it was designed and in the manner intended by this code.
(q) Habitable Space. "Habitable space" is one (1) or more rooms in a dwelling used
primarily for sleeping, living or dining purposes.
27-4
(r) Impervious to Water. "Impervious to water" shall mean constructed of concrete,
cement block, terrazzo, brick, tile, or other material approved by the Building Inspector, and
having tight fitting joints, and not having more than four and one-half percent (4 1/2%)
absorption by test.
(s) Infestation. "Infestation" means the sustained presence of household pests,
vermin or rodents.
(t) Living Room. "Living room" shall mean a room used primarily for living, dining or
cooking purposes.
(u) Lodging House. "Lodging house" is a dwelling containing lodging rooms that will
accommodate five (5) or more persons not members of a family.
(v) Lodging Room. "Lodging room" is a portion of a dwelling used primarily for
sleeping and living purposes, excluding cooking facilities.
(w) Mixed Occupancy. "Mixed occupancy" shall be occupancy of a building in part
for residential use and in part for some other use not accessory thereto.
(x) Occupant. "Occupant" means one who occupies or has actual possession of
usable space.
(y) Operator. "Operator" shall mean any person who has charge or control of a
building or part thereof in which dwelling units or lodging rooms are located or let.
(z) Owner. The term "owner" shall mean every person, firm, partnership, or any
individual member thereof, corporation, business organization of any kind, the state, the
country, the village, any sewer district, drainage district, the University of Wisconsin and any
associated corporation or organization, and any other public or quasi-public corporation
having a legal or equitable interest in the property under consideration and shall include the
representative, officer, agent or other person having the ownership, control, custody or
management of any building. Owner does not include any person whose legal or equitable
interest in the building is a security interest derived solely from the extension of credit to
permit construction or remodeling of the dwelling or purchase of the dwelling by a third
party.
(aa) Person. A "person" shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation,
association or partnership.
(bb) Properly. "Properly" shall mean as deemed proper by the Administrative Officer
under the regulations of this chapter or deemed proper by an authority designated by law of
this chapter.
(cc) Provided. "Provided" shall mean furnished, supplied, paid for or under control
of the owner.
(dd) Residential Building. A "residential building" is a building which is arranged,
designed, used, or intended to be used for residential occupancy by one (1) or more families
or lodgers, and which includes, but is not limited to, the following types:
27-5
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Two-family detached dwellings.
3. Multiple-family dwellings (including apartment hotels).
4. Lodging houses.
5. Fraternity and sorority houses.
For the purpose of this chapter, any building containing any of the above uses
together with other uses shall be considered a residential building.
(ee) Room. A “room” is a partitioned part of the inside of a building. For the
purpose of this definition, partition shall mean something that divides interior space,
especially an interior dividing wall. A wall is one of the sides of a room or building
connecting floor and ceiling and may also include anything which encloses or separates
space. A partition or wall which intrudes into the space by more than one-third (1/3) of the
least dimension of an existing room may be regarded as creating an additional separate
room. The partitioned space shall be considered as a room if privacy is implied; light and
ventilation are affected; or a bedroom through a bedroom, bathroom through a bedroom or
bedroom through a bathroom situation is created.
(ff) Rooming House. See Lodging House and Lodging Room.
(gg) Sleeping Room. A "sleeping room" shall mean a room used for sleeping
purposes.
(hh) Structure. "Structure" is anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having
permanent location on the ground.
(ii) Supplied. "Supplied" shall mean paid for, furnished, provided by or under control
of, the owner or operator.
27.04 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT, LIGHTING,
VENTILATION, HEATING AND ELECTRICAL SERVICE.
(1) The purpose of this subsection is to establish minimum standards for basic
equipment, lighting, ventilation, and electrical services for all residential buildings and parts
thereof and to obtain the public and private benefits accruing from the provision of such
services. A suitable environment for safe and healthy living is encouraged by adequate
water and sanitary facilities, proper storage and disposal of garbage, recyclables, and other
refuse, safe means of egress, provision of light, air, heat and electrical service.
(2) No person shall occupy as an owner or let to another for occupancy any space in
a residential building for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which
does not comply with the following requirements:
(a) Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink, a flush water closet, a lavatory
basin and a bathtub or shower, all in good working condition and properly connected to hot
and cold water lines and to an approved municipal water and sewer system. The flush
water closet and bathtub or shower shall be contained within a separate room. Water
pressure shall be available at all fixtures as specified in Wis. Admin. Code sec. Comm.
82.40.
27-6
(b) Every residential building shall have supplied water heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working conditions, are properly
connected with the hot water lines required hereunder and are capable of heating water to
such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at any required
kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than one
hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit.
(c) The owner of every residential building shall be responsible for supplying such
building with garbage, recycling and refuse storage as required in Chapter 22, "Village of
DeForest Solid Waste Ordinance," Village of DeForest Municipal Code.
(d) Every dwelling unit and lodging room shall have direct access to at least two (2)
accessible unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe and open public street. Exterior
stairways or exit platforms, or a combination thereof, will be permitted as second exits
provided the platform or stairways terminate at a point not more than ten (10) feet above the
grade directly below the lowest platform. All stairs shall terminate at grade or a platform.
Platforms shall have a minimum area of fourteen (14) square feet within a minimum
dimension of three (3) feet.
All stairways and platforms shall be protected with handrails and guardrails as
specified in Wis. Admin. Code secs. Comm. 21.04(3) or Comm. 51.161 and Comm. 51.162
as dictated by the type of occupancy in the building. Existing variances to the height
limitations specified above may be approved by the DeForest Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Village Board provided platforms or stairs are maintained in a sound
structural condition.
(e) Each lodging house shall provide at least one (1) flush water closet, lavatory
basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved municipal water and sewer
system and in good working condition for each seven (7) persons or fraction thereof residing
therein including members of the operator's family wherever they share use of said facilities,
except that the required number of bathtubs or showers may be reduced by the Building
Board of Examiners and Appeals for lodging houses utilizing gang bathrooms containing
multiple bathtubs or showers. All such facilities shall be located on the floor occupied by
persons sharing such facilities or the floor directly above or below and shall be accessible
from a common hall or passageway. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be
supplied with hot water at all times.
(f) Every living, sleeping, kitchen or bathroom shall have available natural light and
ventilation complying with Comm. 21.05 or Comm. 57.13 as dictated by the occupancy of
the building. Existing light and ventilation conditions which do not comply with Comm.
Codes may remain in use with the granting of a variance by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Village Board.
Exhaust ventilation shall be installed in all toilet rooms except those having only one
(1) fixture (water closet or one urinal) and the window area is greater than four (4) square
feet and more than two (2) square feet is openable directly to the exterior of the building.
The volume of air exhausted shall not be less than two (2) cubic feet per minute per square
foot of floor area.
27-7
All doors and windows shall be protected with insect screens equivalent to not less
than sixteen (16) wire mesh installed to prevent the entrance of flies, mosquitoes and other
insects, annually during May before June 1 and maintained until storm windows are installed
in autumn.
All exterior doors and windows shall have storm windows or storm doors installed or
maintained to prevent excessive drafts and heat loss no earlier than October 15, but no later
than November 15 annually.
(g) Electrical. Every dwelling unit and all public and common areas in multiple
dwellings shall be supplied with electrical service, outlets, and fixtures which shall be
properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be
connected to a source of electric power in a manner prescribed by the Wisconsin Electric
Code. The minimum capacity of such electrical services and the minimum number of outlets
and fixtures shall be as listed below. (For the purpose of this section "electrical service"
shall mean: "The conductors and equipment for delivering electrical energy from the supply
system to the wiring system of the premises or the unit served." The electrical service shall
be of sufficient size to handle the load connected to it. The branch circuits shall be protected
by S-type or equivalent safety type, tamper-proof fuses, not to exceed the amp/capacity of
the smallest wire size in the circuit.
1. Every dwelling unit or room shall have electric service capable of
providing at least three (3) watts per square foot of total floor area (air
conditioners, ranges, space heaters and motor drive equipment 1/8 hp. or
over excluded).
2. Every lavatory, bathroom, kitchen or kitchenette, dining room, laundry
room, furnace room shall contain at least one (1) approved ceiling or wall
type electric light fixture equipped with sufficient lamps or tubes to provide
no less than five (5) foot candles at floor level at center of room. Where
more than one (1) fixture is used or required, they shall be equally spaced
as far as practicable. (A switched outlet may be substituted for ceiling or
wall fixture in dining room.)
3. Convenience outlet receptacles shall be provided as follows:
(measurements are at room perimeter and include doors and dooralcoves.)
Living Room - 1 per 75 sq. ft. or major fraction (minimum of 2)
Dining Room - 1 per 75 sq. ft. or major fraction (minimum of 2)
Kitchen - 1 per 8 ft. or fraction of counter top and preparation area
measured at rear (preparation area includes countertops, sinks, range
tops, and all other similar areas at counter height.) Island type work
areas require one for each 8 ft. or less of length. Separate outlets shall
be provided for refrigerators.
Dining Areas in Kitchen - 1 per 75 sq. ft. or major fraction.
Bedroom - 1 per 75 sq. ft. or major fraction (minimum of 2).
27-8
Laundry - 1 (when laundry equipment is present.)
Bathrooms and Lavatories - 1 (may be part of wall fixture if 72.0 inches or
less from floor).
Other Habitable Rooms - minimum of 2.
Fixed appliances exceeding 1/8 hp. or 300 watts rating shall not be
connected to general purpose branch circuits. Convenience outlets are to
be located to present use of extension cords (NEC 400-8). All cords and
temporary wiring not in compliance with NEC Article 400-A, and all
exposed abandoned wiring shall be removed immediately upon the
direction of the Building Inspector or DeForest Area Fire Chief, or
DeForest Area Chief of Prevention/Inspection, DeForest Windsor Fire
Department.
4. Switches or equivalent devices for turning on one (1) light in each room or
passageway shall be located so as to conveniently control the area to be
lighted.
5. Public halls and stairways in multiple dwellings shall be adequately
lighted by natural or electric light at all times, so as to provide in all parts
thereof at least two and one-half (2 1/2) foot candles of light at the tread
or floor level. Halls and stairways in structures containing not more than
three (3) dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located
switches, controlling the lighting system, which may be turned on when
needed. Other occupancies require full-time or automatic time-switched
lighting. When dwelling unit doors open to the outside a minimum of two
and one-half (2 1/2) foot candles of illumination at the locks are required.
Required parking areas for more than three (3) cars shall be lighted to a
minimum of one (1) foot candle on all surfaces.
6. When the service in existing residential building is changed for any
reason, the entire building electrical system shall be brought to the above
minimum standards. The minimum replacement electrical service shall
be:
100 amp for first two (2) dwelling units in a building.
50 amp for each additional unit.
Where electric heat and air conditioner over 20 amps are added or in
place, additional capacity to cover this demand is required. All electrical
work shall be done in accordance with the National Electric Code.
(h) Heating. All habitable rooms, kitchens and bathrooms shall be provided with
permanently connected heating system. This heating system shall be maintained in a safe
and efficient condition by a qualified person and a record kept at the premises showing the
date of service and by whom. A minimum temperature of sixty-seven (67) degrees
Fahrenheit shall be maintained in all habitable rooms, kitchens and bathrooms. The only
exception to this provision is that the occupant of a room or an apartment may maintain a
27-9
lesser temperature than is specified above as long as it does not affect the temperature in
other habitable areas of the building.
(i) Illumination. Illumination shall be provided at all intersections of passageways, at
all exits and at the head, foot and landings of every stairway in all buildings having three (3)
or more apartments and/or lodging houses. The illumination shall be provided during the
period commencing one (1) hour before sunset and ending one (1) hour after sunrise.
Every residential building that will accommodate three (3) or more families, twenty
(20) persons or contains more than (4) lodging rooms shall have signs at the emergency exit
doors or other places as may be necessary to direct the occupant to the exit doorways. The
signs shall be red illuminated translucent exit signs bearing the word EXIT in plain letters not
less than five inches (5") in height.
(j) The owner or operator of every residential building shall not provide, use, or
permit to be used and the occupant shall not provide, use, or permit to be used, in any room
other than a kitchen, any equipment designed or intended to be used for cooking or
preparation of meals.
(k) Every owner of a multi-family dwelling shall make available to the occupants the
names of two (2) or more persons that may be called to arrange for emergency work. The
names with the telephone numbers shall be posted in a conspicuous place readily
accessible to the occupants. The names with the telephone numbers shall be revised
periodically to maintain accurate information at all times.
27.05 SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY.
(1) The purpose of this subsection is to recognize the private and public benefits
resulting from the safe, sanitary and attractive maintenance of residential and nonresidential
buildings, structures, yards, or vacant areas. Attractive and well-maintained property will
enhance the neighborhood and Village and provide a suitable environment for increasing
physical and monetary values.
(2) Every owner or operator shall improve and maintain all property under his/her
control to comply with the following minimum requirements:
(a) All courts, yards, or other areas on the premises shall be properly graded to
divert water away from the building. Adjacent ground surface shall be sloped away from the
structure with a grading of at least one-half (1/2) inch per foot for a minimum of five (5) feet
where possible or by other means such as eaves troughs and downspout extensions.
(b) All exterior property areas shall be kept free from noxious weeds as required
under sec. 12.07 of this Code.
[Am. 16-15, Eff. 06-17-16]
(c) All exterior property areas shall be properly maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition free from debris, rubbish or garbage, physical hazards, rodent harborage and
infestation, and animal feces. All animal feces shall be removed within twenty-four (24)
hours.
27-10
(d) Fences, other minor construction, walks, driveways, parking areas and similar
paved areas shall be properly maintained in a safe, sanitary and substantial condition.
Approved walks shall provide convenient all weather access to buildings.
(e) Exterior surfaces of buildings and structures not inherently resistant to
deterioration shall be treated with a protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative
which will provide adequate resistance to weathering and maintain an attractive
appearance. Any exterior surface treated with paint or other preservative shall be
maintained so as to prevent chipping, cracking or other deterioration of the exterior surface
or the surface treatment and to present an attractive appearance. All paint or other
preservative shall be applied in a workmanlike fashion.
(f) Landscaping, plantings and other decorative surface treatments, including
common species of grass, shall be installed if necessary and maintained to present an
attractive appearance in all court and yard areas. Grass shall be maintained to a height not
to exceed twelve inches (12") in length. Plantings shall be maintained so as not to present
hazards to adjoining properties or to persons or vehicles traveling on public ways and shall
be maintained so as to enhance the appearance and value of the property on which located
and thereby the appearance and value of the neighborhood and Village. The Village, after
due notice to the property owner, will cause to be cut or trimmed nonconforming areas and
place said cost as a special assessment/charge due against the property.
[Am. 16-15, Eff. 06-17-16]
(g) 1. Every interior floor, wall and ceiling, including door and window assemblies,
shall be kept clean and in good repair, and shall be capable of affording privacy. Any
sagging or bulging shall be properly repaired to a level or plumb position. All surfaces shall
be free from serious cracking, irregularities, and peeling paint. A waterproof and hard
surface shall be provided in spaces subject to moisture. All surface repairs shall be
completed to closely match the existing surface color and texture. Floor surfacing shall
provide ease of maintenance and durability appropriate for the use of the room.
2. Every foundation, exterior wall, floor and roof shall be reasonably weather
tight, watertight and rodent proof and shall be kept in proper repair and
shall be capable of affording privacy. Any sagging or bulging shall be
properly repaired to a level or plumb position. All chimneys and breeching
shall be so constructed and maintained so as to insure that it safely and
properly removes the products of combustion from the building.
3. Every gap allowing the accumulation of dirt or other objectionable matter in
bathing, toilet, or food preparation areas shall be tightly sealed with an
impervious and cleanable material.
(h) Every window, exterior door, interior door and basement hatchway shall be
reasonably weather tight, watertight and rodent proof and kept in proper repair. All door and
window hardware shall be installed and maintained in proper working condition.
(i) Every inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance thereto shall
be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use
may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in proper condition and repair and shall
present an attractive appearance. All interior and exterior stairs, steps, porches and every
appurtenance thereto shall comply with the requirements specified in Wis. Admin. Code
27-11
secs. Comm. 20.04 or Comm. 51.16, 51.161, 51.162 and 51.164 as dictated by the type of
occupancy in the building.
(j) Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and
maintained in good working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstructions.
(k) Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface shall
be properly constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so
as to permit such floor to be easily kept in clean and sanitary condition.
(l) Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility shall be so constructed,
installed and maintained so that it will function in a proper working condition.
The owner of any dwelling or apartment in which a cooking stove and/or refrigerator
are furnished for the use of the tenants as part of rental agreement shall keep such cooking
stove and/or refrigerator in good mechanical condition.
It shall be the responsibility of the tenant to maintain supplied facilities in a clean and
sanitary condition when contained within the tenant's dwelling unit.
(m) No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or
utility which is required under this chapter to be removed from or shut off from or
discontinued for any occupied dwelling, dwelling unit or lodging room let or occupied by
him/her except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs are
in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by
an authorized inspector.
(n) Abandoned Fuel Oil Tanks. Abandoned fuel oil tanks shall be removed from the
building.
(o) The DeForest Area Fire Chief of Prevention/ Inspections or the DeForest Area
Fire Chief shall have the authority under this chapter to enter and commence a structural fire
inspection. Any violations found should be remedied by the owner of the property. If the
owner does not comply, penalties may be assessed under this chapter. This is to be
considered a separate offense and in addition to any State Code violations.
(p) All unpaved driveways and parking areas shall be maintained in a dust-free
condition and shall be graded so that no potholes exist. No stone or other materials may be
deposited in the street.
(q) Removal of Debris.
1. No person shall dispose of rocks, trees, stumps, waste building material or
other debris from land development, building construction, street grading, or
installation of underground utilities, upon the surface of any land in the
Village of DeForest except at approved disposal sites.
2. No land owner shall allow an accumulation of rocks, trees, stumps, waste
building material or other debris from land development, building
construction, street grading, or installation of underground utilities upon the
surface of his land for a period of more than ten (10) days.
27-12
(3) All vacant lands within the Village shall be leveled off to permit the mowing of
weeds and the removal of other debris, including, but not limited to stones, bottles, wire, and
other debris that will interfere with mowing operations. All lands in the Village of DeForest
shall be kept in compliance with sec. 12.07 of this Code.
[Am. 16-15, Eff. 6-17-17]
27.051 PLANNED NATURAL LANDSCAPING.
[Cr. 16-15, Eff. 06-17-17]
(1) Definitions.
(a) “Native plants” means those grasses (including prairie grasses), sedges
(solid, triangular-stemmed plants resembling grasses), and forbs (flowering broadleaf plants)
native to or naturalized to Wisconsin. Native plants do not include noxious weeds and turf
grasses.
(b) “Ornamental Grasses and Groundcovers” means grasses and groundcovers
not indigenous to Wisconsin, but does not include turf grass and noxious weeds.
(c) “Planned natural landscaping” means a planned, intentional and maintained
planting of native plants, ornamental grasses and groundcovers, rain gardens, shrubs and
trees. Planned natural landscaping does not include any species of turf grasses and is
subject to the restrictions set forth under sec. 12.07 of this Code, except that the twelve inch
(12”) height restriction shall not apply to grasses that qualify as native plants. Planned
natural landscaping does not include gardens.
(d) “Rain garden” means a native plant garden that is designed not only to
aesthetically improve properties, but also to reduce the amount of storm water and
accompanying pollutants from entering streams, rivers and lakes.
(e) “Turf grass” means any grasses commonly used in regularly cut lawns or play
areas, including bluegrass, fescue or rye grass blends.
(2) Planned natural landscaping permitted. Planned natural landscaping is
permitted in lieu of a lawn subject to the following:
(a) All turf grass must be removed and replaced by native plants, ornamental
grasses and groundcovers, trees and shrubs actively planted by human or mechanical
means.
(b) No planned natural landscaping is permitted within ten feet (10’) of any
sidewalk or lot line. This restriction does not apply to lot lines:
i. That abut a public park;
ii. That abut a prairie area or other natural area; or
iii. In which a sight-tight fence runs along the lot line.
(c) All planned natural landscaping must be actively maintained and kept free of
weeds and turf grass.
27-13
27.06 FIXING THE RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS, OPERATORS, AND
OCCUPANTS.
(1) The purpose of this subsection is to fix the responsibility of owners, operators
and occupants of residential buildings.
(2) The responsibility of owners, operators, and occupants of residential buildings is
as follows:
(a) Every owner of a residential building containing two (2) or more dwelling units
shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean, proper and sanitary condition the shared or
public areas of the residential building and premises thereof.
(b) Every occupant of a residential building shall keep in a clean, proper and
sanitary condition that part of the residential building and premises thereof which he/she
occupies and controls. Every occupant of a residential building shall dispose of all his/her
refuse, recycling and garbage in the containers required by the DeForest Municipal Code.
(c) Every owner of a residential building shall be responsible for hanging, installing,
and maintaining of all screens and double or storm doors and windows whenever the same
are required under the provisions of the DeForest Municipal Code.
(d) Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the
premises and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a residential building shall be responsible
for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding
the foregoing by failure of the owner to maintain a residential building in a reasonable
condition extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists
in two (2) or more of the dwelling units or lodging rooms in any residential building or in the
shared or public parts of any residential building, extermination thereof shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
(e) Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a
clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in
the proper use and operation thereof.
(f) The owner or operator shall not occupy or let to another for occupancy any space
in a residential building unless it is clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, complies with
the requirements of the DeForest Municipal Codes, the Village of DeForest Building
Inspector and/or the DeForest Fire Inspector.
(g) Every owner of a rental unit shall make available to the occupants the names of
two (2) or more persons that may be called to arrange for emergency work. The names with
the telephone numbers shall be posted in a conspicuous place readily accessible to the
occupants. The names with the telephone numbers shall be revised periodically to maintain
accurate information at all times.
27-14
27.07 DESIGNATION OF UNFIT BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES AND LEGAL
PROCEDURES OF REPAIR OR RAZING.
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide for the designation and repair or razing
of those buildings or structures which are so dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unhygienic,
inadequately maintained or lacking in basic equipment, facilities, light, ventilation, and
heating so as to constitute a menace to the occupants or to the public.
(2) Any building or structure which shall be found to have any of the following
defects may be designated as unfit for human habitation and in need of repairs or razing
and so placarded by the Building Inspector. Legal notice shall be served upon the owner
and on the operator of any building:
(a) Which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, dangerous, unsanitary, unsafe, or
vermin infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of
the public.
(b) Which lacks illumination, ventilation, heating, basic equipment or sanitary
facilities adequate to protect the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants or of the
public.
(c) Which, because of its general condition, location, or appearance, is a blighting
influence or causes decreasing physical or monetary value of property in the neighborhood.
(3) Any building or structure or part thereof designated and placarded by the
Building Inspector as unfit for human habitation and in need of repairs or razing shall be
vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the Building Inspector.
(4) No building or structure or part thereof which has been designated and
placarded as unfit for human habitation and in need of repairs or razing shall again be used
for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by,
the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall remove such placard whenever the
defect or defects upon which the designation and placarding action were based have been
eliminated.
(5) No person shall deface or remove the placard from any building or structure or
part thereof which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as
such.
(6) Any building or structure or part thereof designated as unfit for human habitation
and in need of repairs or razing by the Building Inspector, which in the opinion of the
Building Inspector, would be unreasonable to repair shall be razed or removed upon legal
written service of the order of the Building Inspector. If the owner shall fail or refuse to
comply with the order, the Building Inspector shall refer such violation to the Village Attorney
who will start any legal proceedings necessary to cause such building to be razed or
removed as a violation of this chapter.
(7) (a) Any building which has been vacant for more than thirty (30) days for any
reason and has been damaged, illegally entered or vandalized shall be secured against
entry. This shall include adequately boarding up doors, windows and other openings in a
workmanlike manner so as to prevent illegal entry, vandalism or damage.
27-15
(b) The building utilities, plumbing, electrical and heating systems in vacant buildings
shall be maintained at all times in a safe condition or inactivated so as to prevent the
possibility of damage to the structure by the failure of such utilities and so as to prevent
hazardous and dangerous conditions.
(c) When any building has been damaged by fire or other cause and when
hazardous or dangerous conditions exist and when such building cannot be secured by
conventional locking or boarding up of windows and doors, such building shall be fenced off
so as to prevent access and entry to the structure and the area immediately surrounding the
structure within three (3) days of the damage by fire or other cause.
27.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide for the administration and enforcement
of this chapter.
(2) The office of the Village of DeForest Building Inspector is hereby created to
enforce this chapter. The Building Inspector shall be under the supervision of the Village of
DeForest President and the Village of DeForest Planning and Zoning Chairperson.
Therefore, for purposes of enforcement of this chapter, he/she shall have the same powers
as the officer referred to in the Wisconsin State Statutes as the Building Inspector.
(3) The duties of the Building Inspector, Village Board President and the
Chairperson of the DeForest Planning and Zoning Commission shall be as follows:
(a) Provide and maintain a public information bureau relative to all matters arising
out of this chapter.
(b) Maintain permanent and current records of all matters arising out of this chapter.
(c) Conduct a systematic inspection of buildings, structures and land to determine
compliance with the terms of this chapter, all state laws, Village Ordinances and lawful
orders relating to the alteration, repair, maintenance, safety and use of existing buildings
and permanent building equipment and take such action as necessary to secure such
compliance, including: the withholding of building permits, imposition of forfeitures and
injunctive action. They shall have full power to pass upon any question arising under the
provisions of the housing, building, plumbing, electrical and heating codes and zoning
procedures, subject to conditions contained herein.
(d) Initiate, direct, and review from time to time a study of the provisions of this
chapter and make recommendations to the Village Board by the 1st of May each year on
such matters that will improve this chapter or its systematic enforcement.
(e) Coordinate such inspection and code compliance programs with inspections or
improvement programs of other neighborhood groups whose purpose is neighborhood
improvement.
(4) (a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a forfeiture of $45.00 for each violation. Each day a violation continues or occurs
shall constitute a separate offense.
27-16
(b) Except as otherwise provided by law, any action to collect a forfeiture for a
violation of this chapter may be commenced by the issuance of a citation pursuant to
§§66.0113 and 800.02, Wis. Stats.. Any citations so issued shall be in the form of the
Wisconsin Uniform Municipal Citation.
(c) Citations for violations of this chapter may be issued as provided in sec. 1.10 of
this Code.
[Am. 14-13, Eff. 04-15-14]
(d) The issuance of a citation under this section shall not preclude the Village or any
individual from commencing any action against a violator under any other authority of law.
[Repl. & Recr. 96-41, Eff. 10-21-96]
27.09 [Repealed 96-41, Eff. 10-21-96]
27.10 SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this chapter is invalid or unconstitutional
or if the application of this chapter to any person or circumstance is invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or
applications of this chapter which can be given effect with the invalid or unconstitutional
provisions or applications.
27.11 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. It is not intended by this
chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements,
covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, chapter or permits previously
adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
27.12 INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where any terms
or requirements of this chapter may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more restrictive
requirement or interpretation shall control.
28-1
CHAPTER 28
ETHICS CODE
28.01 Declaration of Policy ....................................................................................... 28-1
28.02 Statutory Standards of Conduct ..................................................................... 28-1
28.03 Responsibility of Public Office ....................................................................... 28-2
28.04 Dedicated Service ............................................................................................ 28-2
28.05 Fair and Equal Treatment ................................................................................ 28-2
28.06 Conflict of Interest ........................................................................................... 28-2
28.07 Advisory Opinion ............................................................................................. 28-4
28.08 Ethics Committee ............................................................................................ 28-4
28.09 Jurisdiction and Application........................................................................... 28-5
28.10 Sanctions ......................................................................................................... 28-5
28.11 Distribution of Ethics code ............................................................................. 28-6
28.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
(1) The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and
employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government
decisions and policies be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public
office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its
government. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established in this Chapter a code
of ethics for all Village of DeForest officials and employees, whether elected or appointed,
paid or unpaid, including members of boards, committees and commissions of the Village,
as well as any individuals who are candidates for elective office as soon as such individuals
file nomination papers with the Village. The purpose of this Ethics Code is to establish
guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employees. The
provisions and purpose of this Ethics Code and such rules and regulations as may be
established are hereby declared to be in the best interests of the Village of DeForest.
(2) The purpose of this Code is to have disclosure of private financial matters for
elected officials, those seeking elected office, Planning and Zoning Commission members,
Board of Appeals members, the Village Administrator, Village Deputy Treasurer and Deputy
Clerk, Chief of Police and paid appointed officials which may cause a conflict with their
official duties.
(3) Every official or employee, prior to assuming his/her duties, is required to file a
statement that the person knows of no personal or financial interest which might disqualify
the person from holding and/or exercising the duties of the office.
(4) No person required to file the statement pursuant to sub. (3) may receive any
salary or compensation until such statement has been filed with the Village Clerk.
28.02 STATUTORY STANDARDS OF CONDUCT. There are certain provisions of
the Wisconsin Statutes which should, while not set forth herein, be considered an integral
part of any Code of Ethics. Accordingly, the provisions of the following sections of the
Wisconsin Statutes, as from time to time amended, are made a part of this Code of Ethics
and shall apply to public officials and employees whenever applicable, to wit:
28-2
(1) Sec. 946.10. Bribery of Public Officers and Employees
(2) Sec. 946.11. Special Privileges from Public Utilities.
(3) Sec. 946.12. Misconduct in Public Office.
(4) Sec. 946.13. Private Interest in Public Contract Prohibited.
28.03 RESPONSIBILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICE. Public officials and employees are
agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to
uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of this State and carry out
impartially the laws of the nation, state and municipality, to observe in their official acts the
highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless
of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their prime concern.
28.04 DEDICATED SERVICE.
(1) Officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and performance
established as the standard for their positions by the appropriate authority.
(2) Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or
ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other public officials and
employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or by officially recognized confidentiality
of their work.
28.05 FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT.
(1) USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY. No official or employee shall request or permit
the unauthorized use of Village-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for
personal convenience or profit.
(2) OBLIGATIONS TO CITIZENS. No official or employee shall grant any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every
other citizen.
28.06 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
(1) FINANCIAL AND PERSONAL INTEREST PROHIBITED. No official or
employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall act
in regard to financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with
the proper discharge of official duties in the public interest contrary to the provisions of this
Chapter or which would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the
performance of official duties.
(2) DEFINITIONS.
(a) Financial Interest. Any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly, a
monetary or other material benefit to the officer or employee.
(b) Personal Interest. Any interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or
from close business or political associations, whether or not any financial interest is
involved.
(c) Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership or joint venture.
28-3
(3) SPECIFIC CONFLICTS ENUMERATED.
(a) Incompatible Employment. No official or employee shall engage in or accept
private employment or render services for private interest when such employment or service
is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or would tend to impair
independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties, unless otherwise
not prohibited by law and unless disclosure is made as hereinafter provided.
(b) Disclosure of Confidential Information. No official or employee shall, without
proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property,
government or affairs of the Village, nor shall such information be used to advance the
financial or other private interests of the official or employee or others.
(c). Gifts and Favors.
1. No official or employee shall accept any gift, whether in the form of service,
loan, thing or promise, from any person which may tend to impair his
independence of judgment or action in the performance of his duties or
grant in the discharge of his duties any improper favor, service or thing of
value. Any official who receives, directly or indirectly, any gift or gifts
having an aggregate value of more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00)
within any calendar year from any person not a member of his/her
immediate family who is known by said official or employee to be
interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business
dealings with the Village upon which the official or employee has any
influence or input or over which the official or employee has any
jurisdiction, discretion or control, shall disclose the nature and value of
such gifts to the Ethics Committee by January 20 next following the year in
which the gift or gifts are received.
2. No official or employee may solicit or accept, either directly or indirectly,
from any person or organization, money or anything of value if it could
reasonably be expected to influence the employee's official actions or
judgments, or be considered a reward for any action or inaction on the part
of the official or employee. Legal campaign contributions are exempt from
the definition.
3. An official or employee is not to accept hospitality if, after consideration of
the surrounding circumstances, it could reasonably be concluded that such
hospitality would not be extended were it not for the fact that the guest, or
a member of the guest's immediate family, was a Village official or
employee. Participation in celebrations, grand openings, open houses,
informational meetings and similar events are excluded from this
prohibition. This paragraph further shall not be construed to prevent
candidates for elective office from accepting hospitality from citizens for the
purpose of supporting the candidate's campaign.
4. Gifts received by an official or employee under unusual circumstances
should be referred to the Ethics Committee within ten (10) days of receipt
for recommended disposition.
28-4
(d) Representing Private Interests Before Village Agencies or Courts. No official or
employee who is entitled to compensation by the Village shall appear on behalf of private
interests before any agency of the Village. She/He shall not represent private interests in
any action or proceeding against the interests of the Village. This paragraph shall not be
construed as prohibiting the appearance of officials or employees when subpoenaed as
witnesses by parties involved in litigation which also may involve the Village of DeForest. A
Village Board member may appear before Village Boards, Commissions, and Committees
on behalf of constituents in the course of her/his duties as a representative of the electorate.
(e) Ad Hoc Committee. No violation of this section shall exist, however, where an
individual serves on an ad hoc committee charged with the responsibility of addressing an
issue or topic in which that individual, or the employer or a client of that individual, has an
interest so long as the individual discloses to the Ethics Committee that such interest exists.
(5) CONTRACTS WITH THE VILLAGE. All Village officers or employees who have
a substantial or controlling financial interest in any business entity, transaction or contract
with the Village, or in the sale of real estate, materials, supplies or services to the Village,
shall make known to the proper authority such interest in any matter on which she/he may
be called to act in her/his official capacity. This paragraph is subject to the provisions and
restrictions imposed in sec. 28.06(1) & (3)(a). She/He shall refrain from voting upon or
otherwise participating in the transaction or the making of such contract or sale.
(6) DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST IN LEGISLATION.
(a) Any member of the Village Board who has a financial interest or personal interest
in any proposed legislation before the Village Board shall disclose on the records of the
Village Board or the Ethics Committee created by this Chapter the nature and extent of such
interest.
(b) Any official or employee who has a financial interest or personal interest in any
proposed legislative action of the Village Board or any board, commission or committee
upon which the official or employee has any influence or input, or of which the official or
employee is a member, that is to make a recommendation or decision upon any item which
is the subject of the proposed legislative action shall disclose on the records of the Village
Board or the appropriate board, commission, committee, or the Ethics Committee the nature
and extent of such interest.
28.07 ADVISORY OPINION. Any questions as to the interpretation of any
provisions of this Code of Ethics Chapter shall be referred to the Ethics Committee and/or
the Village Board, which, if it deems it necessary or appropriate, may request an advisory
opinion from the Village Attorney.
28.08 ETHICS COMMITTEE.
(1) There is hereby created an Ethics Committee to consist of members who shall
serve without compensation.
(2) The membership of the Ethics Committee shall consist of five (5) members,
including at least three (3) Village residents, one (1) practicing attorney who is a member in
good standing of the State Bar of Wisconsin and one (1) Trustee. The Village Attorney shall
28-5
furnish the Committee with whatever legal assistance is necessary in carrying out its
functions. No member of the Ethics Committee, except the Trustee member, shall serve on
any other Village committee or board, or be the spouse of any member of a Village
committee or board.
[Am. 97-18, Eff. 5-5-97]
(3) The members of the Ethics Committee shall be appointed by the Village
President, subject to confirmation by the Village Board. Terms of office of the members of
the Ethics Committee shall be three (3) years except that when the initial appointments are
made, one (1) member shall be appointed for one (1) year, two (2) of the members shall be
appointed for two (2) years, and two (2) of the members shall be appointed for three (3)
years.
(4) The Ethics Committee shall elect its own Chairperson, Vice President, and
Secretary and shall develop written rules of procedure which shall be submitted to the
Village Board for approval.
(5) The Ethics Committee may make recommendations with respect to amendments
to this Code of Ethics Ordinance.
28.09 JURISDICTION AND APPLICATION.
(1) The Ethics Committee shall have administrative jurisdiction over this Code of
Ethics Chapter.
(2) Upon the sworn complaint of any person alleging facts which, if true, would
constitute improper conduct under the provisions of this Chapter, the Ethics Committee shall
conduct an investigation of the facts of the complaint. The Committee shall conduct a public
hearing if there is probable cause to believe a violation of this Chapter has occurred. The
hearing will be held in accordance with the common law requirements of due process,
including the accused's rights to proper notice, an opportunity to be heard, an opportunity to
cross-examine witnesses and to present testimony and other evidence in support of his/her
position and an opportunity to be represented by counsel or other representatives. The
Committee shall make written findings of fact and issue a written decision concerning the
propriety of the conduct of the accused official or employee and shall refer the matter to the
Village Board for final disposition.
(3) In the event a member of the Ethics Committee is allegedly involved in an Ethics
Code violation, the Village President, subject to the confirmation of the Village Board, shall
appoint another citizen to temporarily replace the member of the Committee who is under
investigation.
(4) In the event an employee, covered under a collective bargaining agreement, is
allegedly involved in an Ethics Code violation, the terms and conditions set forth in the
applicable collective bargaining agreement shall prevail in the administration and
interpretation of this Ethics Code Chapter.
28.10 SANCTIONS. Violation of any provisions of this Code should raise
conscientious questions for the official or employee concerned as to whether voluntary
resignation or other action is indicated to promote the best interests of the Village of
DeForest. Violation of any provision of this Chapter may constitute a cause for suspension,
28-6
removal from office or employment, or other disciplinary action. As an alternative or an
addition to the sanctions imposed herein, any person violating the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a nonreimbursable forfeiture of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25) nor
more than two hundred dollars ($200), plus costs.
28.11 DISTRIBUTION OF ETHICS CODE. The Village Administrator shall cause a
copy of this Code of Ethics to be distributed to every public official and employee of the
Village of DeForest within thirty (30) days after enactment of this Chapter. Each public
official and employee elected, appointed or engaged thereafter shall be furnished a copy
before entering upon his/her duties.
[Cr. 93-50, Eff. 12-24-93]

1 ORDINANCE 2013- 006
2
3 AN ORDINANCE INCORPORATING A WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
4 INTO THE VILLAGE ZONING CODE (CHAPTER 15)
5
6 WHEREAS, the Village has created a Wellhead Protection Plan for Wells #2, #3, #4, #5, #6, and
7 #7 (dated January 18, 2010), which advises compatible land use and management practices within 1,200
8 feet of municipal wells and the adoption/amendment of a wellhead protection ordinance to implement
9 said Plan and protect groundwater quality around Village municipal wells, and
10
11 WHEREAS, the Village Board finds that the amendments to Chapter 15 to incorporate a
12 Wellhead Protection Overlay District are consistent with the Village of DeForest's Wellhead Protection
13 Plan and Comprehensive Plan, and
14
15 WHEREAS, clear wellhead protection zoning regulations are in the best interest of the Village;
16 are designed to protect public health, safety, and welfare; and precise zoning rules for wellhead protection
17 will assure that all interested parties understand the Village's position on such matters.
18
19 NOW, THEREFORE, THE VILLAGE BOARD OF DEFOREST, WISCONSIN DOES
20 ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
21
22 SECTION 1. Sections 15.02(4m), (26q), (96), and (96c) of the DeForest Municipal Code [Definitions]
23 are hereby created to read as follows:
24
25 (4m) AQUIFER. A saturated, permeable, geologic formation that contains, and will yield,
26 significant quantities of water.
27
28 (26q) EXISTING FACILITIES. Pertaining to the wellhead protection regulations in this chapter,
29 those facilities, practices, or activities existing as of January 1, 2013 and in continuous operation since
30 that date, which may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution within the WP Wellhead
31 Protection overlay zoning district. Existing facilities include but are not limited to the type listed in the
32 Department of Natural Resources' form 3300-215, Public Water Supply Potential Contaminant Use
33 Inventory Form, incorporated herein as if fully set forth.
34
35 (96) WELL FIELD. A premise used primarily for the purpose of supplying a location for
36 construction of a well to supply a municipal water system.
37
38 (96c) WELL RECHARGE AREA. The land area that contributes water to a well by infiltration or
39 water into the subsurface and movement towards the well, regardless of the municipal or zoning
40 jurisdiction of such land area.
41
42
Page 1
43 SECTION 2. Section 15.09(1) of the DeForest Municipal Code [Zoning Districts; Maps] is hereby
44 amended to read as follows:
45
46 (1) ZONING DISTRICTS. In order to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter, the
47 Village of DeForest and the ETZ Area are hereby divided into the following districts:
48
49 (a) Residential Districts
50
51 1. RH-1 Rural Housing District
52 2. RE-1 Residential Estate Single Family Residence District
53 3. RE-2 Residential Estate Single Family Residence District
54 4. RN-1 Residential Neighborhood Single Family Residence District
55 5. RN-2 Residential Neighborhood Single Family Residence District
56 6. RN-2A Residential Neighborhood Single Family Residence District
57 7. RM-3 Residential Mix Two Family Housing District
58 8. RM-4 Residential Mix Multi-Family Housing District
59 9. RM-5 Residential Mix Elderly Housing District
60 10. RM-B Residential Mix - Business District
61 11. RM-6 Residential Mix - Traditional Housing District
62
63 (b) Business Districts
64
65 1. B-1 Central Business District
66 2. B-2 General Business District
67 3. B-3 Highway Business District
68 4. A-B Agricultural Business District
69 5. O-R Office and Research District
70
71 (c) Industrial Districts
72
73 1. M-1 Restricted Industrial District
74 2. M-2 General Industrial District
75 3. M-3 Intensive Industrial District
76
77 (d) Agricultural Districts
78
79 1. A-1 Agricultural District
80 2. A-1X Exclusive Agricultural District
81 3. A-2 General Agricultural District
82
83 (e) Other Districts
84
85 1. C-1 Conservancy District
86 2. PUD Planned Unit Development District
87 3. WP Wellhead Protection Overlay District
88
89 SECTION 3. Section 15.20 of the DeForest Municipal Code is hereby created to read as follows:
90 15.20 WP WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
91
Page 2
92 (1) PURPOSE. Persons served by the DeForest Water Utility depend exclusively on
93 groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously
94 threaten or degrade groundwater quality. This WP overlay district institutes land use regulations within
95 1,200 feet of each municipal well, designated in the Village's wellhead protection plan and mapped as
96 WP areas on the zoning map. The district is intended to protect groundwater quality and promote the
97 health, safety and general welfare of municipal water users. Authority for Village adoption of this district
98 and enforcement of associated regulations is established under §62.23(7)(a) and (c), Stats., and NR
99 811.16, Wis. Adm. Code.
100
101 (2) SEPARATION DISTANCES. Minimum separation distances shall be maintained
102 between any well and other facilities within the WP overlay district per the standards in NR 811.12, Wis.
103 Adm. Code.
104
105 (3) CONDITIONAL USES. Subject to the separation standards in subsection (2), the uses
106 listed within this subsection (3) are conditional uses within the WP overlay district, provided that such
107 uses are allowed in the underlying zoning district. Uses not listed below are permitted by right in the WP
108 district, provided such uses are permitted by right in the underlying zoning district and subject to any
109 applicable separation standards in subsection (2).
110 (a) Animal waste storage areas and facilities.
111 (b) Asphalt products manufacturing plants.
112 (c) Automobile fueling, service, painting, repair, and/or maintenance facilities.
113 (d) Building materials and product sales.
114 (e) Car washes.
115 (f) Cartage and express facilities.
116 (g) Cemeteries.
117 (h) Center-pivot or other large-scale irrigated agriculture operations.
118 (i) Chemical storage, sale, processing, and/or manufacturing facilities.
119 (j) Dry cleaning establishments.
120 (k) Dumping or disposing of garbage, refuse, trash, or demolition material.
121 (1) Electronic circuit assembly plants.
122 (m) Electroplating plants.
123 (n) Exterminating shops.
124 (o) Fertilizer manufacturing or storage facilities.
125 (p) Foundries and forge plants.
126 (q) Highway salt storage areas.
127 (r) Industrial liquid waste storage areas.
128 (s) Junk yards and salvage yards.
129 (t) Metal reduction and refinement plants.
130 (u) Mineral extraction operations.
131 (v) Motor and machinery service and assembly shops.
Page 3
132 (w) Motor freight terminals.
133 (x) Petroleum products storage tanks, and/or processing of petroleum products.
134 (y) Pharmaceuticals manufacturing.
135 (z) Photography studios, including the developing of film and pictures.
136 (aa) Plastics manufacturing.
137 (bb) Printing and publishing establishments.
138 (cc) Pulp and paper manufacturing.
139 (dd) Septage disposal sites.
140 (ee) Sludge disposal sites.
141 (ff) Storage, manufacturing or disposal of toxic or hazardous materials.
142 (gg) Underground petroleum products storage tanks, and above-ground petroleum product
143 storage tanks greater than 660 gallons. All new or replaced tanks shall also be installed
144 in compliance with Comm 10, Wis. Adm. Code.
145 (hh) Woodworking and wood products manufacturing.
146 (ii) Any other use with characteristics similar to one or more of the above listed uses, in the
147 determination of the Zoning Administrator.
148
149 (4) CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION, STANDARDS, AND CONDITIONS.
150
151 (a) Application. In addition to conditional use permit application requirements in Section
152 15.16(3)(a), the Zoning Administrator may require an environmental impact study, environmental
153 assessment, or such other information as necessary to evaluate the application against the conditional use
154 permit standards in this subsection and in Section 15.16.
155
156 (b) Standards. Standards for conditional use permit approval are included within Section
157 15.16(f). In its consideration of conditional use permits applications for one of the listed conditional uses
158 in subsection (3) within the WP overlay district, the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board
159 shall consider the following additional factors:
160
161 1. The Village's responsibility as a public water supplier to protect and preserve public
162 health, safety and welfare.
163
164 2. The potential of the proposed use to seriously threaten or degrade groundwater
165 quality.
166
167 3. The availability of alternative uses, locations, and operational characteristics, and the
168 cost, effect, and extent of availability of such alternatives.
169
170 4. The proximity of the applicant's property to other potential sources of contamination
171 or vulnerable activities or uses.
172
173 5. The then-existing condition of the associated well, well field, well recharge area, and
174 the vulnerability to further contamination.
175
176 6. The direction of flow of groundwater and other factors in the area of the applicant's
Page 4
177 property which may affect the speed of the groundwater flow, including topography,
178 depth of soil, extent of aquifer, depth to water table, and location of private wells.
179
180 7. The zone of contribution (5-year, 50-year, 100-year) for the associated well within
181 which the proposed use is located.
182
183 8. Any other hydrogeological data or information which is available from any public or
184 private agency or organization.
185
186 9. The potential benefit, both economic and social, from the approval of the application.
187
188 (c) Approval Conditions. In its approval of any conditional use permit within the WP
189 overlay district, the Village Board may impose conditions as specified under Section 15.16(g) and:
190 1. Environmental and/or safety monitoring to indicate whether the facility may be
191 emitting any contaminants.
192 2. A financial guarantee in a form determined by the Village for future monitoring and
193 cleanup costs.
194 3. Any requirement authorized for existing facilities under subsection (5).
195
196 (5) REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING FACILITIES AND LAND USES.
197
198 (a) At the request of the Zoning Administrator, existing facilities, as defined under Section
199 15.02, shall provide to the Village copies of all federal, state and local facility operation approvals or
200 certificates and ongoing environmental monitoring results.
201
202 (b) Existing facilities shall provide additional environmental or safety monitoring as deemed
203 necessary by the Village Board, including the production of any and all environmental statements
204 detailing the extent of chemical use and storage on the property.
205
206 (c) Existing facilities, when upgrading or expanding, shall replace equipment or expand in a
207 manner that improves existing environmental and safety technologies and performance.
208
209 (d) At the request of the Zoning Administrator, existing facilities shall devise and file with
210 the Village, a contingency plan for unexpected release of contaminants or other emergency events that is
211 satisfactory to the Village Board.
212
213 (6) VIOLATIONS AND COMPLIANCE. In the event an individual and/or facility within
214 the WP district causes the release of any contaminants which endanger the public, in the determination of
215 the Village Board, the individual or facility causing said release shall immediately cease and desist, and
216 provide clean-up satisfactory to the Village Board. The individual or facility will be held financially
217 responsible for all environmental cleanup costs, along with all required Village consultant fees for
218 oversight, review and documentation. Following any such discharge, the Village may require additional
219 environmental and/or safety monitoring.
220
221 SECTION 4. The Official Zoning Map is hereby amended in a manner which indicates 1200 foot radii
222 around each of DeForest wells 2 through 7, as being located within the WP Wellhead Protection Overlay
223 District.
Page 5
Judd Bgrau, Village President
224
225 Adopted at a regular Village Board meeting this 19th day of March, 2013.
226
227
228
229
230
231
232
233 Attest:
234
235
236
237
238
239
240
241
LuAnn Leggett, Villdge" Clerk
Vote: SO
Date of Pub1ication:Vi7a4/5 2 2 , 2013
Effective Date:Yndr , 2013
Page 6
WELLHEAD PROTECTION PLAN
WELLS #2, #3, #4, #5, #6 AND #7
Village of DeForest
Wisconsin
January 18,2010
Prepared by the DeForest Water Utility
With assistance from
Wisconsin Rural Water Association
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Background
2. Hydrogeologic Setting
3. Groundwater Recharge and Movement
4. Zone of Influence
5. Wellhead Protection Area
6. Potential Contaminant Sources
7. Land Use Management
8. Public Education
9. Water Conservation
10. Contingency Planning
11. References
FIGURES
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Well Locations
Vertical Relationships
Groundwater Movement
Zones of Contribution
Potential Contaminant Sources
Extraterritorial Zoning
APPENDICES
Appendix A. Lithologic Logs and Well Construction Details
Appendix B. Calculations for Delineation of Wellhead Protection Area
Appendix C. Details of Potential Contaminant Sources
Page I 1
1. BACKGROUND
The Village of DeForest has prepared this wellhead protection plan for the purpose of
minimizing the risk of contamination of its municipal water supply. This plan includes
the three existing supply wells, #2, #3 and #4, as well as three wells planned for
construction in the future (#5, #6 and #7). The Village consulted with the Wisconsin
Geological and Natural History Survey and the Dane County Regional Planning
Commission to delineate Zones of Contribution as a basis for wellhead protection using
the Dane County groundwater flow model (DCRPC, 1977).
The water system serves the entire village (approximate population 8,500) plus additional
customers outside the village, with an average demand of about 850,000 gpd. Pumping
capacities for the wells are:
Well #2
Well #3
Well #4
Well #5
Well #6
Well #7
350 gpm
1,000 gpm
1,400 gpm
1,500 gpm (Anticipate construction in summer 2010)
1,500 gpm (Anticipated)
1,500 gpm (Anticipated)
Values for Wells #5, #6 and #7 are estimated from expected well construction and yields
from the sandstone aquifer. Current pumpage from the existing wells is:
Well #2 110,500 gpd
Well #3 306,000 gpd
Well #4 433,500 gpd.
Anticipated pumpage from all six wells projected for the year 2025 is:
Well #2 310,000 gpd
Well #3 310,000 gpd
Well #4 310,000 gpd
Well #5 310,000 gpd
Well #6 310,000 gpd
Well #7 310,000 gpd
The Village has two elevated tanks with capacities of 300,000 and 600,000 gallons and
treatment consists of chlorination and fluoridation. Well locations are shown in Figure 1
and lithologic logs and construction details for the wells are included in Appendix A.
This plan was prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, Chapter NR 811, Section 16(5) for wellhead protection planning.
Page 12
2. HYDROGEOLOGIC SETTING
DeForest is located along the Yahara River in north-central Dane County, an area
characterized by rolling morainal and drumlinoid topography. Bedrock lies beneath a
cover of glacial drift of variable thickness, consisting of glacial till with isolated deposits
of outwash sand and gravel. At Well #2, the drift is 135 feet thick while at Well #3 there
is only 15 feet of drift.
Bedrock below the glacial drift consists primarily of layers of Cambrian sandstone
dipping slightly to the southeast. At some locations, especially southeast of town where
surface elevations are higher, the uppermost bedrock is dolomite (possibly Trempealeau
Formation). The sandstone is underlain by PreCambrian crystalline rock of low
permeability at a depth of about 770 feet. The sandstone sequence is divided into an
upper and a lower aquifer separated by the Eau Claire shale, an effective confining unit.
The lower sandstone has artesian conditions. Examination of the logs of about 70 wells
in the area shows that nearly all obtain water from the bedrock.
The clayey drift covering the sandstone aquifer affords some protection from
contamination, provided that the clays are not breached by improperly abandoned wells.
Although the drift thickness is as little as 15 feet (Well #3), nearly all of the well logs
examined show some clay deposits. Similarly, the Eau Claire shale provides protection
to the lower sandstone. Wells #2, #3 and #4 are open across the Eau Claire shale. It is
assumed that future wells will be cased through the shale and withdraw from only the Mt.
Simon sandstone. Vertical relationships of the wells, aquifers and discharge points are
illustrated in Figure 2.
3. GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AND MOVEMENT
The direction of groundwater movement may be inferred from the slope of the
potentiometric surface or water table and the regional topography. Shallow groundwater
generally moves in the direction toward which the water table slopes. It is likely that
shallow groundwater flows toward the Yahara River, into which it discharges. Deeper
groundwater in the artesian sandstone aquifer follows the slope of its potentiometric
surface. Elevations of that surface are contoured in Figure 3 and show a general
southwestward movement of groundwater following the Yahara River Watershed.
Comparison of water level data for the two aquifers shows a slight downward gradient
across the Eau Claire shale at DeForest (Krohelski, et al, 2000). Groundwater captured
by each well is recharged by infiltration of precipitation in an area extending up-gradient
from the well to a groundwater divide that lies north of town.
4. ZONE OF INFLUENCE
The zone of influence is the area encompassed within a calculated radius around a well,
representing the area of a cone of depression that would develop after 30 days of
Page I 3
continuous pumping at the well's capacity, assuming that there is no recharge to the
groundwater. It simulates worst-case drought conditions, in which the cone of depression
would reach maximum extent. The zone of influence depends on aquifer thickness,
permeability (transmissivity), and the pumping rate. Typical hydraulic conductivity
values used in the groundwater flow model were assumed in determining transmissivity.
The zone of influence radii for the wells were calculated to be:
Well #2
Well #3
Well #4
Well #5
Well #6
Well #7
34,260 ft
55,073 ft
61,343 ft
62,500 ft
62,500 ft
62,500 ft
Calculations of the zone of influence and supporting data are included in Appendix B.
5. WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA
There are different methods of delineating a wellhead protection area, ranging from a
simple fixed radius to use of complex computer models. The fixed radius depends on the
pumping rate, time of pumping and the aquifer's porosity and thickness. Fixed radii for
the wells were calculated to be:
Well #2
Well #3
Well #4
Well #5
Well #6
Well #7
808 ft
1,366 ft
1,616 ft
1,690 ft
1,690 ft
1,690 ft
In another method, the Uniform Flow Equation is used to calculate the width and downgradient
length (null point) of the recharge area for a well. The "Zone of Contribution"
delineated in this method depends on the pumping rate, groundwater gradient and the
aquifer's transmissivity.
The zone of contribution area extends up-gradient to the groundwater divide; however,
for practical reasons, the up-gradient extent of the wellhead protection area is limited to
the distance of a 50-year time-of-travel (TOT) of groundwater to the well. Zone of
contribution areas were determined using the Dane County Groundwater Model
(DCRPC, 1997) and the results are shown in Figure 4. The areas were then enlarged to
include the required minimum 1,200-foot radius around each well. Calculations used in
the delineation of the wellhead protection areas are included in Appendix B.
Page I 4
6. POTENTIAL CONTAMINANT SOURCES
As required by the WDNR, potential contaminant sources within a one-half mile radius
of each well were identified by the wellhead protection team. The Village is served
predominately by municipal water and sewerage, although there are a few private wells in
use within the village, for which the Village administers permits. Wells #2, #3 and #4 are
surrounded by residential neighborhoods and parklands while proposed Wells #5, #6 and
#7 are in areas now used for agriculture. The primary concerns at Wells #2, #3 and #4
are over-application of lawn chemicals, fuel tanks and contaminated stormwater. Current
concerns at proposed Wells #5, #6 and #7 are agricultural chemicals and private septic
systems. Improperly abandoned wells are a concern for all locations. The locations of
potential contaminant sources are shown on Figure 5 and details of those sources are
contained in Appendix C. Further detail is contained in three reports by Vierbicher
Associates (2003, a, b and c).
7. LAND USE MANAGEMENT
The Village has a well abandonment ordinance and has drafted a wellhead protection
ordinance, which will be revised to conform to this plan. In addition, the Village has
extraterritorial zoning in the area shown in Figure 6. An important method of reducing
risk will be the program of education and public awareness discussed in Section 8. The
County conducts annual "Clean Sweep" operations for the collection of hazardous
household wastes. Separation distances required at NR 811.16 are included in the
wellhead protection ordinance and will also be maintained for future structures through
the Village's building permit review and by the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission. In addition the Township and County planning groups will be informed of
the wellhead protection area and asked for cooperation in protection of areas outside the
corporate limits. The Village will request incorporation of essential elements of its
wellhead protection plan in Comprehensive Planning ("Smart Growth") for the area. In
addition, possible locations of future wells will be taken into consideration in land use
planning.
8. PUBLIC EDUCATION
Public awareness and education are an important part of the management strategy for this
plan. Residents and businesses within the wellhead protection area will be notified by
mail and informed of the importance of preventing the release of pollutants within the
area. In addition, wellhead protection will be explained on the Utility's web site and
articles explaining the wellhead protection plan will be published in the "DeForest Times
Tribune" and the Village's e-newsletter. This plan will also be made available to the
public at the Village Hall, the Utility Department and the DeForest Area Public Library.
Page I 5
9. WATER CONSERVATION
Water conservation by customers will be promoted through the distribution of
educational material. Water bills are screened to find anomalous spikes in water use that
might be caused by leaking plumbing. Water loss for the system is currently about 4
percent, which is within the PSC guideline of 15 percent for Class AB communities.
Leak detection surveys have been conducted and if future water audits indicate a
substantial increase in unaccounted for water, the Village will consider the use of
additional surveys. The Village has a meter exchange arrangement with its supplier,
which meets PSC guidelines. There are no unmetered customers in the village. The only
unmetered water uses are Hydrant flushing, Water Main Breaks, and Fire Department
use.
10. CONTINGENCY PLANNING
If any well had to be shut down because of contamination or any other reason, the others
could meet system demand. The projected demand could be met temporarily by any two
of the six wells. Storage capacity is 900,000 gallons, which would provide about one
day's supply if all wells were shut down. The Village has natural gas backup engines at
Wells #3 and #4 and will provide backup power at future wells. With all wells out of
service for an extended period, a connection could be made with any of the adjacent
water systems. Bottled water is available at local stores. The first responder to a
contaminant spill would be the Village Fire Department, which has some HAZMAT
training. The nearest Regional HAZMAT Team is in Madison.
11. REFERENCES
Bradbury, K.R., Swanson, S.K., Krohelski, J.T. and Fritz, A.K., 1999. Hydrogeology of
Dane County, Wisconsin: WGNHS Open-File Report 1999-04.
Cline, D.R., 1965. Geology and Ground-Water Resources of Dane County, Wisconsin:
U.S. Geological Survey Water Supply Paper 1779-U.
Dane County Regional Planning Commission, 1997. The 1997 Modeling and
Management Program: DCRPC, Madison, Wis.
Hadley, D.W. and Pelham, J.H., 1976. Glacial Deposits of Wisconsin, Sand and Gravel
Resources Potential: Scale 1:500,000 WGNHS State Map 10.
Krohelski, J.T., Bradbury, K.R., Hunt, R.J. and Swanson, S.K., 2000. Numerical
Simulation of Groundwater Flow in Dane County, Wisconsin: WGNHS Bulletin 98.
Page 16
Mudrey, M.G., Jr, Brown, B.A. and Greenberg, J.K., 1982. Bedrock Geologic Map of
Wisconsin: Scale 1:1,000,000 WGNHS.
Trotta, L.C. and Cotter, R.D., 1973. Depth to Bedrock in Wisconsin: Scale 1:1,000,000
WGNHS State Map 30.
Vierbicher Associates, 2003c. Well No. 5- Capwin Site Well Site Investigation Report:
Consultant's Report for Village of DeForest, Feb 2003.
Vierbicher Associates, 2003b. Well No. 6- Conservancy Place Site Well Site
Investigation Report: Consultant's Report for Village of DeForest, Feb 2003.
Vierbicher Associates, 2003a. Well No. 7- Badgerland Site Well Site Investigation
Report: Consultant's Report for Village of DeForest, Feb 2003.
Vogeler, Jim, 2003. Superintendent of Public Works, Village of DeForest: Personal
Communication to Ed Morse (WRWA), March 2003.
Page I 7
Village Board Summary and Recommendation Sheet
Meeting Date: March 19, 2013
Agenda Number: 9.1
Agenda Item: Wellhead Protection Ordinance
Lead Staff: Michael Centinario, Planning & Zoning Administrator
Committee Review: Planning & Zoning Commission
Attachments: Ordinance, Adopted Wellhead Protection Plan
Background Information:
The draft ordinance would establish a Wellhead Protection Overlay District (WP). This new
zoning district is in response to the Village's recently prepared Wellhead Protection Plan, which
was also included in the Board's packet. The intent of both the plan and proposed overlay
zoning district would be to ensure that land uses and activities within a specified distance of
municipal wells (1200 feet) did not present unacceptable risk to groundwater quality there. The
proposed WP district regulates land uses and activities than may have an adverse impact on
groundwater quality. The district details conditionally-permitted uses, and standards in which
those uses are to be reviewed, and requirements for existing facilities and land uses. The
proposed regulations reference models from other communities, but are customized to reflect the
conditions in the DeForest area.
The Planning and Zoning Commission recommended Village Board approval last year. As part
of the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendation, Village staff was directed to notify
property owners that would be potentially impacted by the proposed ordinance. Staff recently
notified those property owners and provided approximately one month for inquiry and comment.
I received a handful of phone calls inquiring about the ordinance, but there was no identifiable
opposition once the intent and content of the ordinance was detailed.
Requested Action:
I request Village Board action through a formal motion.
Recommendation:
The Planning and Zoning Commission and I recommend Village Board adoption of Ordinance
2012-006.
Notice of Newly Enacted Ordinance
Please take notice that the Village Board of DeForest, Wisconsin enacted Ordinance No. 2013-006: "An
Ordinance Incorporating a Wellhead Protection Overlay District into the Village Zoning Code (Chapter
15)." This ordinance creates a Wellhead Protection District around Village Wells to protect groundwater
quality. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality.
This overlay district institutes land use regulations within WP areas on the zoning map. The district is
intended to protect groundwater quality and promote the health, safety and general welfare of municipal
water users. Authority for Village adoption of this district and enforcement of associated regulations is
established under Section 62.23(7)(a) and (c), Stats., and NR 811.16, Wis. Adm. Code.
The full text of Ordinance 2013-006 may be obtained at the office of the Deputy Administrator/Village
Clerk, 306 DeForest Street, DeForest, Wisconsin or through the Village's website at
http://www.vi.deforest.wi.us .
Clerk's Telephone No.: (608) 846-6751.
