MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF DELAFIELD 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
  
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Kent Attwell 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jeff Krickhahn, Alderperson, District 1 (Wards 1-2) 
James R. Behrend, Alderperson, District 2 (Wards 3-4) 
Jackie Valde, Alderperson, District 3 (Wards 7-8) 
Wayne F. Dehn, Alderperson, District 4 (Wards 5-6) 
Matt Grimmer, Alderperson, District 5 (Wards 9-10) 
Kevin Maples, Alderperson, District 6 (Wards 11-12) 
Tim Aicher, Alderperson, District 7 (Wards 13-14) 
Common Council 
____________ 
Michelle Luedtke 
City Clerk  
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Kent Attwell 
Mayor 
____________ 
Doug Saloga, Alderperson, District 1 (Wards 1-2) 
James R. Behrend, Alderperson, District 2 (Wards 3-4) 
Jackie Valde, Alderperson, District 3 (Wards 7-8) 
Wayne F. Dehn, Alderperson, District 4 (Wards 5-6) 
Matt Grimmer, Alderperson, District 5 (Wards 9-10) 
Phil Kasun, Alderperson, District 6 (Wards 11-12) 
Tim Aicher, Alderperson, District 7 (Wards 13-14) 
Common Council 
____________ 
Michelle Luedtke 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Delafield, Wisconsin. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the republication were the 1997 Code, as supplemented through November 20, 2017, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1997 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Jeanne O'Brien, Deputy Clerk/Treasurer, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Delafield, Wisconsin. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Delafield, Wisconsin. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Delafield, Wisconsin. 2018. 
STATE OF WISCONSIN:  CITY OF DELAFIELD:  AUKESHA COUNTY: 
ordinance no. 770 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF DELAFIELD; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
WHEREAS, The Code entitled the "Municipal Code of the City of Delafield," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 52, each inclusive, is adopted. 
WHEREAS, all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 20, 2017, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
WHEREAS, the repeal provided shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
WHEREAS, unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $5.00 nor more than $500.00, but not more than the forfeiture permitted by statute together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(2)  Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance or part of an ordinance of this Code who has previously been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00, but not more than the forfeiture permitted by statute for each such offense, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
WHEREAS, Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
WHEREAS, Ordinances adopted after November 20, 2017, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
NOW, THEREFORE, the Mayor and Common Council of the City of Delafield, Wisconsin, adopt the municipal code and enact a new code for the City of Delafield effective June 15, 2020. 
Passed and adopted this 15th day of June, 2020. 
CITY OF DELAFIELD 
By:___________ 
Kent Attwell, Mayor 
ATTESTED: 
___________ 
Michelle Luedtke City of Delafield, Clerk  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code of General Ordinances, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the ordinance: 
(1)  Wisconsin Statutes. All references to "Wisconsin Statutes" or "Wis. Stats." mean the current edition of the Wisconsin Statutes and includes the most recent biennial session. 
(2)  Gender, singular and plural. Every word in this Code and in any ordinance imparting the masculine gender may extend and be applied to females as well as males, and every word imparting the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; provided these rules of construction shall not be applied to any provision which contains any express language excluding such construction or when the subject matter or context of such provision may be repugnant thereto. 
(3)  Person. The word "person" extends and applies to natural persons, firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic and all entities capable of being sued, unless plainly inapplicable. 
(4)  Acts of agents. When a provision requires an act to be done which may, by law, as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
(Code 1997, § 25.01)  
Sec. 1-2. - Conflict and separability. 
(a)  Conflict of provisions. If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter. 
(b)  Separability of Code provisions. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof. The council hereby declares that they would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Code 1997, § 25.02)  
Sec. 1-3. - Clerk to file documents incorporated by reference. 
Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth herein and the clerk shall file, deposit and keep in his office a copy of the code, standard, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept shall be public records open for examination with proper care by any person during the clerk's office hours, subject to such orders or regulations which the clerk may prescribe for their preservation. 
(Code 1997, § 25.03)  
Sec. 1-4. - Penalty provisions. 
(a)  General penalty. Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $5.00 nor more than $500.00, but not more than the forfeiture permitted by statute together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(2)  Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance or part of an ordinance of this Code who has previously been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00, but not more than the forfeiture permitted by statute for each such offense, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(b)  Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the city from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code. 
(c)  Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of any court for violation of any ordinance of the city, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for such forfeiture and costs. 
(Code 1997, § 25.04)  
Sec. 1-5. - Repeal of general ordinances. 
All ordinances heretofore adopted by the city council are hereby repealed, except all ordinances or parts of ordinances relating to the following subjects and not conflicting with any of the provisions of this Code: 
(1)  The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the city of whatever name or description. 
(2)  The establishment of grades, curb lines and widths of sidewalks in the public streets and alleys. 
(3)  The fixing of salaries of public officials and employees. 
(4)  Rights, licenses or franchises or the creation of any contract with the city. 
(5)  The lighting of streets and alleys. 
(6)  The annexation of territory to the city. 
(7)  The naming and changing of names of streets, alleys, public grounds and parks. 
(8)  The letting of contracts without bids. 
(9)  The establishment of aldermanic districts, aldermanic district boundaries and election precincts. 
(10)  Tax and special assessment levies. 
(11)  Releases of persons, firms or corporations from liability. 
(12)  Construction of public works. 
(13)  Water, sewer and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main construction. 
(14)  Budget ordinances, resolutions and actions. 
(Code 1997, § 25.05)  
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeals. 
The repeal or amendment of any section or provision of this Code or of any other ordinance or resolution of the council shall not: 
(1)  By implication be deemed to revive any ordinance not in force or existing at the time such repeal or amendment takes effect. 
(2)  Affect any vested right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed or amended, unless the privilege of repealing such obligation or privilege has been reserved by the city. 
(3)  Affect any offense committed, or penalty or forfeiture incurred, previous to the time when any ordinance is repealed or amended; except when any forfeiture or penalty has been mitigated by the provisions of any ordinance, such provisions shall apply to and control any judgment to be pronounced after such ordinance takes effect for any offense committed before that time. 
(4)  Affect any prosecution for any offense, or the levy of any penalty or forfeiture pending at the time when any ordinance aforesaid is repealed or amended; but the right of action shall continue and the offender shall be subject to the penalty as provided in such ordinance, and such prosecution shall proceed, in all respects, as if such ordinance had not been repealed; except all such proceedings had after the time this Code takes effect shall be conducted according to the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1997, § 25.06)  
Sec. 1-7. - Title; effective date citation. 
These ordinances shall be known as the "Municipal Code of the City of Delafield" and shall take effect from and after passage and publication as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.035. All references thereto shall be cited by section number (example: section 50-6, Municipal Code of the City of Delafield). 
(Code 1997, § 25.07)  
Sec. 1-8. - Keeping code current; revisor's amendments. 
As each ordinance or resolution affecting the Municipal Code becomes effective, the city clerk shall forward such ordinance or resolution to the revisor, who shall incorporate them into the Municipal Code. The revisor shall make no substantive changes to such ordinances and resolutions but may renumber, rearrange and edit them without first submitting them to the city clerk; and such rearranging, renumbering and editing shall not affect the validity of such ordinances and resolutions or the provisions of this Municipal Code affected thereby. 
(Code 1997, § 25.08)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL GOVERNMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-19. - Form of government. 
The City of Delafield shall be organized and governed under the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 62. 
(Code 1997, § 1.01; Rep. & Recr. #694 )  
Sec. 2-20. - Elected officials. 
(a)  Officials. The elective officers of the city shall be a mayor, municipal judge and one alderman from each aldermanic district. 
(b)  Eligibility. No person shall be elected to a city office who is not, at the time of his election, 18 years of age, a citizen of the United States and of the state and an elector of the city, and, if an aldermanic district office, of the aldermanic district and actually residing therein. 
(Code 1997, § 1.02)  
Sec. 2-21. - Appointed officials. 
The following shall be appointed officials: 
Official 	How 
Appointed 	Term 
Administrator 	Mayor, subj. to conf. by the council 	Indefinite 
Chief of 
police 	Police comm. 	Indefinite 
City assessor 	Mayor, subj. to conf. by the council 	2 yrs., commencing May 1, even years. 
City attorney 	Mayor, subj. to conf. by the council 	2 yrs. 
City engineer 	Mayor, subj. to conf. by the council 	2 yrs., commencing May 1, even years. 
City clerk 	Mayor, subj. to conf. by the council 	2 yrs., commencing May 1, even years. 
Electrical 
inspector 	Mayor, subj. to conf. by the council. If not a city employee, the Inspector shall enter into a contract with the city. 	2 yrs. 
Emergency government dir. 	Mayor, subj. to conf. by the council 	2 yrs. 
Fire chief 	Fire comm. 	Indefinite 
Plumbing/HVAC 
inspector 	Mayor, subj. to conf. by the council. If not a city employee, the inspector shall enter into a contract with the city. 	2 yrs. 
Treasurer 	Mayor, subj. to conf. by the council 	2 yrs., commencing on May 1, even years. 
Official 
building 
inspector 	Mayor, subj. to conf. by the council. If not a city employee, the inspector shall enter into a contract with the city. 	2 yrs. 
 
(Code 1997, § 1.03; Rep. & Recr. 694 )  
Sec. 2-22. - Oaths and bonds. 
Elected and appointed officials shall take and file the official oath within ten days after notice of their election or appointment as provided in Wis. Stats. § 62.09(4)(a) and shall execute and file the official bond as required by state statutes and this Municipal Code. 
(Code 1997, § 1.04)  
Sec. 2-23. - Removals. 
(a)  Elected officials. Elected officials may be removed by the city council as provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.12(1)(a) or 17.16. 
(b)  Appointed officials. Appointed officials may be removed as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.12(1)(c) and 17.16. 
(Code 1997, § 1.05)  
Sec. 2-24. - Vacancies. 
(a)  How occurring. Vacancies in elective and appointive positions are caused as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.03 and 17.035. 
(b)  How filled. Vacancies in elective and appointive offices shall be filled as provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.23. 
(Code 1997, § 1.06)  
Sec. 2-25. - Salaries. 
The salaries of all elected and appointed officials, including members of boards and commissions, shall be as determined by the city council from time to time, provided the salary of the mayor and members of the council shall not be increased during their terms of office. (See Wis. Stats. § 66.0505(2).) 
(Code 1997, § 1.07; Rep. & Recr. #694 )  
Sec. 2-26. - Receipt of gifts and gratuities. 
(a)  Restricted. No city employee or official shall receive or offer to receive, either directly or indirectly, any gift, gratuity or other thing of value which he is not authorized by ordinance or state statute to receive from any person who: 
(1)  Has or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city or city council; or 
(2)  Conducts operations or activities which are regulated by the city or city council; or 
(3)  Has interests which may be substantially affected by the city or city council. 
(b)  Penalty. The receipt of any gift, gratuity or other thing of value as denoted above is contrary to the public policy of the city and is punishable as provided in Wis. Stats. § 946.12. Such conduct shall also be punishable under section 1-4. 
(Code 1997, § 1.08)  
Sec. 2-27. - Defense of officers. 
(a)  By city attorney. The city council may authorize the city attorney to defend actions brought against any officer or employee of the city or of any board or commission of the city growing out of any acts done in the course of his employment or out of any alleged breach of his duty as such officer or employee. This section is discretionary. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.115 are incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  By private counsel. The city council may authorize special counsel privately retained by the officer or employee of the city or of any board or commission of the city to defend actions brought against the officer or employee growing out of any acts done in the course of his employment or out of any alleged breach of his duty as such officer or employee. The officer or employee is required to submit the name of the special counsel that the officer or employee wishes to retain and a written fee agreement. No fees or other costs of defense of any officer or employee of the city or of any board or commission of the city shall be paid by the city, unless the name of the special counsel and the fee arrangement have been submitted to and approved by council resolution. 
(Code 1997, § 1.09; Cr. #315)  
Secs. 2-28—2-57. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OFFICIALS 
 
Sec. 2-58. - Mayor and alderpersons. 
(a)  Election and term. 
(1)  The mayor and alderpersons from aldermanic districts 2, 4 and 6 shall be elected during even-numbered years. The alderpersons from aldermanic districts 1, 3, 5 and 7 shall be elected during odd-numbered years. (See Charter Ordinance No. 93.) 
(2)  Except as otherwise specifically provided, the regular term of the mayor and alderperson shall be two years. 
(b)  Duties and powers. 
(1)  Mayor. See Wis. Stats. § 62.09(8). 
(2)  City council. The alderpersons shall constitute the city council and shall have such duties and powers as are enumerated in Wis. Stats. ch. 62 and elsewhere in the statutes. 
(3)  Police powers. See section 26-22. 
(c)  Authority. The city council shall have all powers of the city not specifically given to some other body or officer. Except as otherwise provided by law, the city council shall have the management and control of the city property, finances, highways, streets, utilities and the public service and may act for the government and good order of the city, for its commercial benefit and for the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public and may carry its powers into effect by license, regulations, suppression, borrowing, taxation, special assessment, appropriation, imposition of forfeiture and other necessary or convenient means. The city council may appoint such officers from time to time as may be deemed necessary for the benefit of the community. The powers hereby conferred shall be in addition to all other grants and shall be limited only by express language. 
(Code 1997, § 1.10; Am. #296; Am. #373; Rep. & Recr. #694 )  
Sec. 2-59. - Assessor. 
(a)  Appointment and term. See section 2-21. 
(b)  Applicable statute. See Wis. Stats. § 62.09. 
(c)  Duties and powers. 
(1)  Statutes. See Wis. Stats. §§ 70.12, 70.13, 70.17, 70.18, 70.23, 70.29, 70.30, 70.32, 70.34, 70.345, 70.35, 70.365, 70.43, 70.44, 70.45, 70.48, 70.49, 70.50, 70.501 and 70.503, in particular. 
(2)  Other duties prescribed law. The assessor shall perform such other duties as shall be prescribed by state law, supervisory personnel of the state department of revenue and the city council, including attendance at all meetings of the board of review. 
(Code 1997, § 1.11; Rep. & Recr. #694 )  
Sec. 2-60. - Municipal judge and municipal court. 
(a)  Municipal judge. 
(1)  Office created. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 755.01, there is created the office of municipal judge for the city. 
(2)  Election; term. The municipal judge shall be elected at large at the spring election in even-numbered years for a term of four years, or until a successor is elected and qualifies, commencing on May 1 next succeeding his election. 
(3)  Salary. The municipal judge shall receive a salary as determined from time to time by the city council, which shall be in lieu of fees and costs. No salary shall be paid to the judge for any time during his term for which he has not executed and filed his official bond and oath as required by subsection (a)(4) of this section. 
(4)  Bond; oath. 
a.  The municipal judge shall execute and file with the clerk of the courts for Waukesha County the oath prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 757.02 and a bond in the penal sum of $500.00. 
b.  The municipal judge shall not be qualified to act until a certified copy of the bond is filed with the city clerk and a certified copy of the oath is filed with the office of the state administrator of courts as required by Wis. Stats. § 755.03. 
(5)  Jurisdiction. The municipal judge shall have jurisdiction as provided by law and Wis. Stats. § 755.045 and exclusive jurisdiction of violations of city ordinances, resolutions and bylaws. 
(6)  Appointment of clerks, deputy clerks. The municipal judge shall, in writing, appoint such clerks and deputy clerks as are authorized by the council or board. Their salaries shall be fixed by the council or board as provided in Wis. Stats. § 755.10. 
(b)  Municipal court. 
(1)  Court established. The municipal court for the City of Delafield is established pursuant to Wis. Stats § 755.01(1) and ch. 755. 
(2)  Hours. The municipal court for the city shall be open as determined by order of the municipal judge. 
(3)  Location. The municipal judge shall keep his office and hold court in the city hall. 
(4)  Collection and return of forfeitures. The municipal judge shall collect all forfeitures, penalty assessments, fees and taxable costs in any action or proceeding before him and shall pay over such moneys to the city treasurer within seven days of collection. At such time the municipal judge shall also report to the city treasurer the title, nature of offenses and total amount of judgments imposed in actions and proceedings in which such moneys were collected. 
(5)  Contempt of court. 
a.  The municipal judge, after affording an opportunity to the person accused to be heard in defense, may punish for contempt of municipal court persons guilty of either of the following acts: 
1.  Disorderly, contemptuous and insolent behavior toward the judge while engaged in any judicial proceeding or other conduct which tends to interrupt the proceedings or to impair the respect due the judge's authority. 
2.  Resistance of or disobedience to any lawful order or process made or issued by the judge. 
b.  For the purpose of hearing the person's defense, the municipal judge may, if the alleged offender is not present, issue a warrant for the person to be brought before the municipal judge. 
c.  The municipal judge may, upon finding any person guilty of contempt, order such person to forfeit not more than $50.00 plus a penalty assessment under Wis. Stats. § 757.05. Upon nonpayment of the forfeiture and penalty the person found guilty of contempt may be sentenced to the county jail not to exceed seven days. 
(c)  Stipulations and deposits in municipal court. 
(1)  Deposit schedule to be established. The municipal judge shall establish and submit to the city council for approval in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 800.037, a schedule of deposits for violations of city ordinances, resolutions and bylaws except traffic regulations which are governed by Wis. Stats. § 345.27 and boating violations governed by Wis. Stats. § 23.67. When approved by the council, such deposit schedule shall be posted in the office of the municipal court clerk and the city police department. 
(2)  Stipulation and deposit in lieu of court appearance. Persons cited for violations of city ordinances, resolutions or bylaws for which a deposit has been established under this subsection shall be permitted to make a stipulation of no contest and a deposit in lieu of court appearance as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 800.037, 800.035 and 800.09. 
(3)  Traffic and boating deposits. The deposit schedule established by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference and the procedures set forth in Wis. Stats. chs. 23 and 345 shall apply to stipulations and deposits for violations of traffic regulations enacted in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 345.27 and boating regulations enacted in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 30.77. 
(4)  When not permitted. Stipulations and deposits shall not be permitted after initial appearance or in cases of contempt under subsection (b)(5) of this section. 
(Code 1997, § 1.12; Rep. & Recr. #694 )  
Sec. 2-61. - City attorney. 
(a)  Appointment and term. See section 2-21. 
(b)  Applicable statute. See Wis. Stats. § 62.09(12). 
(Code 1997, § 1.13)  
Sec. 2-62. - Electrical inspector. 
See section 8-83. 
(Code 1997, § 1.14)  
Sec. 2-63. - Plumbing inspector. 
See section 8-54. 
(Code 1997, § 1.145)  
Sec. 2-64. - City engineer. 
(a)  Appointment and term. See section 2-21. 
(b)  Duties and powers. The city engineer shall perform such duties and have such powers as are provided by state statute and this Municipal Code or as shall be prescribed from time to time by the mayor or the city council. 
(c)  Compensation. The office of city engineer shall be compensated on a fee-for-service basis only at a rate to be agreed upon from time to time. 
(Code 1997, § 1.15)  
Sec. 2-65. - Clerk. 
(a)  Appointment and term. See section 2-21. 
(b)  Duties. The clerk shall perform those duties prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 62.09(11) and such other duties as the council may prescribe. 
(c)  Deputy. The clerk may, in writing filed with the mayor and in the office of the clerk, appoint a deputy who shall act under the clerk's direction and, in the clerk's absence or disability or in case of a vacancy, shall perform the clerk's duties and shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations. The deputy shall receive such compensation as the council shall provide. The clerk and the clerk's sureties shall be liable on the clerk's official bond for the acts of such deputy. 
(Code 1997, § 1.16; Am. Ch. Ord. #331) 
Editor's note— Charter Ordinance 579, adopted Oct. 1, 2007, provided for the combining of the offices of clerk and treasurer. Appointment to be made by the mayor, subject to confirmation of the common council.  
Sec. 2-66. - Director of public works. 
The city administrator shall serve as director of public works. 
(Code 1997, § 1.17; Cr. #694 )  
Sec. 2-67. - Chief of police. 
(a)  Appointment and term. See section 2-21. 
(b)  Duties and powers. See Wis. Stats. § 62.09(13). 
(Code 1997, § 1.18)  
Sec. 2-68. - Fire chief. 
Appointment and term. See chapter 18 of the Municipal Code. 
(Code 1997, § 1.19; Rep. & Recr. 694 )  
Sec. 2-69. - Treasurer. 
(a)  Appointment and term. See section 2-21. 
(b)  Duties. The treasurer shall perform those duties prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 62.09(9) and such other duties as the council may prescribe. The treasurer shall be the investment officer for the city. 
(c)  Deputy. The treasurer may, in writing filed with the mayor and in the office of the clerk, appoint a deputy who shall act under the treasurer's direction and, in the treasurer's absence or disability or in case of a vacancy, shall perform the treasurer's duties. The deputy shall receive such compensation as the council shall provide. The acts of such deputy shall be covered by official bond as the council shall direct. 
(Code 1997, § 1.192; Am. Ch. Ord. #331) 
Editor's note— Charter Ordinance 579, adopted Oct. 1, 2007, provided for the combining of the offices of clerk and treasurer. Appointment to be made by the mayor, subject to confirmation of the common council.  
Sec. 2-70. - City administrator. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created the office of city administrator. The offices of city administrator and director of public works may be held by the same person, that person to be called city administrator/director of public works. 
(b)  Appointment and term. See section 2-21. 
(c)  Duties. The administrative duties and responsibilities of the city administrator shall be prescribed from time to time by the mayor and the council, provided these duties do not usurp the duties or functions that are required by state law to be performed by the city boards, commissions and other city officers or department officials. The administrator shall have the following specific duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Effectuate all actions of the council which require administrative implementation. 
(2)  Direct, coordinate and expedite the activities of all city departments, except where such authority is vested by State law in officers, boards and commissions. Such responsibilities shall include making or directing such studies as are necessary to determine or bring about the most economical, efficient operation of such departments and their programs as deemed necessary. However, the administrator shall not control the activities within the various departments, such functional departmental activities to remain under the direct control of the department heads. 
(3)  Direct and control, through appropriate organizational channels, the efficient performance of all city employees' duties. After the appropriate screening and selection process has been followed, the administrator shall submit recommendations to the mayor and council for appointees to vacancies in any city positions for offices of the city not required by law or ordinance to be otherwise selected. 
(4)  Develop budgeting procedures and prepare or supervise the preparation of the annual operating budget. The administrator shall also be responsible for coordinating financial and economic data for the city's long-range financial plans. In addition, the administrator shall make such reports as the mayor and the council require as to the current status of budgeted items and shall review and report to the mayor and council any variations in the operation of the city budget. 
(5)  Serve as personnel officer for the city and be responsible for the development and administration of standardized personnel policies and procedures, subject to council approval and in accordance with all prior ordinances relating to tenure of certain city positions; conduct labor negotiations with union representatives. 
(6)  Develop and implement standardized purchasing policy and procedure for the city. The administrator is responsible for supervising the purchasing of all supplies, materials and equipment. 
(7)  Review proposed and pending county, state and federal legislation and report to the mayor and council on its effect upon the city. In addition, the administrator shall appear on the city's behalf at all legislative and administrative hearings as directed by the mayor or the council. 
(8)  Submit, when necessary, recommendations and suggestions for improving the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city and coordinate a system of communications among and with the mayor and the council as well as with the general public. This shall include the establishment of procedures for the facilitation of the communications between citizens and the city to assure that complaints, grievances, recommendations and other matters receive the prompt attention of a responsible official and are expeditiously resolved. 
(9)  Keep informed concerning current developments in the field of municipal administration and the availability of state and federal funds for local purposes. 
(10)  Work closely with all department heads to ensure that they and other city employees receive adequate opportunities for training within budget allowances prescribed by the council to improve their knowledge and skills. The administrator shall act as the approving authority for all requests by city employees to attend conferences, meetings, training schools, etc., pertaining to their employment. 
(11)  In coordination with the mayor and the city clerk, prepare the agenda for all meetings of the council, together with such supporting data as may be required, provided nothing herein shall be construed to give the administrator authority to limit or prevent matters from being considered by the council. The administrator shall assist the mayor and the city clerk as required in the performance of their duties. 
(12)  Shall attend all meetings of the council, assisting the mayor and the city clerk as required in the performance of their duties; attends meetings of boards and commissions as necessary and desired. 
(13)  Negotiate, manage, and monitor a wide variety of city contracts with other governmental bodies and private vendors that provide service to city residents and customers. 
(14)  Serve as city liaison to a number of regional boards, commissions, agencies, and districts that provide services directly or indirectly to the city; creates and negotiates intergovernmental agreements for consideration by, and approval of, the city council. 
(15)  Manage a variety of special projects; serve as liaison with property owners, residents, contractors, engineers, and regulatory agencies. 
(16)  Apply for state and federal grants for the city alone or in conjunction with other governmental jurisdictions. 
(17)  Provide effective and efficient customer services and promote and maintain responsive community relations. 
(18)  Act as press officer for the city and be the spokesperson on all matters within his/her authority to assure that news media are kept fully informed and that all open meeting rules and regulations are followed. 
(19)  Assist in the preparation of ordinances and resolutions as requested by the mayor or the council as needed. 
(d)  Under Delafield Code section 52-293, the administrator "is hereby designated the administrative officer under the direction of the plan commission. The administrator may delegate certain administrative, inspection, and enforcement responsibilities to the building inspector or other city employees or independent contractors subject to approval by the plan commission." 
(e)  The City of Delafield organizational chart, designated as appendix A and on file in the office of the city clerk, shall hereby be adopted and established as the official organizational chart for the City of Delafield. Absent statutory conflicts to the contrary, this chart shall establish the chain of command throughout the organization. 
(Code 1997, § 1.193; Cr. Ch. Ord. #331; Cr. #410; Cr. #585; Am. #585; Rep. & Recr. #694 )  
Sec. 2-71. - Director of tourism, promotion, and economic development. 
(a)  Office created. The office of tourism, promotion, and economic development is hereby created. The city promotion and tourism commission ("commission") shall appoint a director of tourism, promotion, and economic development. 
(b)  Duties. The office of tourism, promotion and economic development shall serve as a tourism entity, and shall be responsible for performing those duties and obligations imposed upon a tourism entity as described in Wis. Stats. § 66.0615. The director shall, coordinate and expedite tourism, promotion and economic development activities within the city, and shall perform such other duties as the city promotion and tourism commission may authorize and direct. 
(c)  Budget. The director shall, after giving due consideration to the anticipated tax revenues to be collected by the city under section 46-3 ("Room Tax"), formulate and submit an annual budget pursuant to the financial policies and procedures of the city. Funding for the office shall be exclusively from room tax proceeds. The city shall not budget or make payments in excess of the room tax collected under section 46-3. No expenditure exceeding the budget approved by the council shall be made without an appropriate fund transfer approved by the city council. 
(Code 1997, § 1.194; Cr. # 734 ) 
( Ord. No. 747 , §§ 1, 2, 8-20-2018)  
Secs. 2-72—2-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND DEPARTMENTS 
 
Sec. 2-101. - City plan commission. 
(a)  How constituted. The city plan commission shall consist of the mayor, who shall be its presiding officer, one alderperson, and six citizen members. The chairperson or designee of the lake welfare committee and park and recreation commission, shall be appointed as citizen members together with four additional citizen members. The plan commission shall, at all times consist of eight members. Members shall for cause be removable by the city council. 
(b)  Appointment and term. 
(1)  Citizen members. Citizen members shall be persons of recognized experience and qualifications. 
(2)  Appointment. Citizen members shall be appointed by the mayor annually in April for staggered three-year terms, subject to confirmation by city council. 
(3)  Alderperson member. Annually, during the month of April, the alderperson member of the plan commission shall be appointed by the mayor and subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The authority of the city plan commission and its functions and duties shall be as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
(Code 1997, § 1.20; Am. #558; Am. #599; Rep. & Recr. #694 )  
Sec. 2-102. - Park and recreation commission. 
(a)  Composition. The park and recreation commission shall consist of seven members. One member shall be a city alderman, selected annually by majority vote of the city council to serve for a one-year term to begin on May 1. The six citizen members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the members of the city council. Members of the park and recreation commission shall be qualified residents of the city. 
(b)  Terms. Each citizen member shall serve a three-year term, the terms to be staggered by the appointment of two citizen members each year so as to provide continuity of membership. 
(c)  Organization. 
(1)  Officers. The commission members shall annually elect for one-year terms, to begin in May, a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary. 
(2)  Vacancies. Any vacancies occurring on the park and recreation commission shall be filled by appointment by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council. Such appointees shall serve the balance of the term of the member replaced. 
(d)  Duties and powers. 
(1)  Buying, selling and letting. The park and recreation commission shall have the power to purchase, lease, sell or exchange park or recreation lands, facilities and equipment, subject to approval of the city council. 
(2)  Acquisition by other means. The commission shall have the power to acquire any park or recreation lands, facilities and equipment by gift, devise, bequest or condemnation, either absolutely or in trust; money, real or personal property, or any incorporeal right or privilege, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(3)  Control and management. The commission shall have the power to govern, manage, control, improve, develop, maintain and operate all city parks or recreational lands, facilities, equipment and activities and to adopt necessary rules and regulations for such purposes. 
(4)  Tree board. The commission shall also serve as the city's tree board as required to meet the Arbor Day Foundation's Tree City USA standards. The commission shall be charged with developing and administering a comprehensive tree management program. The commission shall be responsible for writing and implementing an annual community forestry work plan. The commission shall also have all powers and duties enumerated in Wis. Stats. § 27.09. 
(5)  Other duties. The commission shall have such additional powers and duties as shall be assigned by the city council in addition to all powers enumerated in Wis. Stats. § 27.08. 
(e)  Finances. The commission shall submit to the city administrator by August 1 of each year a proposed program and budget for the ensuing year. The commission shall not contract any liability in excess of the budget appropriated unless specifically authorized by the city council. All monies received for the purposes of the commission, whether from the general fund or from approved donations or from such reasonable fees as may be charged for activities, facilities or services, shall be deposited in the general fund of the city and segregated on the books of the city. The city treasurer shall act as treasurer of the commission without additional compensation. 
(Code 1997, § 1.21; Am. #282; Am. #559; Cr. # 687 )  
Sec. 2-103. - Zoning board of appeals. 
(a)  How constituted. The city zoning board of appeals shall consist of five members to be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. Members shall be appointed to staggered three-year terms, with one or two members to be appointed each year. In addition, the mayor shall appoint two alternate members of the board of appeals, who shall act with full power only when a member of the board refuses to vote because of interest or when a regular member is absent. Any vacancy occurring on the board shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member involved, by appointment and confirmation as stipulated for full-term appointments. Members shall be removable for cause as provided by law. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to adopt rules; meet and hear and determine appeals as prescribed by law; and shall have all of the powers conferred or conferrable thereon by the provisions of any statute, law, rule or provision of this Code now existing or hereafter created, including, but not limited to, the power, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, to make special exceptions to the terms of the Zoning Code or of any other zoning provisions hereafter adopted, in harmony with the general purposes and intent of such regulations and in accordance with general or specific rules therein contained. Such exceptions or variances may be granted upon determination by the board that the variance shall not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the terms of the Zoning Code shall result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. See Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e). 
(Code 1997, § 1.22)  
Sec. 2-104. - Water pollution control commission. 
See section 50-3. 
(Code 1997, § 1.24)  
Sec. 2-105. - Police commission. 
(a)  Creation. The police commission shall consist of five citizens, three of whom shall constitute a quorum. The mayor shall annually, between the last Monday of April and the first Monday of May, appoint in writing, to be filed with the secretary of the commission, one member for a five-year term. The initial appointments shall be of the required five commissioners each for varying terms from one to five years. All appointments shall be subject to confirmation by the council. No appointment shall be made which will result in more than three members of the commission belonging to the same political party. 
(b)  Ex officio alderman member. In addition to the members provided in subsection (a) of this section, the mayor shall appoint for a term of one year, subject to confirmation by the council, one alderman to serve with the commission as an ex officio nonvoting member. 
(c)  Duties. The police commission shall perform such duties as are prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 62.13. 
(d)  Rules. The police commission shall keep a record of its proceedings, and shall adopt rules and regulations necessary to carry out its duties. 
(Code 1997, § 1.25; Rep. & Recr. #625)  
Sec. 2-106. - Public works committee. 
(a)  Public works committee. The department of public works shall operate within the authority of the public works committee as granted by the city council. The public works committee shall be comprised of seven members to include one member of the city council serving a one-year term, renewable annually; and six citizen members serving three-year terms. Appointments shall be made by the mayor with approval of the city council. 
(b)  Duties. The department of public works shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and construction of all city bridges, buildings, grounds, public rights-of-way, as well as repair and maintenance of city sanitary sewers and equipment pertinent to its functions. 
(c)  Administration. The city administrator shall administer the department of public works. 
(Code 1997, § 1.26; Rep. & recr. #694 )  
Sec. 2-107. - Board of review. 
(a)  Composition. The board of review shall consist of the mayor, the president of the common council, and five citizen members who shall be appointed by the mayor to serve a term of two years, subject to confirmation by the common council. In addition, the mayor shall appoint two alternate members to the board of review who shall serve a term of two years, and whose appointment shall be subject to confirmation by the common council. One alternate member shall be designated as the first alternate and the other as being the second alternate. Alternate members, when required, shall act with full power when a member of the board of review refuses to vote because of conflict of interest, is absent, or if a person who is objecting to a valuation requests the removal of a board of review member pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 70.47(6m) or is otherwise unavailable to hear an objection. The mayor and common council president shall receive no additional compensation for service on the board of review, but citizen members and alternate members shall be compensated at a rate of $40.00 per meeting, or such other compensation as may be determined annually by the common council. The mayor, or in the absence of the mayor, the president of the common council shall chair the board of review. 
(b)  Duties; Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference. The duties and functions of the board of review shall be as prescribed in Wis. Stats. §§ 70.46, 70.47 and 70.48, which sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Confidentiality of information about income and expenses. Whenever the assessor, in the performance of the assessor's duties, requests or obtains income and expense information pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), or any successor statute thereto, then such income and expense information that is provided to the assessor shall be held by the assessor on a confidential basis except, however, that the information may be released to and used by persons; in the discharging of duties imposed by law; in the discharge of duties imposed by office (including, not limited to, use by the assessor in performance of official duties of the assessor's office and used by the board of review in performance of its official duties) or pursuant to order of a court. Income and expense information provided to the assessor under Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is not, per Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), subject to the right of inspection or copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1). 
(d)  Hearing procedure. In accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 70.47(8), the board of review is authorized to consider requests and objections from property owners or the property owner's representatives to offer testimony, under oath, by telephone or submit written statements under oath to the board of review. The following procedure shall apply to such requests: 
(1)  A property owner or property owner's representative may request that the board of review consider testimony offered under oath by telephone, or consider written statements submitted under oath, provided that: 
a.  The requirements of Wis. Stats. § 70.47, which requires that the property owner or property owner's representative provide notice of intent to appear at the board of review hearing are satisfied; and 
b.  The objection form for real estate property assessment (PA-115A) has been completed and submitted to the board of review in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 70.47; and 
c.  A request to testify by telephone or submit a written statement under oath to the board of review (Form PA-814) shall be filed with the city clerk. Such requests must be submitted timely to be considered by the board of review at the first meeting of the board of review. 
(2)  Criteria to be considered. The board of review may consider any and all of the following factors when deciding whether to grant or deny a request established under this subsection: 
a.  The requester's stated reason(s) for the request as indicated on the PA-814. 
b.  Fairness to the parties. 
c.  Ability of the requester to procure in person oral testimony and any due diligence exhibited by the requester in procuring such testimony. 
d.  Ability to cross-examine the person providing the testimony. 
e.  The board of review's technical capacity to honor the request. 
f.  Any other factors that the board deems pertinent to deciding the request. 
(Code 1997, § 1.27; Cr. #433; Cr. #464; Cr. #715 ; Rep. & Recr. # 736 )  
Sec. 2-108. - Lake welfare committee. 
(a)  Committee created. A committee to represent the City of Delafield. Such committee shall be known as the "lake welfare committee" (hereafter called the "committee"), pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.11(5). The purpose of this committee is to study problems and issues relating to Nagawicka Lake, Upper Nashotah Lake, and the Bark River within the city limits, and make recommendations to the common council concerning solutions thereto. 
(b)  Membership. 
(1)  Number of members. The committee shall consist of 11 members as follows: one member of the common council, one representative from the Village of Nashotah, and nine City of Delafield citizen members. 
(2)  Selection. All members shall be appointed by the mayor with approval of the common council. 
(3)  Term of office. The representative of the common council and the representative from the Village of Nashotah shall serve one year terms. Those citizen members from the odd-numbered aldermanic districts shall serve two-year terms to expire in the odd-numbered years, and those citizen members from even-numbered aldermanic districts shall serve two-year terms that expire in the even-numbered years. 
(4)  Citizen member. Citizen members shall represent as closely as possible the seven aldermanic districts. 
(5)  Removal. Any member of the committee may only be removed by a majority vote of the common council. 
(6)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the mayor with approval of the common council. Each successor so selected shall serve the remaining term of the member whose office has been vacated. 
(c)  Officers. 
(1)  Officers designated. The officers of the committee shall be a chair and a vice-chair. In addition, the committee may choose to appoint a clerk. 
(2)  Selection and term of office. Each committee officer shall be elected annually by the committee members at the June meeting and shall serve a one-year term. 
(3)  Removal. Any officer may be removed by a majority vote of the committee. 
(4)  Vacancies. Any vacancy of office shall be filled by the committee at its next meeting following the vacancy. 
(d)  Meetings. 
(1)  Regular meetings. The committee shall meet once a month, or additionally as needed. 
(2)  Annual lake awareness meeting. The committee shall have an annual lake awareness meeting each year. 
(e)  Powers and duties. The committee shall be responsible for investigating any and all issues and concerns that arise regarding Nagawicka Lake, Upper Nashotah Lake, and the Bark River within the city limits and make recommendations to the common council concerning solutions thereto. 
(Code 1997, § 1.29; Cr. #573; Rep. & Recr. #694 ) 
( Ord. No. 758 , § 1, 11-18-2019; Ord. No. 766 , § 1, 1-20-20)  
Sec. 2-109. - Library board. 
The library board shall be appointed pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 43.54(1) and 43.60. 
(Code 1997, § 1.295; Rep. & Recr. #647)  
Sec. 2-110. - Deer management committee. 
(a)  Committee created. The common council has determined that a deer management committee shall be created to implement the deer management plan and policy approved by the common council. The deer management committee shall be advisory to the common council. 
(b)  Membership. 
(1)  Number of members. The deer management committee shall consist of seven members as follows: one member of the common council, one member from the public works committee, one member from the park and recreation commission, one member from the promotional and tourism council, and three city citizen members. 
(2)  Selection. All members shall be appointed by the mayor with confirmation by a majority of the members of the common council. 
(3)  Term of appointments. The representative from the common council shall serve a one-year term. All other members shall serve staggered two-year terms (half of these initial appointments shall be one-year terms to accomplish the staggering) to provide continuity of membership, with half of the terms expiring in even numbered years and half of the terms expiring in odd numbered years. The terms of the public works committee member and two of the citizen members shall expire in even numbered years. The terms of the park and recreation commission member, the promotional and tourism council member, and one of the citizen members shall expire in odd numbered years. Terms shall expire in April as part of the common council organizational meeting appointments following the spring election. 
(4)  Removal. Members shall, for cause, be removable by a majority vote of the common council. 
(5)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor with confirmation by a majority of the members of the common council. Each successor so elected shall serve the remaining term of the member they replaced. 
(6)  Officers. The officers of the deer management committee shall include a chair and a vice-chair. Officers shall be elected annually, following the April appointment, by the committee members. The chair shall work with city staff to coordinate meetings, set the meeting agendas and packet documentation, and shall preside over all meetings of the deer management committee when in attendance. The vice-chair shall fulfill the responsibilities of the chair when the chair is unavailable or absent. Any officer may be removed as an officer (not as a committee member) by a majority vote of the committee members. Officer vacancies shall be filled by the committee at its next meeting following the vacancy. 
(c)  Termination of committee. Unless otherwise terminated by action of the common council, adopted by a majority of the common council, the deer management committee shall terminate on March 31, 2023. 
( Ord. No. 746 , § 1, 5-21-2018)  
Secs. 2-111—2-131. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - POLITICAL BOUNDARIES 
 
Sec. 2-132. - Aldermanic districts. 
(a)  District 1. Wards 1 and 2, includes all of the area in the city, which are a part of Sections 3, 4, 5, 8, 9 and 16 lying east and north of Nagawicka Lake and north of Oakwood Road and Evergreen Lane, extended to the east shore of Nagawicka Lake. 
(b)  District 2. Wards 3 and 4, includes all of the area in the city, which are a part of Sections 16, 21 and 20 lying east and south of Nagawicka Lake; south of Oakwood Road and Evergreen Lane, extended to the east shore of Nagawicka Lake; north of I-94; east of Genesee Street; and south and east of Poplar Path, Woodberry Drive, W. Devonshire Road, N. Lapham Peak Road, E. Devonshire Road, 1st Street, extended to E. Devonshire Road, and 3rd Street extended to Nagawicka Lake. 
(c)  District 3. Wards 7 and 8, includes all of the area in the city, which are a part of Sections 17, 20, and 19 lying south of Nagawicka Lake and the Bark River; east of Genesee Street; north and west of 3rd Street extended to Nagawicka Lake, 1st Street, extended to E. Devonshire Road, E. Devonshire Road, N. Lapham Peak Road, W. Devonshire Road, Woodberry Drive, Poplar Path, and Genesee Street; and an area lying west of Genesee Street, south of Main Street and north of Wells Street, east of Butler Drive, north of Pamelia Street extended to Butler Drive and including Parcels 0793-051, 0793-052, and 0793-053. 
(d)  District 4. Wards 5 and 6, includes all of the area in the city, which are a part of Sections 27, 21, 20, 19 and 30 lying south of I-94 west of Genesee Street, south of Main Street, except that part of Section 19 as described follows; the area lying south of Main Street, west of Genesee Street and north of Wells Street, east of Butler Drive, north of Pamelia Street extended to Butler Drive and including Parcels 0793-051, 0793-052, and 0793-053. 
(e)  District 5. Wards 9 and 10, includes all of the area in the city, which are a part of Sections 18 and 19 lying north of Main Street, west of Genesee Street and South of Oakwood Drive. 
(f)  District 6. Wards 11 and 12, includes all of the area in the city, which are a part of Sections 17, 18, and 8 lying west of Nagawicka Lake, north of the Bark River and east of Genesee Street; and the area lying north of Oakwood Drive, east of Hillcrest Drive and south of Copperfield Drive. 
(g)  District 7. Wards 13 and 14, includes all of the area in the city, which are a part of Sections 18, 7, and 6 lying north of Oakwood Drive, west of Hillcrest Drive, north of Copperfield Drive and west of Genesee Street. 
(Code 1997, § 1.30; Rep. & Recr. #660)  
Sec. 2-133. - Annexations. 
(a)  Ordinances. #51, Gigas property; #79, Nickel property; #121 (repealed); #123, Butler's Woods; #124, Binkowski and Cistercian property; #136, Nickel property; #138, Nashotah House property; #163, Nickel property; #203, Exhibit B Hirsch; #220, Nickel property; #220, Tax Key Nos. 807.989 and 807.990; #234, Nickel property; #234, Tax Key No. 807.988; #407, Hartland Sportsmen's Club; #414, County property; #550, County property; #704, County property. 
(b)  Security for payment of litigation costs. 
(1)  Prior to city council action on a pending annexation, the applicant shall file with the city clerk-treasurer sufficient security, approved by the city attorney, to pay the costs of litigation to test the validity of such annexation. 
(2)  Such security may be in the form of a cash or surety bond in an amount determined by the city attorney or in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit from a recognized lending institution. If such security is not filed, the city council may reject the petition for annexation. 
(Code 1997, § 1.31; #704 )  
Secs. 2-134—2-164. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 2-165. - Polling places. 
The polling place for all aldermanic districts shall be located at Christ the King Lutheran Church, 1600 N. Genesee Street. 
(Code 1997, § 1.40; Am. #236; Am. #594)  
Sec. 2-166. - Registration of electors. 
A registry of electors shall be made for each aldermanic district applicable to regular, special and primary elections. 
(Code 1997, § 1.41)  
Sec. 2-167. - Spring primary. 
Whenever three or more candidates file nomination papers for a city office, the primary election to nominate candidates shall be held. 
(Code 1997, § 1.42; Cr. Ch. Ord. #63)  
Sec. 2-168. - Polling hours. 
Polls shall be open in the city from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(Code 1997, § 1.43; Cr. #180)  
Secs. 2-169—2-189. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - THE GOVERNING BODY 
 
Sec. 2-190. - The city council. 
The city council shall consist of the mayor and one alderperson from each aldermanic district, who shall be elected for two-year terms. 
(Code 1997, § 2.01)  
Sec. 2-191. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at least once per month, typically on the third Monday of each calendar month. By October 31 of each year the city council shall approve a schedule of city council meetings for the next year. The city clerk shall publish this approved schedule on the city's website by November 15 of each year. For months when a second city council meeting is scheduled, it shall typically be scheduled for the first Monday of the month. City council meetings shall be held in the council chambers at City Hall, unless otherwise noted. City council meetings shall begin at 7:00 p.m., unless otherwise noted, and shall be open and public pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 19. 
(b)  Special meetings. Special meetings of the city council may be called by the mayor or any two alderpersons with written notice filed with the clerk at least 24 hours prior to the time specified for such meeting. The clerk shall notify each alderperson of the time and purpose of such meeting by telephone, electronic mail and/or causing a written notice thereof to be delivered to each alderperson. Special meetings may be held without such notice when all members of the city council are present in person or consent in writing to the holding of such meeting, such written consent to be filed with the clerk prior to the beginning of the meeting. Any special meeting attended by all the alderpersons shall be a regular meeting for the transaction of any business that may come before such meeting. 
(c)  Adjournments. The council may, by a majority vote of those present, but not less than three affirmative votes, adjourn from time to time to a specific date and hour. 
(Code 1997, § 2.02; Am. #373; Rep. & Recr. #695 ) 
( Ord. No. 753 , § 1, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 2-192. - Presiding officer. 
(a)  Designated. The mayor shall preside. In the absence of the mayor, the president of the council shall preside. In the absence of both the mayor and the president, the city clerk shall call the meeting to order and preside until the alderpersons present elect one of their number acting mayor for that meeting. 
(b)  Duties. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order and conduct the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, unless otherwise provided by statute or by these rules. 
(c)  Decisions, appeals from. Any member may appeal from a decision of the presiding officer. An appeal shall be sustained by a two-thirds vote of the council. 
(Code 1997, § 2.03; Am. #373)  
Sec. 2-193. - Roll call; quorum. 
(a)  Roll call; procedure when quorum not in attendance. As soon as the council is called to order, the city clerk shall proceed to call the names of the members, noting who are present and who are absent, and record the same in the proceedings of the council. If there is not a quorum present, the fact shall be entered in the minutes and the council may adjourn; or the mayor or, in his absence, the clerk may issue a process to any policeman commanding him forthwith to summon the absentees. 
(b)  Quorum. Two-thirds of the members shall be a quorum, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.11(3)(b). The mayor shall not be counted in computing a quorum. In determining a quorum of the council, the term "member" shall mean those council members who have been duly elected or appointed for a current regular or unexpired term and whose service has not been terminated by death, resignation or removal from office. 
(Code 1997, § 2.04; Rep. & Recr. #695 )  
Sec. 2-194. - Order of business. 
The business of the council shall be conducted in the following order: 
(1)  Call common council meeting to order. 
(2)  Pledge of Allegiance. 
(3)  Roll call. 
(4)  Approve minutes. 
(5)  City of Delafield citizen's comments for items not on the agenda. City of Delafield citizen's comments for items on the agenda. 
(6)  Consent agenda. 
(7)  Committee reports. Report on discussion and action taken at previous meetings, future agenda items and upcoming scheduled meetings. 
a.  Licenses. 
b.  Plan commission. 
c.  Lake welfare committee. 
d.  Park and recreation commission. 
e.  Public works committee. 
f.  Del-Hart commission. 
g.  Police commission. 
h.  Library board. 
i.  Board of zoning. 
j.  Promotional and tourism committee. 
k.  Lake Country fire commission. 
l.  Lake Country fire board. 
(8)  Unfinished business. 
(9)  Mayor's report. 
(10)  New business. 
(11)  Reports of city officials. 
a.  Administrator. 
b.  Clerk-treasurer. 
c.  Council requests for future agenda items. NO DISCUSSION OF REQUESTED ITEMS. 
(12)  Correspondence. 
(13)  Adjourn. 
(Code 1997, § 2.05; Rep. & Recr. #695 )  
Sec. 2-195. - Clerk pro tem. 
In the absence of the clerk, the mayor shall appoint a clerk pro tem. 
(Code 1997, § 2.06; Am. #373)  
Sec. 2-196. - Mayor to conduct. 
The mayor at the stated hour shall call the meeting to order. He shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order and conduct the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, unless otherwise provided by statute or by these rules. Any member shall have the right of appeal from a decision of the presiding officer. The appeal may be sustained by a majority of the members present, exclusive of the presiding officer. 
(Code 1997, § 2.07)  
Sec. 2-197. - President to conduct in absence of mayor. 
If the mayor is absent at the designated time of any meeting, the president of the council shall preside, and during the absence or inability of the mayor, shall have the powers and duties of the mayor, excepting that he shall not have the power to approve an act of the council which the mayor has disapproved by filing an objection with the clerk. He shall, when so officiating, be styled "acting mayor." The president shall be selected by a two-thirds vote of all members of the council at the annual organizational meeting on the third Tuesday of April. In the absence of both the mayor and the president of the council, the clerk shall call the meeting to order and preside until the council shall, by motion, select an acting mayor for that meeting. 
(Code 1997, § 2.08; Am. #373)  
Sec. 2-198. - Conduct of deliberations. 
(a)  Presiding officer speaking. Whenever the presiding officer shall desire to speak upon any question, or to make any motion, he shall vacate the chair and designate the president of the council, if present, or any alderperson to preside temporarily. 
(b)  Council may act as committee of the whole. The mayor may declare the entire council a committee of the whole for informal discussion at any meeting or for any other purpose, and shall ex officio be chairman of the same, provided there is no objection by any one of the alderpersons present at the meeting. 
(c)  Appointment of committees. The mayor may, from time to time, appoint such special committee or committees as he may deem advisable or as provided for by motion or resolution stating the number of members and object thereof to perform such duties as may be assigned to them. 
(Code 1997, § 2.09)  
Sec. 2-199. - Consideration of matters before the council. 
(a)  Reference to committee. All ordinances, resolutions, communications and other matters submitted to the council shall be read by title and author and acted on by the council unless the council chooses to refer such matters to the appropriate committee for study and recommendation back to the council. The clerk shall read and record each such reference by title. Any alderperson may require the reading in full of any matter at any time it is before the council. 
(b)  Financial claims upon the city. All bills and other financial claims against the city shall be itemized and upon receipt thereof shall be examined by the clerk and referred by the clerk to the next meeting of the council, provided that payment of regular wages and salaries of officials and employees according to schedules adopted by the council shall be made by the clerk without submission to the council after verification and approval by the mayor. 
(c)  Committee minutes required. Each committee shall, at the next regular council meeting, submit written minutes of all matters considered by it. 
(d)  Committee may require conference. When authorized by the council, any committee may require any city official to confer with it and supply information needed in connection with any matter pending before the committee. 
(e)  Action on matters discussed. When a question is under discussion, no action shall be in order except the following motions which shall have precedence in the order listed: 
(1)  To adjourn; 
(2)  To recess; 
(3)  To lay on the table; 
(4)  To move the previous question; 
(5)  To postpone to a certain day; 
(6)  To refer to a committee; 
(7)  To amend; or 
(8)  To postpone indefinitely. 
(f)  Termination of debate. Any member desiring to terminate debate may move the previous question, in which event the presiding officer shall announce the question as, "Shall the main question now be put?" If a majority of the members present vote in the affirmative, the main question shall be taken without further debate, its effect being to put an end to all debate and bring the council to a direct vote, first upon any pending amendments and then upon the main question. 
(g)  Vote may be demanded. Any alderperson may demand an aye and nay vote on any matter, and such vote shall be entered in the proceedings. On confirmation of appointments and on the adoption of any measure assessing or levying taxes, appropriating or disbursing money, or creating any liability or charge against the city, or any fund thereof, the vote shall be aye and nay. Every member shall vote when a question is put unless the council by a majority vote of those present excuses him for special cause. A majority vote of all members of the council in favor of any proposed ordinance, resolution or appointment shall be necessary for passage or approval unless a larger number is required by statute. Except as otherwise provided by these rules, a majority vote of those present shall prevail in other cases. 
(h)  Mayor to abstain. The mayor shall not vote except in the case of a tie. When the mayor does vote in the case of a tie, his vote shall be counted in determining whether a sufficient number of council members has voted favorably or unfavorably on any measure. A majority vote of all members of the council in favor of any proposed ordinance, resolution or appointment shall be necessary for passage or approval, unless a larger number is required by statute. Except as otherwise provided, a majority vote of those present shall prevail in other cases. 
(i)  Motion to adjourn. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order; and a motion to adjourn, to recess or to lay on the table and a call for the previous question shall be decided without debate. 
(j)  Resolutions appropriating money or creating charges to the city. All ordinances or resolutions appropriating money or creating any charge against the city other than the payment of claims for purchases or work previously authorized by the council shall not be finally acted upon by the council sooner than at the next regular meeting following their introduction, provided that this provision may be suspended by affirmative action by three-fourths of all members of the council. 
(Code 1997, § 2.10; Am. #173; Am. #373)  
Sec. 2-200. - Reconsideration of question. 
Any member voting with the majority may move for a reconsideration of the vote on any question at that meeting. A motion to reconsider being put and lost shall not be renewed. An alderperson may not change his vote on any question after the result has been announced. 
(Code 1997, § 2.11)  
Sec. 2-201. - Disturbances and disorderly conduct. 
Whenever any disturbance or disorderly conduct occurs in any meeting of the council, the presiding officer may cause the room to be cleared of all persons guilty of such disorderly conduct except the alderpersons. If any alderperson is guilty of disorderly conduct, the presiding officer may order the police to take him/her into custody for the time being or until the meeting adjourns. Such member may appeal from such order to the council as in other cases. 
(Code 1997, § 2.13; Am. #373)  
Sec. 2-202. - Appropriations and accounts. 
All demands or accounts shall be acted upon at the time of presentation unless one or more members demands a reference. 
(Code 1997, § 2.14)  
Sec. 2-203. - Publication and effect of ordinances. 
(a)  Publication. All general ordinances of the city, and all regulations imposing a penalty, or a summary of the general ordinance or regulation as permitted by Wis. Stats. § 62.11(4)(c)1., shall be published in the official newspaper of the city as a Class 1 notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985, and shall be immediately recorded by the city clerk in a book kept for that purpose. Affidavits of publication shall be filed separately. A printed copy of such ordinance or resolution in any book, pamphlet or newspaper and published or purporting to be published therein by direction of the city council shall be prima facie proof of due passage, publication and recording thereof. 
(b)  Effective date. Unless otherwise provided, all ordinances shall take effect and be in force from and after passage and publication; and published copies thereof shall have appended the date of first publication. 
(Code 1997, § 2.16; Am. #373; Am. #592)  
Sec. 2-204. - Amendment of rules. 
These rules shall not be rescinded or amended unless the proposed amendment or motion to rescind has laid over from a regular meeting, and then it shall require a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the council. 
(Code 1997, § 2.17)  
Sec. 2-205. - Suspension of rules. 
These rules or any part thereof may be temporarily suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of the members present. 
(Code 1997, § 2.18)  
Secs. 2-206—2-233. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE 
 
Sec. 2-234. - Fiscal year. 
The calendar year shall be the fiscal year. 
(Code 1997, § 3.02)  
Sec. 2-235. - Budget. 
(a)  Departmental estimates. Annually, on or before October 1, each officer or department shall file with the finance officer/budget analyst an itemized statement of disbursements made to carry out the powers and duties of the officer or department during the preceding fiscal year, a detailed statement of the receipts and disbursements on account of any special fund under the supervision of the officer or department during the year and of the condition and management of the fund and detailed estimates of the same matters for the current fiscal year and for the ensuing fiscal year. Such statements, which shall be designated as "departmental estimates," shall be presented in the form prescribed by the finance officer/budget analyst, such form to be as nearly uniform as possible for the main division of all departments. 
(b)  Budget preparation. 
(1)  Finance officer/budget analyst to submit estimates. The finance officer/budget analyst shall submit all departmental estimates to the city administrator who shall be responsible for the preparation of the annual budget, per section 2-70(c)(4). 
(2)  Information required. The budget shall include the following information: 
a.  The expense of conducting each department and activity of the city for the ensuing fiscal year and corresponding items for the current year and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for increase and decrease recommended as compared with appropriations for the current year. 
b.  An itemization of all anticipated income of the city from sources other than general property taxes and bonds issued, with a statement comparing the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year. 
c.  An itemization of the amount of money to be raised from general property taxes which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
d.  Such other information as may be required by the council and by state law. 
(3)  Copies required. The city shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the budget thus prepared for distribution to citizens. 
(c)  Notice and hearing. The council shall hold a public hearing on the budget after giving notice thereof as required by Wis. Stats. § 65.90. 
(d)  Action by council. Following the public hearing, the proposed budget may be changed or amended and shall take the same course in the council as ordinances. 
(Code 1997, § 3.03; Rep. & Recr. #696 )  
Sec. 2-236. - Changes in budget. 
The amount of the tax to be levied or certified and the amounts of the various appropriations, and the purposes thereof, shall not be changed after approval of the budget except by a two-thirds vote of all the members of the city council. Notice of such change shall be given by publication within 15 days thereafter in the official city newspaper. 
(Code 1997, § 3.04)  
Sec. 2-237. - City funds to be spent in accordance with appropriations. 
No money shall be drawn from the city treasury, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as authorized by section 2-236. At the close of each fiscal year, any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be made by the council, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned. Excess funds from certain designated departments shall revert to their special reserve accounts as specified from time to time by the council. 
(Code 1997, § 3.05)  
Sec. 2-238. - Claims procedure. 
(a)  Claims. All claims and demands against the city shall be itemized and filed with the department heads, who shall deliver the same to the finance officer/budget analyst for examination. The finance officer/budget analyst shall thereafter examine such claim semimonthly and return the same to the clerk-treasurer with the treasurer's report thereon in writing, who shall place the same before the council for action at its next meeting. 
(b)  Claims to be verified. All accounts, demands or claims against the city shall be verified by the claimant or proper official. 
(c)  Payment of regular wages or salaries. Payment of regular wages or salary pursuant to the budget and salary schedule adopted by the council may be by payroll, verified by the proper official, and filed in time for payment on the regular payday. 
(Code 1997, § 3.06; am. #373; Rep. & Recr. #696 )  
Sec. 2-239. - Public records. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. A representative government is dependent upon an informed electorate and therefore it is declared to be the public policy of the City of Delafield that all persons are entitled to the greatest possible information regarding the affairs of their government and the official acts of those officers and employees who represent them. Further, providing persons with such information is an essential function of a representative government and an integral part of the routine duties of officers and employees whose responsibility it is to provide such information. To that end, this article shall be construed in every instance with a presumption of complete public access, consistent with the conduct of governmental business. The denial of public access generally is contrary to the public interest and only in an exceptional case may access be denied. Therefore, the City of Delafield does hereby adopt and incorporate, as though fully set forth herein, the provisions of Wisconsin's public records laws, Wis. Stats. §§ 19.31—19.39, inclusive of all future amendments and revisions to such sections of the Wisconsin Statutes. The following provisions are intended to supplement, not to replace or to supplant, the Wisconsin public records laws. 
(b)  Records custodians. 
(1)  Designation of records custodians and alternate custodians. "Custodian" means that officer, department head of the City of Delafield who is designated by the mayor or by the terms of this article, to keep and preserve public records, or whom is required by law to file, deposit, or keep such public record in his/her office, or is lawfully in possession or lawfully entitled to possession of public records. The city clerk-treasurer is the legal custodian of the records of the common council as a body politic and for all common council boards, committees, and commissions. Each alderperson shall be the custodian of their individual official records, such as their correspondence, memorandums, and e-mail. Any alderperson may designate, in writing, the city clerk-treasurer to act as the official custodian of the alderperson's individual official records. For every department, the department head is the custodian of records for their agency. Every custodian of records shall designate in writing one or more employees to act in his or her absence as an alternate custodian of such records. 
(2)  Duties. Custodians are vested with full legal power to render decisions and carry out the duties of the city under this article. Each custodian shall establish a procedure for handling records and shall see that all of their employees entrusted with records are informed of these procedures. If a custodian has any question about granting or denying a request to inspect or copy any record, he or she may consult with the city attorney. 
(3)  Public records training. Each custodian and alternate custodian shall receive training regarding public records laws as soon as practicable upon receiving these duties. Custodians and alternate custodians are personally responsible for keeping current with any developments or advancements in records keeping and the Wisconsin public records laws. 
(c)  Procedural information. 
(1)  Form of request. The Wisconsin public records law dictates that certain actions must be taken with regards to oral requests for records and that certain more formal actions are taken in response to written requests for records. However, the state law does not expressly state how to respond to the following methods of communication. Therefore, requests made by the following means shall be responded to as follows: 
a.  E-mail. A request made by e-mail may be responded to via e-mail or in writing and shall have all of the formalities as though the request was made in writing. 
b.  Voice-mail. A request made by voice-mail shall be responded to as though it were made orally. 
c.  Instant messaging/text messaging. A request made in either such manner shall be treated as an oral request. 
(2)  Treatment of certain data as records. The Wisconsin public records law provides little or no guidance as to whether the raw and perishable data of the following technologies qualify as records that must be maintained. Therefore, the common council determines the following status of these technologies: 
a.  E-mail. The data in an e-mail message may constitute a public record and is subject to maintenance as a public record. The data in an e-mail is subject to the same analysis under the public records statutes as an equivalent paper or hard copy record. The city administrator is responsible for ensuring that all e-mails are properly preserved for such analysis. 
b.  Voice-mail. A voice-mail message is not a public record and voice-mail messages do not have to be maintained as public records. These messages are the functional equivalent of phone conversations. Phone conversations clearly are not public records. Additionally, these messages also share many of the attributes of "personal notes" which are not public records either. Finally, these messages cannot be indexed or maintained in any manner that would allow for their easy classification, searching or retrieval. 
c.  Instant messaging (IM)/text messaging (TM). Except as set forth in this subsection and in subsection (c)(2)i and j of this section, the data involved in IM/TM communications is not subject to maintenance as a public record. IM/TM has all of the attributes of instantaneous exchange of ideas, as does a regular telephone conversation. Furthermore, the data exchange has the same technological issues as to capturing and storage of data that is present with regards to voice-mail with an additional concern - the raw data is often only briefly stored or not stored at all by the third party vendors or hosts that provide these services. Thus, this technology is even closer to a true telephone conversation than are voice-mails. Therefore, city employees and officials shall refrain from using such services for official communications purposes or for matters that would result in a public record if another format such as email or written communications were employed, unless the employee or official preserves a copy of such communications by either copying them to their email account, downloading the communications to their city computer, making a computer file of the communications or by printing and retaining a copy of such communications. 
d.  Voice over the internet protocol (VOIP). The city does not monitor nor record the data associated with the conversations that occur over VOIP. Such conversations are the very same real time voice communications as standard telephone conversations that are not public records. The only difference between these communications is the medium employed in transmitting the voice communications from one participant in the conversation to all others involved in the conversation. 
e.  Audio, video, data transmissions and communications. Although audio, video, data and radio transmissions and communications may be processed through city computers, the city does not routinely copy the data nor maintain records of such communications. Whenever the city copies, records or maintains copies or recordings of such communications or transmissions, those copies may constitute public records that are subject to records requests and which must be maintained according to the appropriate records retention schedule. The Waukesha County consolidation dispatch center is the custodian for police and fire radio communications. 
f.  Audio/video recordings. Unless otherwise provided herein, are public records subject to requests and must be maintained according to the retention schedules published herein. 
1.  Rewritable recording systems. Those systems where the recordings are routinely overwritten by newer recordings, such as in continuous loop videotape or digital video written to a camera's hard drive or memory, such data does not constitute a record unless it is further downloaded, printed or separately preserved to memorialize some event or proceeding. Until such time as these recordings are downloaded, printed or separately preserved, these recordings do not have to be preserved and, as the recording equipment programs/protocols may dictate, can be overwritten, erased or otherwise destroyed. However, if such data is downloaded, printed, or separately preserved it shall be treated as a record and shall be retained in accordance with the retention schedules. 
2.  Recordings made for the purpose of preparing minutes of meetings. In accordance with Wis. Stats. § 19.21(7); any tape or digital recording of a meeting, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 19.82(2); by any city body as defined by Wis. Stats. § 19.82(1); to include each city board, commission and committee, may be destroyed, overwritten, or recorded over no sooner than 90 days after the minutes have been approved and published if the purpose of the recording was to take minutes of the meeting. 
g.  Electronic document files. Where records, as that term is defined in Wis. Stats. § 19.32(2); exist in an electronic format only, such electronic records shall be maintained according to the appropriate retention schedule. Where both hard copy (i.e., paper) and electronic copies of a record exist they shall each be subject to public records requests. However, when the custodian has designated, pursuant to subsection (c)(2)i of this section, electronic records as the official records, only the electronic copy shall be retained and made available for inspection under the public records laws. Where the custodian has not made such a designation, only the hard copy shall be subject to inspection as a public record and the electronic copies shall be treated and disposed of as draft documents that do not need to be maintained beyond creation of the final hard copy. 
h.  Electronic logs/temporary data files. These logs and temporary data files provide detailed information about the design and functionality of the city's computer network. These logs are routinely overwritten on a daily basis due to the high volume of traffic that is being logged. Unrestricted access to these logs and files would constitute a breach of system security and leave the system vulnerable to exploitation and hacking. In order to ensure network security, these logs are available to city administrator's authorized staff only. These determinations apply to the following types of logs and data files: 
1.  Syslogs for network electronic devices. All logs created by network devices such as firewalls, routers, switches, etc., which are used for monitoring and trending computer network traffic patterns and/or detecting unauthorized network traffic. 
2.  Network server security, application and event logs. These logs are used to monitor activity on city network servers including successful/unsuccessful login attempts, file system access, hardware performance, etc. These logs provide detailed information about city network account IDs, file system structure, and hardware profiles. 
3.  Network security appliance logs. All logs created by network security devices such as the anti-virus appliance, anti-spam appliance, content filtering appliance, etc., which are used to monitor specific types of unauthorized or malicious traffic on the city network. These logs identify specific network traffic patterns and/or protocols that are allowed or disallowed on the city network. 
4.  Application logs. These logs are used to monitor activity on various database applications, but do not contain specific audits of database transactions. These logs can contain version information, program variables, and programming logic. 
i.  Emerging technologies and records retention. As new information technologies emerge the city administrator shall evaluate these technologies and their benefit to city operations. The city administrator shall consider whether any of these technologies provide the capacity to archive public records created by these technologies. Whenever it is economically and practically feasible to archive records created by such technologies that archiving shall be incorporated into any deployment of said technologies. Whenever the technologies do not provide for such archiving capabilities the city administrator shall consider whether the benefits of employing such technologies outweigh the risks that some public records may not be retained by deployment of such technologies. Where such benefits outweigh these risks city employees shall refrain from using such technologies for official communications purposes or for matters that would result in a public record if another format such as email or written communications were employed. In the event that such technologies are used for such communications purposes the employee shall preserve a copy of such communications by either copying them to their email account, downloading the communications to their city computer, making a computer file of the communications or by printing and retaining a copy of such communications. The city administrator shall also ensure that, as soon as practical and economically feasible, archiving systems are obtained for any information technology that is deployed without an archiving system. 
j.  Use of technologies to avoid duty to preserve public records prohibited. No employee shall use or employ any form of communications or information technology with the intent or design to circumvent the records retention requirements of this article. For example, text messaging shall not be used in lieu of email to share or create a public record unless the employee complies with the provisions of subsection (c)(2)i of this section. 
(d)  Access to records; fees. 
(1)  Format for delivery of records. 
a.  Same format as record exists and redacted records. Except as otherwise provided by law, any requester may receive or inspect a record in the very same format in which the city maintains the record. However, whenever it is necessary to redact or excise portions of a record in order to comply with the Wisconsin public records laws, the redactions shall be made with the assistance of the city clerk-treasurer. Whenever electronic redaction or excisions cannot be done in a secure manner that preserves such redactions and prevents the viewing of the redacted information then such redactions should be made by hand, not electronically, and the requestor shall only receive a hard copy, not an electronic copy, of the redacted record. A requestor may not be charged for the time necessary to review a record and to redact or excise non-releasable materials. 
b.  E-mailing records. When practicable, records may be e-mailed to the requestor. In order to ensure the integrity of city records, any e-mailed document shall be converted to a secure format, so that the document cannot readily be edited, changed or modified by the recipient, prior to sending the document to anyone outside of the city government. There shall not be any reproduction charge for e-mailing records, however, such records may still be subject to payment of a location fee as established in Wis. Stats. § 19.35(3)(c). 
(2)  Reproduction fees. To the extent possible, the city administrator and the city clerk shall develop a uniform fee schedule for the reproduction of records that shall be used by every department. Such schedule shall include the following provisions and considerations: 
a.  Fees imposed upon a records requestor may not exceed the actual, necessary and direct costs of reproducing and/or transcribing of the record, unless a fee is otherwise specifically established or authorized by state or federal law. 
b.  If the record exists in such a format that it cannot be easily reproduced, such as a mock-up of a building, then the custodian may photograph the record and may charge the requestor for the actual, necessary and direct costs of such photographing and photographic processing. 
c.  The fee schedule for photocopying records shall be: 
1.  A fee established, from time to time, by resolution adopted by the common council. 
2.  Full cost of reproduction for materials such as microfilms, tapes, computer printouts, etc., not otherwise identified in the schedule developed under this subsection. In such cases, the department head who is the records custodian, in consultation with the city clerk-treasurer, must determine the costs for reproduction of such records. The determination of these costs shall be made by utilizing a practice or factors that are as uniform as practicable across city departments/divisions. 
3.  Other fees. 
(i)  Location fee. If the cost of locating a requested record is $50.00 or more, the requester shall pay the full cost, as determined by the department or division head. Such cost shall not exceed the actual, necessary and direct cost of locating such record. Whenever it is determined that such location costs will exceed $50.00, the requestor shall be required to post a deposit with the custodian that is equal to the reasonable good faith estimate of such costs. 
(ii)  Mailing fee. Custodians shall impose a fee upon a requester for the actual, necessary and direct cost of mailing or shipping of any copy or record that is mailed or shipped to the requester. 
4.  Fee waivers. A custodian may provide copies of a record without charge or at a reduced charge where the department head determines in writing that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest. 
5.  Prepayment of fees. Custodians may require prepayment by a requester of any fee or fees imposed under this subsection if the total amount exceeds $5.00 and a custodian shall require prepayment by a requester of any fee or fees imposed under this subdivision if the total amount exceeds $50.00. If prepayment is required, the custodian shall not process the request until such prepayment has been posted with the custodian. 
(e)  Special rules regarding reproduction of e-mail records. 
(1)  Reproducing e-mails dated earlier than October 1, 2003. E-mails dated October 1, 2003, or before were not stored in an archive. The restoration and location of these e-mails is difficult and labor intensive. Such requests often take more than 30 days to comply with due to labor and technical issues. Custodians who receive requests for these records should inform the requestor of these issues. Such requests must be immediately forwarded to the city administrator who may prepare an estimate of the actual, necessary and direct cost of locating such records and whom shall provide technical assistance to the custodian. 
(2)  Reproducing e-mails dated October 1, 2003, or later. All City of Delafield e-mail transactions dated October 1, 2003, or later have been preserved in a searchable data archive. When requests are made for such records, custodians should clarify with the requestor, the various search terms, and e-mail boxes that the requestor would have the city clerk-treasurer search for. Once the requestor has specified search terms, the custodian should contact the city administrator for technical assistance in fulfilling the request. E-mails are archived and retained for seven years and shall be purged in the eighth year of retention. 
(3)  E-mail chains. E-mails are often sent to multiple recipients. A requestor will be provided with one copy of such an e-mail and all responses to that e-mail. Unless a requestor specifically requests otherwise, they will not be provided with multiple copies of such an e-mail showing receipt by each of the designated e-mail recipients. 
(f)  Time for compliance and procedures. 
(1)  Time. The fulfillment of public records requests is a high priority for the city. Therefore, each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and without delay, either, fill the request or notify the requester of her/his determination to deny the request in whole or in part and the reasons therefore. If a request may take more than ten business days to process, then the custodian must respond to the requestor within those ten days with an estimate of when such processing shall be completed and an explanation of the reasons supporting that estimate. 
(2)  City attorney consultation required. Before any custodian may deny access to any records or portion thereof, the custodian must consult with the city attorney. Such consultation shall occur as soon as practicable after the custodian has assembled and reviewed the requested record. In any response to a requestor, the custodian shall include a statement that he or she consulted the city attorney regarding the denial of access to any records. Any denial of access made by a custodian without such consultation and statement is not considered a response from the City of Delafield. 
(g)  No destruction of records while a request is pending or while a denial of a request is being appealed. No custodian may destroy any record at any time after the receipt of a request for inspection or copying of the record until after the request is granted or until at least 60 days after the date that the request is denied. If any legal action is pending regarding or related to the record, the record may not be destroyed without the express authorization of the city attorney. No record that is the object of or which has been produced pursuant to a discovery order or a subpoena may be destroyed without the express consent of the city attorney. 
(h)  Retention schedules. The city, in accordance with Wis. Stats. §§ 19.21(4)(b) and 16.61(3)(e), adopts the following records retention schedules: 
(1)  Retention schedule for all records. For all records the city administrator, in consultation with the city attorney and city clerk-treasurer, shall develop the City of Delafield's records retention schedule and such records shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions of that schedule. Such schedule must be approved by the Wisconsin public records board and approved by the common council. In the event that such a records retention schedule is not adopted by the common council or approved by the Wisconsin public records board, all previously adopted city records retention schedules shall remain in full force and effect until such time as a records retention schedule is adopted in accordance with this subsection. 
(2)  Records that are evidence. No record may be destroyed that has been identified as, or that may have value as, evidence in any civil or criminal legal proceeding, labor arbitration or disciplinary action. No record may be destroyed at any time within 60 days of the denial of a request to review the record or any part thereof. 
(3)  Compliance with federal or other retention requirements. Notwithstanding the City of Delafield records retention schedule set forth in subsection (h)(1) of this section, custodians may not destroy any record where any contract, grant, funding conditions, state or federal statute require that such records be maintained for a longer period of time. 
(4)  Offer of records to state historical society before destruction. The city is required to offer all obsolete records to the state historical society in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 19.21(4)(a) prior to destruction of those records. The city clerk-treasurer may apply to the state historical society for a waiver of this requirement as to certain categories of records under such person's authority that they reasonably believe have little or no significant historical value. 
(i)  Electronic formatting or other reproduction of records. The custodian or any department head, may, with the approval of the city clerk-treasurer, retain and preserve public records in his/her possession by means of microfilm, or another reproduction method, optical imaging or electronic formatting. Such records shall meet the standards for photographic reproduction set forth in Wis. Stats. § 16.61(7)(a) and (b); (2001-2002 Wis. Admin. Code § PR 1 (current through Wis. Admin. Reg. No. 467, Nov. 1994) and Wis. Admin. Code § Adm 12 (current through Wis. Admin. Reg. 554, Feb. 2002). Such records shall be considered original records for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved along with other files of the department or division and shall be open to public inspection and copying according to the provisions of state law and of subsections (a) through (c) of this section. The original hardcopy of any document or record which has been converted to and which is also maintained as a microfilm, optical imaging, electronic formatting, or other reproduction in accordance with this section may be destroyed in compliance with subsection (g) of this section. 
(j)  Severability. The provisions of this section are severable. If any provision of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional or if the application of any provision of this section to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this section which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provisions or applications. It is hereby declared the intent of the common council that this section would have been adopted had any invalid or unconstitutional provision or applications not been included herein. 
(Code 1997, § 3.07; Rep. & Recr. #642; Rep. & Recr. #696 )  
Sec. 2-240. - Treasurer's duplicate bond. 
(a)  Eliminated. The city elects not to give the bond on the city treasurer provided for by Wis. Stats. § 70.67(1). 
(b)  City liable for default of treasurer. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.67(2), the city shall pay, if the treasurer fails to do so, all state and county taxes required by law to be paid by such treasurer to the county treasurer. 
(Code 1997, § 3.08; Am. #373)  
Sec. 2-241. - Temporary investment of funds not immediately needed. 
The treasurer may invest any city funds not immediately needed, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0603(1m). 
(Code 1997, § 3.09; Rep. & Recr. #696 )  
Sec. 2-242. - Late charge on delinquent accounts receivable. 
(a)  The clerk is authorized to charge one percent per month on any account receivable not paid within 30 days of billing. The clerk is directed to give notification of such late charge by setting forth the time restriction and percentage on all billings. 
(b)  This section pertains to all accounts receivable except real estate taxes, special assessments and sewer use charges. 
(Code 1997, § 3.11; Cr. #128; Am. #373)  
Sec. 2-243. - Referenda required for city capital expenditures. 
Prior to the start of any physical construction of any municipally financed (in whole or in part) project requiring a city capital expenditure of $1,000,000.00 or more, the common council shall submit to the electorate a binding referendum for approval of the project. Failure of the binding referendum shall preclude the city from proceeding with the project. The wording of any referendum shall provide the specific purpose, location and cost of the project. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to preclude the city from exercising its role in the planning or design of such publicly financed projects. 
(Code 1997, § 3.14; Cr. #546)  
Sec. 2-244. - Employee benefits for private businesses. 
No ordinances of the City of Delafield nor any other municipal ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation shall mandate that any business entity, other than the city itself, shall provide certain wages or benefits to its employees or set forth the amount or type of any employee wages or benefits provided by an employer located within the city limits. 
(Code 1997, § 3.15; Cr. #604)  
Sec. 2-245. - Charge back of engineering, legal and other fees to property owners. 
(a)  Fees of city professionals charged back. Whenever either the city council, city administrator, city clerk-treasurer or other city official has authorized an individual and/or a property owner in the city to contact or consult with the city attorney, engineer, planner, economic development consultant, or whenever the city council, city administrator, city clerk-treasurer or other city official, in the performance of their official duties and responsibilities, contacts or consults with the city attorney, engineer, planner, economic development consultant, or any other of city's professional staff, then the costs, fees and expenses associated with that contact or consultation shall be charged to the individual and/or property owner requesting or receiving the benefit of that contact or consultation, provided that the costs, fees and expenses do not result from a service provided to the residents of the city as a whole. 
(b)  Signed reimbursement notice. Any individual and/or property owner who is subject to charges for fees or other professional services as provided in this section, shall be required to sign a written notice acknowledging the obligation to reimburse the city for professional fees and charges as provided herein. The failure of the applicant and/or property owner to sign the reimbursement notice shall not relieve the individual or property owner of their responsibility for reimbursement to the city for professional fees and expenses incurred as provided in this section. 
(c)  Payment and objections. 
(1)  The city clerk-treasurer shall invoice each individual and/or property owner for professional charges as provided for herein, and the individual and/or property owner shall be responsible for payment of the invoice within 30 days of the date of the invoice, or, in the event of an appeal as provided in this section, within 30 days of the date of the council's decision resolving the appeal. 
(2)  Any property owner receiving an invoice as provided in this section, may, during the 30-day period of time provided for payment, file with the city clerk-treasurer a written notice objecting to all or a portion of the invoice. Any written objection shall be submitted to the city administrator, who shall attempt to resolve the objection with the individual and/or property owner. If the objection cannot be resolved within a reasonable period of time, the city administrator shall notify the city council and a hearing shall be scheduled as provided in subsection (f) of this section. 
(3)  If a hearing is conducted as provided in subsection (f) of this section, the determination of the city council as to the objection shall be final. The individual and/or property owner may, within 30 days following issuance of the written decision, seek a judicial review of that decision. If a judicial review is not initiated within the 30-day period of time allowed in this section, all further judicial reviews shall be barred. It is a condition to the maintenance of an appeal seeking a judicial review that any invoice issued under this section shall be paid when the invoice becomes due. If there is a default in the making of any payment, the appeal seeking judicial review shall be dismissed. 
(d)  Interest on special assessment or special charges. In order to recover the entire cost of any work or improvement to be paid pursuant to this section, the city shall charge interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month for any amounts not paid within 30 days of the date that the city clerk invoices the individual and/or property owner. 
(e)  Appeal to city council. Upon receipt of an objection to any invoice issued to an individual or property owner for professional charges as provided in this section, and upon notice to the city council that the objection has not been resolved administratively, the city council shall hold a hearing regarding the objection at its next scheduled meeting or as soon as possible thereafter. 
(f)  Notice of hearing. The property owner shall receive notice of the hearing, and shall be afforded an opportunity to appear in person, and/or by counsel. The city council shall, after conducting a hearing on the objection, act on the objection. Written notice of the city council's decision as to the objection shall be provided to the property owner. 
(g)  Placement on tax roll. In the event payment of any invoice which is due, remains unpaid as of October 30 of each year, the amount of the invoice together with any accrued interest thereon shall be placed by the city clerk on the tax roll of the benefitted property, as a charge for current services provided the property owner in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Code 1997, § 3.16; Cr. #640; Rep. & Recr. #696 )  
Secs. 2-246—2-268. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 2-269. - Review of administrative determinations. 
Any person aggrieved by an administrative determination of the city council or a board, commission, committee, agency, official or employee of the city or an agent acting on its behalf may have such determination reviewed as provided in this chapter. The remedies under this chapter shall not be exclusive, but an election to proceed hereunder shall be an election of remedies. 
(Code 1997, § 24.01)  
Sec. 2-270. - Determinations reviewable. 
The following determinations are reviewable under this chapter: 
(1)  The grant or denial in whole or in part, after application, of an initial permit, license, right, privilege or authority, except a fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor license. 
(2)  The suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an existing permit, license, right, privilege or authority, except as provided in section 2-271(4). 
(3)  The denial of a grant of money or other thing of value under a statute or ordinance prescribing conditions of eligibility for such grant. 
(4)  The imposition of a penalty or sanction upon any person except a municipal employee or officer, other than by a court. 
(5)  The suspension or removal of a city official or employee except as provided in section 2-271(2) and (7). 
(Code 1997, § 24.02)  
Sec. 2-271. - Determinations not subject to review. 
The following determinations are not reviewable under this chapter: 
(1)  A legislative enactment. A legislative enactment is an ordinance, resolution or adopted motion of the city council. 
(2)  Any action subject to administrative or judicial review procedures under state statutes or other provisions of this Code. 
(3)  The denial of a tort or contract claim for money required to be filed with the city under Wis. Stats. § 62.25. 
(4)  The grant, denial, suspension or revocation of a fermented malt beverage license or intoxicating liquor license under Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
(5)  Judgments and orders of a court. 
(6)  Determinations made during municipal labor negotiations. 
(7)  Determinations subject to grievance, arbitration or other procedures provided in collective bargaining agreements. 
(Code 1997, § 24.03; MSC '82)  
Sec. 2-272. - Municipal authority defined. 
The term "municipal authority" includes the city council, commission, committee, agency, official, employee or agent of the city making a determination under section 2-269, and every person, committee or agency of the city authorized to make an independent review under section 2-276(b). 
(Code 1997, § 24.04)  
Sec. 2-273. - Persons aggrieved. 
A person aggrieved includes any individual, partnership, corporation, association, public or private organization, and any official, department, board, commission or agency of the city, whose rights, duties or privileges are adversely affected by a determination of a municipal authority. No department, board, commission, agency, official or employee of the city who is aggrieved may initiate review under this chapter of a determination of any other department, board, commission, agency, official or employee of the city, but may respond or intervene in a review proceeding under this chapter initiated by another. 
(Code 1997, § 24.05)  
Sec. 2-274. - Reducing determination to writing. 
If a determination subject to this chapter is made orally or, if in writing, does not state the reasons therefor, the municipal authority making such determination shall, upon written request of any person aggrieved by such determination made within ten days of notice of such determination, reduce the determination and the reasons therefor to writing and mail or deliver such determination and reasons to the person making the request. The determination shall be dated and shall advise such person of his right to have such determination reviewed, shall advise that such review may be taken within 30 days and shall name the office or person to whom a request for review shall be addressed. 
(Code 1997, § 24.06)  
Sec. 2-275. - Request for review of determination. 
Any person aggrieved may have a written or oral determination reviewed by written request mailed or delivered to the municipal authority which made such determination within 30 days of notice to such person of such determination. The request for review shall state the grounds upon which the person aggrieved contends that the determination should be modified or reversed. A request for review shall be made to the official, employee, agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body who made the determination; but failure to make such request to the proper party shall not preclude the person aggrieved from review unless such failure has caused prejudice to the municipal authority. 
(Code 1997, § 24.07)  
Sec. 2-276. - Review of determination. 
(a)  Initial determination. If a request for review is made under section 2-275, the determination to be reviewed shall be termed an initial determination. 
(b)  Who shall make review. A review under this section may be made by the official, employee, agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body who made the initial determination. However, an independent review of such determination by another person, committee or agency of the city appointed by the mayor, without confirmation, shall be provided if practicable. 
(c)  When to make review. The municipal authority shall review the initial determination within 15 days of receipt of a request for review. The time for review may be extended by agreement with the person aggrieved. 
(d)  Right to present evidence and argument. The person aggrieved may file with his request for review or within the time agreed with the municipal authority written evidence and argument in support of his position with respect to the initial determination. 
(e)  Decision on review. The municipal authority may affirm, reverse or modify the initial determination and shall mail or deliver to the person aggrieved a copy of the municipal authority's decision on review, which shall state the reasons for such decision. The decision shall advise the person aggrieved of his right to appeal the decision, shall advise that the appeal may be taken within 30 days and shall name the office or person with whom notice of appeal shall be filed. 
(Code 1997, § 24.08)  
Sec. 2-277. - Administrative appeal. 
(a)  From initial determination or decision on review. 
(1)  If the person aggrieved had a hearing substantially in compliance with section 2-278 when the initial determination was made, he may elect to follow sections 2-274 through 2-276 but is not entitled to a further hearing under section 2-278 unless granted by the municipal authority. He may, however, seek judicial review under section 2-280. 
(2)  If the person aggrieved did not have a hearing substantially in compliance with section 2-278 when the initial determination was made, he shall follow sections 2-274 through 2-276 and may appeal under this section from the decision made under section 2-276. 
(b)  Time within which appeal may be taken under this section. Appeal from a decision on review under section 2-276 may be taken within 30 days of notice of such decision. 
(c)  How appeal may be taken. An appeal under this section may be taken by filing with or mailing to the office or person designated in the municipal authority's decision on review written notice of appeal. 
(Code 1997, § 24.09)  
Sec. 2-278. - Hearing on administrative appeal. 
(a)  Time of hearing. The city shall provide the appellant a hearing on an appeal under section 2-277 within 15 days of receipt of the notice of appeal and shall serve the appellant with notice of such hearing by mail or personal service at least ten days before such hearing. The office or person with whom a notice of appeal is filed shall immediately notify the city attorney, who shall forthwith advise the mayor of such appeal. 
(b)  Conduct of hearing. At the hearing, the appellant and the municipal authority may be represented by counsel and may present evidence and call and examine witnesses and cross-examine witnesses of the other party. Such witnesses shall be sworn by the person conducting the hearing. The mayor shall appoint, without confirmation, an impartial decision-maker, who may be an official, committee, board or commission of the city or the city council who did not participate in making or reviewing the initial determination, who shall make the decision on administrative appeal and who may issue subpoenas. The hearing may, however, be conducted by an impartial person, committee, board or commission designated by the mayor to conduct the hearing and report to the decision-maker. 
(c)  Record of hearing. The person conducting the hearing or a person employed for the purpose of making a record of the hearing shall take notes of the testimony and shall mark and preserve all exhibits. The person conducting the hearing may, and upon request of the appellant shall, cause the proceedings to be taken by a stenographer or by a recording device, the expense thereof to be paid by the city. 
(d)  Hearing on initial determination. Where substantial existing rights are affected by an initial determination, the municipal authority making such determination shall, when practicable, give any person directly affected an opportunity to be heard in accordance with this section before making such determination. 
(Code 1997, § 24.10)  
Sec. 2-279. - Final determination. 
(a)  Within 20 days of completion of the hearing conducted under section 2-278 and the filing of briefs, if any, the decision-maker shall mail or deliver to the appellant its written determination, stating the reasons therefor. Such determination shall be a final determination. 
(b)  A determination following a hearing substantially meeting the requirements of section 2-278, or a decision on review under section 2-276 following such hearing, shall be a final determination, judicial review of which may be obtained under section 2-280. 
(Code 1997, § 24.11)  
Sec. 2-280. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final determination may seek review thereof by writ of certiorari within 30 days of receipt of the final determination. 
(b)  The record of the proceedings shall be transcribed at the expense of the person seeking review. A transcript shall be supplied to anyone requesting the same at his expense. If the person seeking review establishes impecuniousness to the satisfaction of the reviewing court, the court may order the proceedings transcribed at the expense of the city, and the person seeking review shall be furnished a free copy of the transcript. By stipulation, the court may order a synopsis of the proceedings in lieu of a transcript. The court may otherwise limit the requirement for a transcript. 
(Code 1997, § 24.12)  
Sec. 2-281. - Legislative review. 
(a)  Seeking review pursuant to this chapter does not preclude a person aggrieved from seeking relief from the city council or any of its boards, commissions, committees or agencies which may have jurisdiction. 
(b)  If, in the course of legislative review under this section, a determination is modified, such modification and any evidence adduced before the city council, board, commission, committee or agency shall be made part of the record on review under section 2-280. 
(c)  The city council, board, commission, committee or agency conducting a legislative review under this section need not conduct the type of hearing required under section 2-278. 
(Code 1997, § 24.13)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Intoxicating liquor, fermented malt beverages and wine. 
(a)  State statutes adopted. The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 125, relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages, and any subsequent amendments, exclusive of any provisions thereof relating to the penalty to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference. A violation of any such provisions shall constitute a violation of this chapter. In addition to any penalty, forfeiture or restriction established by Wis. Stats. ch. 125, penalties for violation of any provision of Chapter 125 incorporated herein by reference shall be as provided by section 1-4. Alcohol premises or applicable person-to-person transfer fees and change of agent fees are adopted by resolution by the common council from time to time. 
(b)  Licenses required. 
(1)  When required. Except as provided by Wis. Stats. § 125.06, no person shall distribute, vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail or wholesale, deal or traffic in or, for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage or cause the same to be done without having procured a license as provided in this section, nor without complying with all the provisions of this section and all statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state and city applicable thereto. 
(2)  Separate license required for each place of sale. A license shall be required for each stand, place, room or enclosure or for each suite of rooms or enclosures which are in direct connection or communication to each other where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale. 
(Code 1997, § 12.01; Rep. & Recr. # 731 )  
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Legal drinking age means 21 years of age. 
Underage person means a person who has not attained the legal drinking age. 
(Code 1997, § 12.02; Rep. & Recr. # 731 )  
Sec. 4-3. - General provisions. 
(a)  Terms interchangeable. The words "license" and "permit" as used throughout this chapter shall be interchangeable. 
(b)  License application. 
(1)  Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing 15 days before action by council on forms prescribed by the state department of revenue and filed with the clerk; provided, however, that applications for licenses to be issued under Wis. Stats. §§ 125.26(6) and 125.51(10) shall be filed with the city clerk not less than three days prior to the granting of the application. The premises shall be physically described, including every room and storage space to be covered by the license and including all rooms joined by connecting entrances or not separated by a solid wall. 
(2)  Application to be notarized. Applications shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant as provided by Wis. Stats. § 887.01. 
(3)  List of licensees. By July 15 of each year, the clerk shall forward to the state department of revenue a list containing the name, address and trade name of each person holding a license issued under this section, except a picnic, manager's or operator's license. 
(c)  License fees. At the time the application is made, all fees adopted by resolution by the common council from time to time, shall be paid to the clerk. 
(d)  Granting of licenses. Except as otherwise provided herein, or except as otherwise authorized by the common council, licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the city clerk only with the approval of the common council, 
(e)  Withholding licenses from delinquent applicants. No license shall be issued for any premises for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid or to any person delinquent in payment of such claims to the city. 
(f)  Terms of licenses. All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on June 30 in the year of issuance, unless issued for a shorter term, when they shall expire at midnight of the last effective day of the license, except boat launch licenses, which shall be valid from January 1 to December 31 or unless otherwise provided by this Municipal Code or state laws. 
(g)  Form and expiration of licenses. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date of issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee and, unless sooner revoked, shall expire on June 30 thereafter except as otherwise provided. The clerk shall affix an affidavit as required by Wis. Stats. § 125.04(4). 
(h)  Records of licenses. The city clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued. 
(i)  Display of licenses. All licenses issued hereunder shall be displayed upon the premises or vehicle for which issued or, if carried on the person, shall be displayed to any officer of the city upon request. Every license issued under this section shall be posted and at all times displayed as provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.04(10). No person shall post such license or permit any other person to post it upon premises other than those mentioned in the application, or knowingly deface or destroy such license. 
(j)  Compliance with ordinances required. It shall be a condition of holding a license under this chapter that the licensee complies with all ordinances of the city. Failure to do so shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(k)  Transfer of licenses. All licenses issued hereunder shall be personal to whom issued, and no license shall be transferred unless it meets the criteria of Wis. Stats. § 125.04(12), or in the event of a foreclosure action if so ordered by a court. Wisconsin state statutes do not provide for the automatic transfer of a license to a court-appointed receiver in the case of foreclosure. A request for a transfer of a license shall be in the same form and procedure as required for the issuance of the license for which the transfer has been requested. 
(l)  Exemptions. No license other than a liquor or beer license shall be required under this chapter for any nonprofit educational, charitable, civic, military or religious organization if the activity which would otherwise be licensed is conducted for the benefit of the members or for the benefit of the public generally. 
(m)  Consent to inspection. An applicant for a license under this chapter thereby consents to the entry of police or authorized representatives of the city upon the licensed premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search, and consents to removal from the premises and introduction into evidence in prosecutions for violations of this chapter all things found therein in violation of this chapter or state law. 
(1)  Investigation of applicants. Upon receipt of any application requesting issuance or renewal of any licensed governed by this chapter, the city clerk shall notify the chief of police, building inspector and the Waukesha County department of public health and those officers and departments shall make such investigations as may be required to determine the fitness and qualifications of the applicants and inspect the premises to determine whether the premises sought to be licensed comply with all regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. 
(2)  Action on investigations. Each official required to inspect the premises proposed to be licensed or to investigate the applicant shall report in writing to the city clerk the results of his investigation, together with his recommendation as to whether a license should be granted. The city clerk shall refer such report to the next meeting of the council. 
(n)  Revocations, suspensions, refusals to issue or renew. Except as otherwise provided, any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended, and the city may refuse to issue or renew any license issued under this chapter in accordance with the authority, provisions and procedures established by Wis. Stats. § 125.12, which are incorporated herein by reference. 
(o)  Violators of liquor, beer or wine laws or ordinances. No retail Class "A," Class "B" or "Class C" license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state liquor, wine or fermented malt beverage law or the provision of this section during one year prior to such application. A conviction of a member of a partnership or the partnership itself shall make the partnership or any member thereof ineligible for such license for one year. 
(p)  Health and sanitation requirements. No retail Class "B" or "Class C" license shall be issued for any premises which does not conform to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the state department of industry, labor and human relations pertaining to buildings and plumbing, to the rules and regulations of the state department of health and social services applicable to restaurants and to all such ordinances and regulations adopted by the city. 
(q)  Corporations. No corporation organized under the laws of this state or of any other state or foreign country may be issued any alcohol beverage license or permit unless such corporation meets the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 125.04(6). 
(1)  Age requirement. No license hereunder, except an operator's license, shall be granted to any person who has not attained the legal drinking age. Operator's licenses may be issued only to applicants who have attained the age of 18 years. 
(2)  Effect of revocation of license. Whenever any license has been revoked, at least 12 months shall elapse before another license shall be granted to the person whose license was revoked. 
(3)  Delinquent taxes, assessments and claims. No license shall be issued for any premises for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid, or to any person delinquent in payment of such claims to the city. 
(r)  Class "B" and "Class "C" licensed premises to be on street level. Retail Class "B" or "Class C" license shall be issued only for that portion of a premises located on the street level. This restriction shall not apply to a bona fide club, society or lodge in existence not less than six months prior to application nor prohibit any hotel holding a state permit from supplying beverages in original containers to bona fide patrons in rooms rented by such patrons. 
(s)  Issuance for sales in dwellings prohibited. No license shall be issued to any person for the purpose of possessing, selling or offering for sale any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment. 
(t)  Location. No retail Class "A," Class "B" or "Class C" license shall be issued for premises, the main entrance of which is less than 300 feet from the main entrance of any established public school, parochial school, hospital or church. Such distance shall be measured by the shortest route along the highway from the closest point of the main entrance of such school, church or hospital to the main entrance to such premises. This paragraph shall not apply to premises licensed as such on June 30, 1974, nor shall it apply to any premises licensed as such prior to the occupation of real property within 300 feet thereof by any school, hospital or church building. 
(u)  Temporary Extension of Premises. The common council may grant a temporary extension of any premises for which a Class "B" or Class "C" liquor license had been issued; provided, however, that the premises for which a temporary extension is requested is contiguous to the premises for which the license has been issued. In granting such a request, the common council may impose reasonable conditions, including but not limited to a requirement that the area for which the temporary extension has been granted is fenced or other otherwise enclosed. 
(Code 1997, § 12.03; Rep. & Recr. # 731 ; Cr. # 742 )  
Sec. 4-4. - Classes of licenses and fees. 
There shall be the following classes and denominations of licenses which, when issued by the clerk under the authority of the city council, after payment of the fee adopted by resolution by the common council from time to time, shall permit the holder to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages: 
(1)  Class "A" license for the sale of fermented malt beverages from the premises within the city as provided by Wis. Stats. § 125.25. 
(2)  Class "B" license for the sale of fermented malt beverages from the premises within the city as provided by Wis. Stats. § 125.26. 
(3)  Temporary Class "B" Fermented Malt Beverage Licenses and Temporary Class "B" Wine Licenses as authorized by Wis. Stats. §§ 125.26(6) and 125.51(10). 
a.  The city clerk shall have the authority to approve these temporary licenses, and is hereby delegated the authority to grant these temporary licenses, upon receipt and approval of an application and payment of the fee required for those licenses as provided in this chapter. 
b.  The city clerk may issue up to 20 licenses under this subsection to the same licensee if all of the following apply: 
1.  Each license is issued for the same date and times and the licensee is the sponsor of an event held at multiple locations within the municipality on this date and at these times. 
2.  An admission fee is charged for participation in the event and no additional fee is charged for service of alcohol at the event. 
3.  Within the immediately preceding 12-month period, the municipality has issued licenses under authority of this paragraph for fewer than two events. 
4.  The duration of the event may not exceed one day. 
(4)  Fermented malt beverage wholesaler's license as authorized by Wis. Stats. § 125.28. 
(5)  "Class C" wine license as authorized by Wis. Stats. § 125.51; provided, however, that: 
a.  Requirements. A "Class C" wine license may be issued to a qualified person only if the city's statutory quota prohibits the city from issuing a "Class B" liquor license to that person. 
b.  A "Class C" wine license may not be issued to a foreign corporation or a person acting as agent for or in the employ of another. 
c.  No intoxicating liquor manufacturer, rectifier or wholesaler may hold any direct or indirect interest in any "Class C" wine license or establishment and no "Class C" wine licensee may hold any interest in a wholesale permit or establishment. 
d.  Except in the case of hotels, no person may hold both a "Class A" liquor license and a "Class C" wine license for the same premises or for connecting premises. 
(6)  "Class A" liquor license issued in accordance with the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 125.51. 
(7)  Class "A" liquor license issued in accordance with the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 125.25. 
(8)  Reserve "Class B" liquor license as authorized by Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4)(a)4; provided, however, that a fee of $10,000.00 shall be required for the initial issuance of a reserve "Class B" license, which fee shall be in addition to any other fee required under this chapter. 
(9)  "Class A" cider license. 
a.  In this paragraph, "cider" means any alcohol beverage that is obtained from the fermentation of the juice of apples or pears and that contains not less than 0.5 percent alcohol by volume and not more than 7.0 percent alcohol by volume. "Cider" includes flavored, sparkling, and carbonated cider. 
b.  Notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 125.68(3), upon application, a "Class A" license shall be issued to an applicant of all of the conditions apply: 
1.  The application is made for a "Class A" license containing the condition that retail sales of intoxicating liquor are limited to cider. 
2.  The applicant holds a Class "A" license issued in accordance with the provisions of this Code and Wis. Stats. § 125.25, for the same premises for which the "Class A" license application is made. 
c.  There shall be no annual fee required for issuance of a "Class A" license under this subsection. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, or in Wis. Stats. ch. 125 to the contrary, a person issued a "Class A" license under this subsection may not make retail sales, or provide taste samples, of any intoxicating liquor other than cider. 
(Code 1997, § 12.04; Rep. & Recr. # 731 )  
Sec. 4-5. - Operator's license. 
Upon submittal of an application in a form required by the city clerk, and upon payment of a fee as provided in the city's fee schedule, the city clerk may issue the following operator's licenses: 
(1)  Operators' license authorized and issued in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.17(1)—(3). 
(2)  Temporary operators' license authorized and issued in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.17(4). 
(3)  Provisional operators' license authorized and issued in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.17(5). 
(4)  Managers' license authorized and issued in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 125.18, 125.32(1), and 125.68(1). 
(Code 1997, § 12.05; Rep. & Recr. # 731 )  
Sec. 4-6. - Commencing and cessation of business. 
(a)  If the license is not issued within 60 days of being granted because the conditions set forth in this section have not been met, the conditional granting of the license shall lapse and the license shall become property of the city once again. 
(b)  Cessation of business. If any all combination Class "B" beer and liquor or "Class C" licensee shall suspend or cease doing business for a period of 60 consecutive days, the license shall be subject to revocation by the common council after public hearing. Within 60 days from the issuance of an all combination "Class B" beer and liquor license or "Class C" license, the licensee shall be open for business with adequate stock and equipment. If business is not commenced within such time, the license shall be subject to revocation by the common council after a public hearing. The common council may, for good cause shown, extend such 60-day period. In the event of revocation under this subsection, no refund of license fee shall be made. 
(Code 1997, § 12.06; Rep. & Recr. # 731 )  
Sec. 4-7. - Regulation of licensed premises and licensees. 
(a)  Gambling and disorderly conduct prohibited. Each licensed premises shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner; and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct or gambling shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises. 
(b)  Employment of underage persons. No licensee shall employ any underage person who does not have a valid operator's license to serve, sell or give away any alcohol beverage. 
(c)  Sales by clubs. No club shall sell intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages, except to members and guests invited by members. 
(d)  Safety and sanitation requirements. Each licensed premises shall be maintained and conducted in a sanitary manner and shall be a safe and proper place for the purpose for which used. 
(e)  Serving restrictions. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.17, no person other than the licensee shall serve fermented malt beverages, wine or intoxicating liquor in any place operated under a Class "A," Class "B" or "Class C" alcohol beverage license, unless he shall possess an operator's license or shall be a member of the immediate family of the licensee. 
(f)  Closing hours. No premises for which a wholesale or retail liquor or fermented malt beverage license has been issued shall remain open for the sale of alcohol beverages: 
(1)  If a wholesale license, between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except on Saturday when the closing hour shall be 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  If a retail Class "A" license, between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(3)  If a retail Class "B" or "Class C" license, between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except on Saturdays and Sundays, when the closing hours shall be between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. On January 1, premises operating under a Class "B" or "Class C" license are not required to close. No package, container or bottle sales may be made after 12:00 midnight. 
(4)  Hotels and restaurants, principally furnishing food or lodging to patrons, bowling alleys, indoor horseshoe pitching facilities, curling clubs, golf courses and clubhouses may remain open for conduct of their regular business, but no intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage shall be sold during prohibited hours. 
(Code 1997, § 12.09; Rep. & Recr. # 731 )  
Sec. 4-8. - Penalty. 
In addition to the suspension or revocation of a license issued under this chapter, and in addition to any penalty, forfeiture or restriction provided by Wis. Stats. ch. 125, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided by section 1-4. 
(Code 1997, § 12.10; Rep. & Recr. # 731 )  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Licensing and regulation of animals. 
(a)  Statues adopted. The current and future provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 174, defining and regulating dogs, excluding provisions relating to the penalty to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are adopted and made a part of this section by reference. A violation of any of such provisions constitutes a violation of this section. Any future amendments, revisions, modifications or additions to the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this chapter. 
(b)  Public policy. In the interest of public health, safety and welfare, keeping dog or other animal within the city shall be regulated to prevent them from becoming public nuisances. 
(Code 1997, § 22.01)  
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
At large means that the dog or other animal is off the premises of the owner or keeper and not accompanied and under the control of a person of suitable age able to control the dog or other animal. A dog or other animal shall not be deemed at large if: 
(1)  It is attached to a leash of sufficient strength to restrain the dog or other animal and the leash is held by a person competent to govern the dog or other animal; 
(2)  It is properly restrained within a motor vehicle; 
(3)  It is accompanied by and under the command control of a person competent to govern the dog or other animal; or 
(4)  It is on the private premises of a person other than the owner of the dog or other animal with the permission of the owner of said private property. 
Dangerous dog means: 
(1)  Any dog with a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack or cause serious injury to human beings or domestic animals; 
(2)  Any dog, which without provocation, attacks or bites, or has attacked or bitten a human being or domestic animal causing serious injury; 
(3)  Any dog which has caused less than serious injuries to humans, livestock or domestic animals after the owner was notified or should have known the dog previously injured or caused injury to a person, livestock or domestic animal; 
(4)  Any dog which has been found to be dangerous by a circuit or municipal court in a trial or hearing upon a charge of harboring a dangerous animal; 
(5)  Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting. 
Dog bite means any bite from a dog which occurs without provocation, and causes less than serious injury to a person, livestock or domestic animal. 
Dog fancier means any person in a residential district who keeps, harbors, raises or possesses four or more dogs, over the age of five months. Only one dog fancier permit may be issued to a residential dwelling. 
Guard dog means any dog trained or used to protect persons or property by attacking or threatening to attack any person found within the area patrolled by the dog. 
Owner means any person, including a keeper or custodian, owning, possessing, harboring or having the care, custody, or control, whether temporarily or permanently, of a dog or other animal. 
Premises of the owner shall be defined as the residence of said owner, including the attached property surrounding said residence that is leased or owned by said owner but not including any common area, park or recreational property jointly owned or leased by the members of a homeowners' or tenants' association. 
Residential district means any part of the city on which two or more residences are occupied within a distance of 1,000 feet of each other. 
Serious injury means broken bones or wounds that require sutures. 
(Code 1997, § 22.02)  
Sec. 6-3. - Animals running at large. 
No owner or keeper of any dog or other animal shall permit the same to run at large at any place within the city unless accompanied by and under his physical control. This section shall not prohibit the owner or keeper of a dog or other animal from allowing the animal to run at large upon premises owned or occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal. 
(1)  Confinement of animals. The police department or any other officer appointed by the council shall apprehend any dog or other animal running at large within the city except when the dog or other animal is on the premises of its owner or keeper, or is accompanied by and under the control of its owner or keeper, and confine the same in the Waukesha County humane society, or such other animal protective entity as may be appointed by the common council from time to time. 
(2)  Enforcement. The council shall, from time to time, appoint a qualified officer to apprehend and confine dogs or other animals in a pound as herein provided and such officer shall apprehend and confine herein, and enforce this section, including commencing actions for the collection of any forfeitures imposed. Such action shall be brought in the name of the city. The officer shall be paid such compensation as the council shall determine by resolution. 
(3)  Disposition of unclaimed animals. The keeper of the pound shall keep all dogs or other animals apprehended for seven days at the pound unless sooner claimed by the owner or keeper and, if any dog or other animal is not claimed by the rightful owner within such time, the dog or other animal may be sold for the amount incurred in the apprehending, keeping and care of the dog or other animal, or it may be destroyed in a proper and humane manner. 
(4)  Owner or keeper to pay costs. The owner or keeper of any dog or other animal so confined may reclaim such dog or other animal at any time before disposal as herein provided and upon payment of all costs and charges incurred in apprehension, keeping and care of the dog or other animal. Such fees shall be $10.00 for apprehension and care, if the dog or other animal is reclaimed within 24 hours of apprehension. 
If the dog or other animal is reclaimed at any time after 24 hours of apprehension, up to and including the seventh day, the fee shall be actual charges submitted to the city for the care and keeping of such animal, plus expense of any inoculations or other medical treatment. If the dog or other animal is not licensed, as a further condition of release, the officer shall require the owner to obtain a license therefore from the proper official. 
(Code 1997, § 22.03)  
Sec. 6-4. - Dog licenses. 
(a)  Licenses required. 
(1)  Every owner of a dog more than five months of age on January 1 of any year, or five months of age within the license year, shall annually, or within 30 days from the date such dog becomes five months of age, at the time and in the manner provided by law for the payment of personal property taxes, pay to the clerk, his dog license tax and obtain a license therefore. Prior to the issuance of the license the owner shall present evidence that the dog is currently immunized against rabies. A dog is considered to be unlicensed if a valid license tag is not attached to a collar which is kept on the animal. 
(2)  Any person in a residential district shall apply for a dog fancier permit with the clerk's office. Dogs, as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act, that are individually trained to perform tasks for people with disabilities are not counted when determining the total number of dogs in this section. The dog fancier permit shall expire on December 31 of the year issued, and must be renewed annually. The application shall include the applicant's name, address, phone numbers, fax numbers, and e-mail address, signature of the applicant, number and breed of dogs, and shall be accompanied by a plat of survey or other official documentation identifying the square footage of the residential property. 
The zoning administrator, or the zoning administrator's designee shall review and either approve or disapprove all applications for a dog fancier permit. At least two weeks prior to acting on an application, written notice of the application shall be provided to all property owners whose properties are located within 300 feet of the residential property owned by the applicant. 
(3)  All dogs shall be maintained in a healthy condition or, if ill, shall be given appropriate treatment on a timely basis. 
(4)  The quarters in which the dogs are kept shall be maintained in a clean condition and good state of repair. 
(5)  Enclosures shall be large enough to provide sufficient freedom of movement for the dogs contained therein. 
(6)  All yards, pens, premises, enclosures and animals shall be kept free of pest infestations. 
(7)  There shall be no odor, noise, nuisance or dog control issues. 
(8)  All premises, quarters, yards, pens or other places where dogs are kept shall be subject to inspection by city officials at reasonable hours. 
(9)  An animal is considered to be unlicensed if a valid license tag is not attached to a collar which is kept on the animal. 
(10)  The determination of the zoning administrator to either approve or deny the application may, within 15 days following the decision to either approve or deny the application, be appealed by the applicant or any other person aggrieved by the decision. Any such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk. The city clerk shall refer the matter to the plan commission which, after providing notice to all interested persons, may affirm with conditions or reverse the decision of the zoning administrator. All decisions of the plan commission shall be final and binding as to all parties. 
(b)  License fees. License fees for neutered/spayed and unneutered/unspayed dogs and a fancier permit shall be set by resolution adopted by the common council from time to time. The license year commences on January 1 and ends the following December 31. 
(c)  Late fees. A late fee shall be collected from every owner of a dog five months of age or over if the owner failed to obtain a license prior to April 1 of each year or within 30 days of acquiring ownership of a licensable dog or if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before the dog reached licensable age in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 174.05(5). 
(d)  Collecting official. Per Wis. Stats. § 174.065(1), the collecting officials for the issuance of dog licenses are the City of Delafield. 
(Code 1997, § 22.04)  
Sec. 6-5. - Ownership restrictions. 
(a)  No owner may keep, have custody of, own, possess, harbor or have the care, custody or control of a dog which: 
(1)  Is at large; or 
(2)  Assaults or attacks any person; or 
(3)  By frequent and habitual howling, yelping, barking, meowing or otherwise shall cause serious annoyance or disturbance to two persons, each of whom lives in a separate residence. Alternatively, the complaint may be based on the personal observation of an on-duty police officer or humane officer. 
(b)  Any person violating this section is subject to those penalties imposed by Wis. Stats. § 174.02(2), and where appropriate, shall be subject to the terms and jurisdiction of a court order issued in accordance the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 174.02(3). 
(Code 1997, § 22.05)  
Sec. 6-6. - Control of rabies. 
(a)  Any police officer or the Waukesha County humane society or any of its agents may impound any dog or other animal which, from the appearance or conduct of such dog or other animal, appears to be infected with the disease known as hydrophobia or rabies. 
(b)  Any person who shall suspect that any dog or other animal is infected with hydrophobia or rabies shall report his suspicion to the police or health authorities, describing the dog or other animal and giving the name of the owner, if known; any such dog or other animal shall, upon demand of any police officer or health officer or the Waukesha County humane society or any of its agents, be delivered to such person and if, upon examination by the health authorities or the Waukesha County humane society or any of its agents, the dog or other animal shall prove, in fact, to be infected with such disease, the dog or other animal may be killed by any such officer. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any dog or other animal infected with hydrophobia or rabies or any dog or cat known to be bitten by a dog or cat known to have been infected with hydrophobia or rabies. 
(d)  Any person who knows that a dog or other animal has bitten any person shall immediately report such fact to a police officer or health officer and, upon notification of such fact, the owner or keeper of such dog or other animal shall confine such dog or other animal for at least 14 days thereafter and shall not release it without the written approval of a licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 1997, § 22.06)  
Sec. 6-7. - Humanely destroying of dogs. 
Dogs which cannot be brought to an animal shelter or impounded because of inability of the owner or police officer to extricate or capture an animal which the officer has reasonable cause to believe may be dangerous or infected with any dangerous or incurable disease or in any painfully crippled condition may be destroyed by a police officer, or veterinarian if available. 
(Code 1997, § 22.07)  
Sec. 6-8. - Animal waste. 
(a)  No owner, keeper or walker of any dog or other animal shall permit, allow or have his dog or other animal discharge such animal's excreta upon any public or private property other than the property of the owner of the dog or other animal within the city if such owner, keeper or walker does not immediately thereafter remove and clean up such animal's excreta from the public or private property. 
(b)  The owner or person having immediate control of an animal shall promptly remove and dispose of in a sanitary manner any excreta left or deposited by the animal on public sidewalks, curbside gutters, hiking-biking trails, public streets, public rights-of-way in front of residential dwelling units or on private property without the owner's permission. This shall not be applicable in cases in which a person is being assisted by a guide eye dog. 
(c)  All pens, yards, structures or areas where animals are kept shall be maintained in a nuisance-free manner. Droppings and manure shall be removed regularly and disposed of properly so as not to attract insects or rodents, become unsightly or cause objectionable odors. 
(Code 1997, § 22.08)  
Sec. 6-9. - Humane officer. 
The common council may contract with the Waukesha County humane society for a one-year term who shall have the qualifications required and exercise the powers set forth by Wis. Stats. ch. 173, and all subsequent amendments. Such contract may be made upon such terms and conditions as the common council shall deem necessary and which are not in conflict with state law. Such contract shall be renewed annually by operation of this chapter and approved by action of the common council. 
(Code 1997, § 22.09)  
Sec. 6-10. - Appeals of abatement orders of humane officer. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 173 and all subsequent amendments, abatement orders of the humane officer may be appealed to the police chief or his designee, who may modify or withdraw such orders. 
(Code 1997, § 22.10)  
Sec. 6-11. - Dangerous dogs. 
(a)  Dangerous dogs. No person shall harbor, keep or maintain within the city limits of the City of Delafield any dangerous dog. 
(b)  Violators of this section shall be summoned to appear before the municipal court. Whenever any person is charged with harboring a dangerous dog as defined in this chapter, that person shall, to the satisfaction of the police chief, confine said dog until the trial on the citation. If the owner fails to confine the dog within 48 hours of the issuance of the citation, the Delafield police department shall impound the dog until the trial on the citation. If the dog is determined by plea or trial to be a dangerous dog pursuant to law, the court shall be empowered and required to order such disposition of the dog as shall best safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the general public. The court shall further order the dog impounded until it is satisfied that arrangements have been made to comply with the court's order. Failure to make such arrangements within seven days of the hearing shall be deemed to constitute consent by the owner to destruction of the dog and the court shall order the destruction of the dog by humane means. 
(c)  No dog shall be declared to be dangerous or dangerous if the dog caused injury or damage to a person who, at the time, was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or if the dog was protecting its owner from attack by a human being. 
(d)  The owner of a dog found to be dangerous pursuant to this chapter shall provide certification of the implantation of an identification microchip if the disposition of the dangerous dog is not the destruction of the dog. The microchip shall be an American Veterinary Identification Device (AVID) or equivalent. The chip implanted in the dog shall be consistent with the AVID technology and readable by an AVID scanner. 
(Code 1997, § 22.11)  
Sec. 6-12. - Noisy dogs prohibited. 
No person shall keep a dog which by barking, fighting or howling disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(Code 1997, § 22.12)  
Sec. 6-13. - Keeping guard dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain guard dogs in any area for the protection of persons or property unless the following provisions are met: 
(1)  The dogs shall be confined to an enclosed area adequate to ensure they will not escape or shall be under the absolute control of a handler at all times when not securely enclosed; and 
(2)  The owner or other persons in control of the premises upon which a guard dog is maintained shall post warning signs on, over or next to all exterior doors stating that such a dog is on the premises. At least one such sign shall be posted at each driveway or entranceway to said premises. Such signs shall be in lettering clearly visible from either the curbline or a distance of 50 feet, whichever is lesser, and shall contain a telephone number where some person responsible for controlling such guard dog can be reached 24 hours a day; and 
(3)  Prior to the placing of a guard dog on any property, the person or persons responsible for the placing shall inform the police department and the fire department, in writing, of their intention to post said dog or dogs, the number of dogs to be posted, the locations where said dog or dogs will be posted, the approximate length of time said dog or dogs will be guarding the area, the daily hours said dog or dogs will be guarding the area, the breed, sex, age and rabies tag number of said dog or dogs. Such notice must be renewed every six months. 
(Code 1997, § 22.13)  
Sec. 6-14. - Dogs trained for animal fighting. 
It is unlawful in the City of Delafield to own or possess any animal used or that has been used or trained in the sport of animal fighting. 
(Code 1997, § 22.14)  
Sec. 6-15. - Horses and horseback riding. 
(a)  Areas of riding. Horseback riding shall be allowed in the city on the private property of the rider, the property of another with his consent, or designated bridle trails on public or private property. 
(b)  Riding on public property restricted. Horseback riding upon a traveled portion of any public highway shall not be allowed, except to cross the same, or where no shoulders exist riding in the right hand lane will be permitted only between the hours of sunrise and sunset. Horseback riding shall not be allowed in school yards, public parks or on other public property. The restrictions in this section shall not apply when the horseback riding is performed as a participant in connection with a public event such as a parade or fair. 
(c)  Orderly riding. People shall only be allowed to ride horses in the city that are thoroughly broken and properly restrained with a bridle. No person shall engage in a horse race on public property within the city. People shall be required to ride a horse with proper care and in such manner as not to endanger the safety or property of himself or others. 
(d)  Running at large or unattended prohibited. No owner, keeper or person having a horse or horses under his control shall allow the same to run at large. No person shall allow any horse under his control to damage public or private property nor shall any person hitch or tie a horse to any rock, tree or shrubbery or allow the animal to remain unattended on private or public property without proper consent. 
(e)  Stabling of horses. No person shall keep or stable any horse, except as permitted by chapter 52 of the Municipal Code, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Delafield. 
(f)  Neglected or abandoned; police power. Any police officer may shelter and care for any horse or other animal found to be cruelly exposed to the weather, starved, neglected or abandoned, and may deliver such animal to another person to be sheltered, cared for and given medical attention, if necessary. In all cases, the owner, if known, shall be immediately notified and the person having possession of the animal shall have a lien thereon for his care, keeping, medical attention and expenses of notice. Whenever, in the opinion of a police officer, an animal is hopelessly injured or diseased so as to be beyond the probability of recovery, it shall be lawful for such police officer to kill such animal. 
(Code 1997, § 22.15)  
Sec. 6-16. - Regulation of animals (except dogs). 
In addition to any other restrictions contained in this chapter, the following provisions shall apply to animals other than dogs: 
(1)  Wild animals—Prohibition on keeping. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, possess or have the care, custody, or control, within the city, of any poisonous reptile or other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile, or any non-domesticated animal or reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities. As used herein, the term "wild animal" does not include captive-bred species of caged birds, rodents, turtles, fish, and non-poisonous, non-constricting snakes. 
(2)  Wild animals—Release. It shall be unlawful for any person who keeps, maintains, has possession of, or has the custody, care or control of any animal or reptile having wild, vicious or dangerous propensities to release that animal, or to relinquish possession, custody, care or control of that animal to anyone other than a law enforcement officer, humane officer or any other organization or individual who has the lawful authority to take possession of the animal. 
(3)  Pet shops. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to licensed pet shops, zoological gardens, circuses, professional animal acts and wild life exhibits if: 
a.  Their location conforms to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the city. 
b.  All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors. 
c.  Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape. 
d.  No person lives within 100 feet of the quarters in which the animals are kept. 
(Code 1997, § 22.16)  
Sec. 6-17. - Penalties. 
In addition to any penalty or restriction contained in any provision of this chapter, any person who violates any term, condition or provision of this chapter shall be subject to penalties and enforcement actions authorized by section 1-4. 
(Code 1997, § 22.17)  
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 8-1—8-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 8-19. - Building codes adopted. 
(a)  Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code chapters SPS 320—325 are adopted. 
(b)  Wisconsin Commercial Building Code chapters SPS 361—366 are adopted with the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 30.43(3), Area. All private garages shall be not more than 1,200 sq. ft. in area. 
(2)  Section 30.43(7)(b), Attached Private Garages. An attached private garage may have a door connecting directly into the principal building. Such door shall be a metal or solid wood door not less than 1¾ inches in thickness. A maximum 100 sq. in. of ¼ inch stationary wire glass window may be permitted in such door. 
(Code 1997, § 14.01; Rep. & Recr. MSC '85; Am. MSC '85) 
( Ord. No. 760 § 1, 12-2-2019)  
Sec. 8-20. - Permits and inspection. 
(a)  Permit required. No building or any part thereof shall be erected within the city or ground broken for the same, except as herein provided, until a permit therefor shall first have been obtained from the building inspector by the owner or his authorized agent. The term "building," as used in this section, shall include any building or structure, and any enlargement, alteration, heating or cooling ventilation installation, moving or demolishing, or anything affecting the fire hazards or safety of any building or structure. Such permit shall lapse and be void unless operations under the permit are commenced within six months of the date of issuance thereof. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the building inspector and shall state the name and address of the owner of the land and also of the owner of the building, if different, and the legal description of the land upon which the building is to be located. A map shall be prepared by a Wisconsin-registered land surveyor showing the location and elevation of the following: 
a.  Crown of street, edge of pavement, top of curb, back of walk and ditch elevation, where available. Such data points shall be obtained at the lot lines extended. 
b.  All existing culverts, ditches and drainageways on and adjacent to property within 100 feet of lot lines. 
c.  The corners of the lot and ground grade at the outside perimeters of the proposed building or buildings. 
d.  The 100-year floodline and elevation. 
(2)  The applicant shall indicate a suggested first floor elevation for the proposed building, which in general shall not be less than 12 inches plus or minus three inches minimum, 24 inches maximum for lots two acres and over or one percent for lots of less than two acres above the centerline elevation of the existing street and/or the average of first floor or ground grade elevations of adjacent properties on unusually shaped lots. On lots with special conditions, the elevation heights for the first floor elevations may be waived with the approval of the DPW superintendent and the building inspector. 
(c)  Plans. With each application there shall be submitted two complete sets of plans and specifications, including a plot plan showing the location of the proposed building with respect to adjoining streets, alleys, lot lines and buildings. Plans for buildings required to comply with the State Building Code shall bear a stamp of approval from the state department of industry, labor and human relations. Such plans and specifications shall be submitted in duplicate; one set shall be returned after approval as herein provided; the other set shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer. 
(d)  Waiver of plans. If the building inspector finds that the character of the work is sufficiently described in the application, they may waive the filing of plans for alterations, repairs or moving provided the cost of such work does not exceed $2,000.00. 
(e)  Approval of plans. If the building inspector determines that the proposed building will comply in every respect with the provisions of this Municipal Code and all applicable laws of the state, he shall officially approve and stamp one set of plans for the inspector to return to the owner, and shall issue a building permit therefor which shall be kept and displayed at the site of the proposed building. After being approved, the plans and specifications shall not be altered in any respect which involves the safety of the building or occupants, except with the written consent of the building inspector. 
(f)  Permit fees. Fees as from time to time set by the city council by resolution shall be paid to the building inspector before any building permit is issued. Whenever any work is commenced prior to obtaining a permit from the building inspector, the person on whose property such work has been commenced shall be liable for double the fees. 
(g)  Records. The building inspector shall keep a record of all permits, fees and inspections. He shall submit to the city council a report of permits, to whom issued, value of proposed building, fee and inspection made. 
(h)  Inspection of work. The builder shall notify the building inspector when ready, and the building inspector shall inspect all buildings upon completion of the foundation forms, or before the foundation is laid, and again when ready for lath and plaster, or before paneling is applied. After completion, he shall make a final inspection of all new buildings and alterations. 
(i)  Revocation. If the building inspector shall find, at any time, that any laws, regulations or specifications are not being complied with, and that the holder of the permit refuses to conform after a written warning or instruction has been issued to him, he shall revoke the building permit by written notice posted at the site of the work. When any such permit is revoked, no person shall do any further work thereunder until the permit is reissued, excepting such work as the building inspector may order to be done as a condition precedent to the reinstatement of permit, or as he may require for the preservation of human life and safety or property. A revocation hereunder may be reviewed under chapter 2, article V. 
(j)  Report of violations. All police officers shall report at once to the building inspector any building, electrical or plumbing work which is being carried on without a permit as required by this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 14.02; Rep. & Recr. MSC '85; Am. #255; Am. #245)  
Sec. 8-21. - Preservation of topography. 
In order to protect property owners from damage due to change in the existing grade of adjoining lands, and to aid in preserving and protecting the natural beauty and character of the landscape, no change in the existing topography of any land shall be made which would result in increasing any portion of the slope to a ratio greater than three horizontal to one vertical, within a distance of 20 feet from any property line or from any street line, or from the natural shore or bank of any lake or stream, except with the approval of the plan commission; or which would alter the existing drainage or topography in any way as to adversely affect highways, sidewalks or adjoining property. In no case shall any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the material involved and all slopes shall be protected against erosion. 
(Code 1997, § 14.03; Rep. & Recr. MSC '85)  
Sec. 8-22. - Fees for occupancy bonds. 
The following fees are established for occupancy bonds in the city for new construction. Occupancy bonds shall be refunded to the person or business that deposited the check. Refunds shall be made only after completed certificate of occupancy is presented to the city clerk's office. 
Residential 
1-family dwelling 	$1,000.00 
2-family dwelling 	$2,000.00 
3-family and larger dwelling 	$1,000.00* 
Non-Residential 
$0 to $100,000.00 of value 	$2,000.00 
$100,000.00 to $250,000.00 of value 	$4,000.00 
$250,000.00 to $500,000.00 of value 	$7,000.00 
Over $500,000.00 of value 	$10,000.00 
*Plus $500.00 per unit 
 
(Code 1997, § 14.04; Rep. & Recr. MSC '85; #252; #377; #539)  
Sec. 8-23. - Building inspector. 
(a)  Office created. There is hereby created the office of building inspector who shall perform such duties as are specified in this chapter and shall have general management of the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Appointment, term and compensation. Appointment shall be pursuant to section 2-21. The building inspector must be state certified in one- and two-family dwelling codes. Compensation shall be fixed by the council. 
(Code 1997, § 14.05; Rep. & Recr. MSC '85; Cr. #245)  
Sec. 8-24. - Penalty. 
Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty as provided by section 1-4. 
(Code 1997, § 14.10; Rep. & Recr. MSC '85)  
Secs. 8-25—8-51. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 8-52. - State plumbing code adopted. 
(a)  Wisconsin Plumbing Code chapters SPS 381—387 are adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter with the same force and effect as though set out in full. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of such regulations shall constitute a violation of this chapter, punishable according to the penalties provided herein. 
(b)  Codes available on Wisconsin Safety and Professional Services website. 
(Code 1997, § 15.01) 
( Ord. No. 761 , § 1, 12-2-2019)  
Sec. 8-53. - Plumbing defined. 
In this chapter, "plumbing" means and includes: 
(1)  All piping, fixtures, appliances, equipment, devices and appurtenances in connection with the water supply, water distribution and drainage systems, including hot water storage tanks, water softeners and water heaters connected with such water and drainage systems, and the installation thereof. 
(2)  The construction, connection or installation of any drain or waste piping system from the outside or proposed outside foundation walls of any building to the mains or other sewerage system terminal within bounds of or beneath an area subject to easement for highway purposes, including private domestic sewage treatment and disposal systems, and the alteration of any such systems, drains or waste piping. 
(3)  The water service piping from the outside or proposed outside foundation walls of any building to the main or other water utility service terminal within bounds of or beneath an area subject to easement for highway purposes and its connections. 
(4)  The water pressure systems other than municipal systems as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 144. 
(5)  A plumbing and drainage system so designed and vent piping so installed as to keep the air within the system in free circulation and movement; to prevent with a margin of safety unequal air pressures of such force as might blow, siphon or affect trap seals or retard the discharge from plumbing fixtures or permit sewer air to escape into the building; to prohibit cross-connection, contamination or pollution of the potable water supply and distribution systems; and to provide an adequate supply of water to properly serve, cleanse and operate all fixtures, equipment, appurtenances and appliances served by the plumbing system. 
(Code 1997, § 15.02)  
Sec. 8-54. - Plumbing/HVAC inspector. 
(a)  Office created. There is hereby created the office of plumbing/HVAC inspector who shall perform such duties as are specified in this chapter and shall have general management of the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Appointment, term and compensation. Appointment shall be pursuant to section 2-21. The plumbing/HVAC inspector shall be a licensed plumber and state certified in plumbing and HVAC. Compensation shall be fixed by the council. 
(c)  Duties and authority. 
(1)  General. The plumbing/HVAC inspector shall enforce all provisions of this chapter and all other state and city provisions relating to the construction, installation, alteration and repair of all plumbing within the city and shall make such inspections, perform such tests and issue such orders as may be necessary for such enforcement. 
(2)  Authority to enter premises. 
a.  In the discharge of his duties, the plumbing/HVAC inspector or his authorized agent may enter any building upon presentation of the proper credentials during reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and may require the production of any permit or license required hereunder. No person shall interfere with the inspector or his authorized agent while in the performance of his duties and any person so interfering shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to a penalty as provided in section 8-60. 
b.  If consent to entry to personal or real properties, which are not public buildings or to portions of public buildings which are not open to the public for inspection purposes, has been denied, the plumbing/HVAC inspector shall obtain a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stats. §§ 66.122 and 66.123. 
(3)  Permits. The plumbing/HVAC inspector or his authorized agent shall prepare suitable forms for permit applications and permits, shall take applications and issue to qualified applicants permits as required for all work contemplated by this chapter and shall maintain suitable records of the permits issued. He shall monthly submit permit fees collected by his office to the city clerk. 
(4)  Records and reports. 
a.  To the city council. The plumbing/HVAC inspector shall keep in his office a daily record of all the transactions of his office, including permits issued and fees received, and shall make such reports thereon to the city council as it may require. 
b.  To the department of industry, labor and human relations. (Am. MSC '89) The plumbing/HVAC inspector shall make such reports to the department of industry, labor and human relations as are required under Wis. Stats. § 145.04(3). 
c.  Record of special locations. The plumbing/HVAC inspector shall keep a record of all sewer and water connections and shall make maps showing the locations of the same and the positions of all house drains, connections, junctions and other data necessary for the efficient operation of his office. 
(5)  Stop work orders. The plumbing/HVAC inspector may order work stopped on the construction, installation, alteration or repair of plumbing when such work is being done in violation of this chapter. Work so stopped shall not be resumed, except with written permission of the plumbing/HVAC inspector, provided if the stop work order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written order within a reasonable period of time. 
(Code 1997, § 15.03; #245)  
Sec. 8-55. - Plumbing permits. 
(a)  Required. No work contemplated by this chapter shall be started until a permit therefor has been obtained from the plumbing inspector or his authorized agent, provided no permit shall be required for minor repairs to faucets or the removal of stoppages in soil and waste pipes. 
(b)  Application. The application shall be in writing upon forms which the plumbing inspector shall provide and shall include the name of the owner and the description of the property on which the work is to be done, along with such pertinent information as the plumbing/HVAC inspector may require and shall state that the property owner and the applicant shall be bound by and subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Plot plan required. 
(1)  Before a permit to install plumbing may be issued, a plot plan of the premises upon which the plumbing is to be installed may be required and, if required, shall have been approved by the building inspector and the plumbing supervisor. This plot plan shall include the following: 
a.  The size of the building and its location on the lot. 
b.  The size and location of the proposed system of private sewage disposal. 
c.  The location in feet of all water wells not on the lot but within 50 feet of it. 
d.  The location of the water well on the lot. 
e.  The location in feet of any system of private sewage disposal that is less than 20 feet from the lot. 
f.  The slope or slopes of the land surface of the lot in feet per 100 feet. 
g.  The location of all percolation test holes and the date of the test of each hole. This means the rate in minutes for the water to fall one inch, plus any data from borings if needed. 
(2)  No permit to install plumbing may be issued unless the lot on which the system of private sewage disposal is to be installed is large enough to install such a system in full compliance with Wis. Admin. Code § H62.20. This shall not apply to plumbing to be installed inside an existing building. 
(3)  Percolation test data shall be accepted only from a person or firm that have been certified and registered with the city council or board. 
(4)  Each application shall be approved by the local plumbing supervisor before a permit to install plumbing may be issued. Licensed master plumbers only may receive such permits, with the exception that a permit may be issued to a property owner to install plumbing in a single family residence which is owned by such owner as his home. 
(d)  Issuance, term, suspension and revocation. When the plumbing inspector is satisfied that the work proposed by the applicant can be done in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and after the appropriate fees have been paid to him, he shall issue the permit. Such permit shall be good for the continuous performance of the work named thereon. A permit shall automatically expire when work ceases for a period of 60 days without good and reasonable cause for same and shall automatically expire on completion of the work for which it was issued; provided the plumbing inspector may, upon notice, suspend or revoke such permit for violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Restrictions on issuance. 
(1)  No plumbing permit shall be issued to any person who is in violation of this chapter until such violation has been corrected. 
(2)  No plumbing permit shall be issued to any person against whom an order issued by the plumbing inspector is pending, provided this restriction may be waived by the plumbing inspector. 
(f)  Appeals for failure to issue, suspension and revocation. Any person directly interested who is aggrieved by the decision of the plumbing inspector to refuse to issue a permit or to suspend or revoke such permit or to order work stopped under section 8-54(c)(5) may obtain review of such determination under chapter 2, article V. 
(g)  Fees. (Am. #245) Fees as from time to time set by the city council by resolution shall be paid to the plumbing/HVAC inspector before any plumbing or HVAC permit is issued. Whenever any work is commenced prior to obtaining a permit from the plumbing/HVAC inspector, the person on whose property such work has been commenced shall be liable for double the fees. 
(Code 1997, § 15.04)  
Sec. 8-56. - Plumbers to be licensed. 
All plumbing work shall be done only by a plumber licensed by the state for such work, provided a property owner may make repairs or installations in a single family building owned and occupied by him as his home if a permit therefor is issued and the work is done in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 15.05)  
Sec. 8-57. - Registration of plumbers. 
(a)  To be on file. All master plumbers engaged in the business of plumbing in the city and all journeymen plumbers and apprentice plumbers working at the plumbing trade in the city shall register with the plumbing supervisor, who shall keep such registration on file in his office. 
(b)  Information to be supplied. Such registration shall consist of the full name and address, license number and current receipt number of each master or journeyman licensee. For an apprentice, the year of apprenticeship and the shop to which he is indentured shall be indicated. 
(c)  Registration requirements limited. The purpose of this section is solely to provide for the administration of state licensing requirements and this chapter. No fee shall be charged for any plumber's registration, nor shall any information other than that specified in subsection (b) of this section be required. 
(Code 1997, § 15.06)  
Sec. 8-58. - Sewer lateral bond. 
The city is constructing a local sewer system with mandatory connection required. In order to assure sewer connection in compliance with city, county and state plumbing codes, the city council deems it in the public interest to require a bond to insure compliance with all applicable codes. Accordingly, before a permit may be issued for construction of a lateral to serve private property, the person applying for such permit shall file with the city clerk a license bond in the amount of $5,000.00, conditioned upon his completion of such work in a manner consistent with all applicable codes. Such bond shall apply to all sewer lateral permits for construction in the city for a period of one year, from the date of receipt of such bond, and shall be renewed annually, with renewals filed with the city clerk. A license bond shall remain on file until after final inspection of all sewer lateral construction by the permittee and shall be released only upon recommendation of the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1997, § 15.07)  
Sec. 8-59. - Septic tanks and seepage beds. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Seepage bed is similar to a seepage trench but is more than three feet wide and shall have more than one line of drainage tiling laid over the filtering material. 
Seepage trench means a trench in which a layer of crushed stone or other loose material has been installed for the purpose of filtering septic tank effluent before it is absorbed into the subsoil. 
(b)  Requirements. 
(1)  A septic tank manhole is required and a four-inch diameter cleanout shall be installed directly over the center of the tank inlet baffle and extended to the grade. This cleanout shall be of the same materials and design as the house sewer cleanout. When desired, in writing, by the owner of a private home, this cleanout may be just under the sod if it is plainly marked or otherwise made easy to locate. 
(2)  The minimum distance that a septic tank shall be from any building is five feet. Septic tanks shall be no less than ten feet from any basement wall. 
(3)  The house sewer from inside of the building to the septic tank shall be of cast iron pipe with leaded joints that are well caulked, or type M copper tubing. 
(4)  All household waste shall be piped to the septic tank, this includes all floor draining. 
(5)  Percolation tests are to be made as specified in Wis. Admin. Code § H65.06(4). The bottom area shall be based upon results of these tests. 
(6)  The excavated area shall be covered with crushed stone or slag not less than three-fourths inch in diameter and to a depth of one foot. This stone or slag shall be graded with a uniform grade of four inches in 100 feet. The seepage tiling or piping should be laid on this and shall have the same grade. The whole area shall be covered with 15 lb. tarred felt or equal and then the trenches or beds may be backfilled. 
(7)  The minimum trench width shall be 24 inches at the bottom. No seepage tile or pipe shall be installed to discharge over a width of stone more than 36 inches across. Seepage beds may not have tiling more than 36 inches apart. 
(8)  Seepage trenches shall not be less than eight feet apart, except at the starting point. 
(9)  No single length, or any length, or seepage tile or piping shall be more than 100 feet long. To accomplish this a distribution box, or automatic siphon, shall be installed. This distribution box shall not be less than 18 inches in diameter, or if of a different shape, the cross sectional area inside the box shall be not less than 255 square inches. The box shall have no bottom. All inlets and outlets shall be not less than two inches above the earth bottom of the box. The box may be made of concrete, masonry or metal and shall have a manhole extended to the grade. A seepage pit may be installed in place of a distribution box. 
(c)  Pump installation. 
(1)  All water pumps shall be installed in compliance with the Wisconsin Well Construction and Pump Installation Code as of April 10, 1953, and any future amendments to this code. This code is hereby made a part of this section by reference. 
(2)  This section does not obligate the plumbing inspector, the installer or the city to guarantee how long any private sewage disposal system will operate in a satisfactory manner. When the provisions of this section have been fully complied with, the resulting system shall give the maximum results that the subsoil is capable of producing. 
(3)  No part of any septic system shall be located within 50 feet of any lakes, streams, rivers or creeks. 
(d)  Street openings. 
(1)  No openings in streets, alleys or other public ways to install plumbing will be permitted when the ground is frozen, except when necessary. In opening any street or other public way, all materials for paving or ballasting shall be removed with the least possible injury or loss and together with the excavated material from the trenches shall be placed where the least practicable inconvenience to the public will be caused, and admit the free passage of water along the gutters. 
(2)  All openings made in the public streets or alleys in accordance with permission given pursuant hereto shall be enclosed with sufficient barriers, and red lamps shall be maintained upon the same at night and all other necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public against accidents from the beginning to the completion of the work. Sewers and drains may be laid only on condition that the excavator or plumber is bonded as herein mentioned for all damages that may result from his neglect of necessary precaution against all accidents to persons or property of others. 
(3)  In opening a trench on any street or lot, the sidewalk materials, sand, gravel and earth, or whatever material is removed or penetrated, must be replaced in precisely the same condition and relation to the remainder as it was before. All rubbish must be removed at once, leaving the street, or sidewalk in perfect repair and must be so maintained for a period of one year thereafter. All gas, water and electric lines or conduits must be protected from injury or settling in a manner approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(4)  When any excavation is made in a permanently paved road or street or in any road or street which is to be permanently paved, all clay or hard pan must be removed and the excavation entirely backfilled with sand or gravel thoroughly wet and consolidated. Any tunnel dug in such road or street shall be backfilled with concrete in a manner approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1997, § 15.08)  
Sec. 8-60. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1997, § 15.10)  
Secs. 8-61—8-78. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 8-79. - Electrical code. 
This article shall be known as the electrical code and shall regulate the alteration, installation or repair of electrical wiring, electrical equipment or devices. 
(Code 1997, § 16.01)  
Sec. 8-80. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply in all respects to the installation of electrical wiring, including service entrance wiring, equipment, devices, fixtures and fixed appliances within or on all buildings, structures and premises, and in the alterations, replacement, changes and repairs to existing electrical wiring systems as well as new installations. 
(Code 1997, § 16.02)  
Sec. 8-81. - Purpose. 
The purpose and object of this article is to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by the safeguarding of persons and property from the hazards arising from the use of electricity by establishing certain minimum standards for the installation and maintenance of electrical wiring and equipment requiring that permits be issued and inspection be made of all electrical work covered by this chapter and fixing a penalty for the violation of any of the provisions thereof. 
(Code 1997, § 16.03)  
Sec. 8-82. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved means acceptable to the authority enforcing this chapter. 
Electrical wiring, electrical system andelectrical installation are synonymous and mean all materials, conductors, raceways, fittings, devices, equipment, appliances, fixture, apparatus and the like, used as a part or in connection with an electrical installation. 
Electrical work means any act involved with installing, altering or maintaining an electrical system, which act ordinarily requires the use of tools. 
State code. The provisions and regulations of the State Electrical Code and the current National Electrical Code and amendments thereto are hereby made a part of this article by reference and shall extend over and govern the installation of all electrical installations, alterations or repairs in the city. 
(Code 1997, § 16.04) 
( Ord. No. 767 , § 1, 2-17-2020)  
Sec. 8-83. - Office of electrical inspector. 
(a)  Office created. There is hereby created the office of electrical inspector who shall perform such duties as are specified in this chapter and shall have general management of the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Appointment. Appointment shall be pursuant to section 2-21. The electrical inspector shall be state certified to conduct all electrical inspections, issue permits and licenses. Compensation shall be fixed by the council. 
(c)  Duties. The duties of the electrical inspector shall be as follows: 
(1)  To receive applications for and to issue electrical permits, collect permit fees and issue inspection certificates required for this chapter and file the proper affidavit with Wisconsin Electric Power Co. upon inspection of all service, both temporary and permanent. 
(2)  To make a thorough inspection and examination of all electrical installations to insure that this work is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter when notified by the person to whom the permit was issued. 
(3)  To notify any person installing, owning, using or operating any electrical system found to be improperly installed or in a dangerous or unsafe condition to correct the work or place the wiring in a safe condition within ten days. Failure to comply with any such order shall constitute a violation of this chapter subject to the penalty thereof. 
(d)  Authority. The electrical inspector shall have the right at any reasonable time to enter any building or premises, except occupied dwellings, in the discharge of his official duties. He shall be given prompt access upon notification to the proper authority and shall have the right to order discontinuance of electrical service to any building or premises or parts thereof where he is denied access or entry. No person shall interfere with the electrical inspector in the performance of his duties or refuse to permit him upon the premises. Upon request, the electrical inspector shall show his credentials. 
(e)  Records. The electrical inspector shall keep a complete record of: 
(1)  All applications and electrical permits issued regularly, numbered in the order of their issue. 
(2)  All permit fees collected showing the date of their receipt and delivery to the city clerk and filing of duplicate copies of permits with the city clerk no later than the tenth of the month following issuance. 
(3)  All inspections made, inspection certificates issued and other official work performed under the provisions of this chapter so arranged or filed to afford prompt information concerning the administration of this chapter. 
(f)  Reports. The electrical inspector shall make an annual report to the city council showing a general summary of the work of his office. 
(Code 1997, § 16.05; #245; 10-11-79)  
Sec. 8-84. - Registration of electrical contractors. 
No person shall be issued a permit to install any electrical wiring until they have first registered with the electrical inspector, obtained a copy of this chapter and have procured an electrical license as shown in section 8-85. Such registration shall include the name of the person, business address, phone number, names of municipalities in which licenses are held and any other information which might be deemed necessary to facilitate enforcement of this article. Applicant must furnish evidence to the electrical inspector of existing current electrical licenses held in one or more other communities in Waukesha or Milwaukee County before being allowed to obtain an electrical license in the city. 
(Code 1997, § 16.06; 10-11-79)  
Sec. 8-85. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 767 , § 1, adopted February 17, 2020, repealed § 8-85 which pertained to electrical licenses and derived from the Code of 1997; and Am. #278.  
Sec. 8-86. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits required. No person shall alter, install or repair electrical wires, equipment or devices for any purpose whatsoever in the city except as herein provided without first having procured a permit from the electrical inspector. 
(b)  Application for permits. Application for an electrical permit shall be made in writing upon blank forms to be furnished by the electrical inspector. The form shall be made out in full and shall describe the nature of the work as well as such other information as may be required. 
(c)  Double fees. Fees shall be doubled for failure to obtain a permit before commencement of work. No further permits shall be issued to any licensee until all arrears in fees have been paid and all lawful orders of the electrical inspector shall have been complied with. 
(d)  Fees for condemned work. Regular permit fees shall be required for permits issued for overhauling existing installation or replacing work condemned by the electrical inspector. 
(e)  Final inspection. Any contractor who does not request final inspection when a job is completed shall be required to pay an additional electrical inspection fee. It shall be the duty of the contractor to provide the electrical inspector with access to all jobs for the purpose of final inspection. 
(Code 1997, § 16.08) 
( Ord. No. 767 , § 1, 2-17-2020)  
Sec. 8-87. - License and permit exceptions. 
The electrical license and permit regulations of this code shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The installation, alteration or repair of electrical generation, transmission or distribution equipment owned and operated by an electrical public utility company. 
(2)  The installation, alteration or repair of signal or communication equipment where such equipment is owned and operated by a public utility company. 
(3)  Any work in connection with electrical equipment used for radio and television transmission, but not including supply wires to such equipment. 
(4)  Any work involved in the manufacturing or testing of electrical equipment or apparatus, but not including any permanent wiring or equipment. 
(5)  Any work associated with the following: 
a.  The repair of plug-connected electrical equipment or devices. 
b.  Permanently connected electrical appliances which have been electrically and mechanically disconnected and separated from all sources of electrical supply. The opening of switches or the blowing or removal of fuses shall not be considered as electrical or mechanical disconnection or separation. 
c.  The installation or replacement of approved fuses which are not oversized for the circuit involved. 
d.  The installation or replacement of plug-connected portable appliances which do not overload the circuit involved and are not located in hazardous locations. 
(Code 1997, § 16.09)  
Sec. 8-88. - Owner's privilege. 
A property owner may personally install electrical wiring in residence owned personally provided that such owner shall: 
(1)  Apply for and secure a permit in accordance with the code. 
(2)  Pay the required fees. 
(3)  Personally do the work in accordance with applicable code. 
(4)  Apply for inspection. 
(5)  Receive the approval of the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1997, § 16.10)  
Sec. 8-89. - Deputies. 
In case of the absence or the inability of the electrical inspector to act, the city council may appoint a deputy who shall have the same powers as the electrical inspector under whom he serves. 
(Code 1997, § 16.11)  
Sec. 8-90. - Authority of electrical inspector. 
(a)  The electrical inspector shall have full power to pass upon any question arising under the provisions of this code, subject to the conditions contained in this code and shall have the power and authority at all reasonable times, for any proper purpose, to enter upon any public premises and make inspection thereof and to require the production of the permit for electrical work or the required license therefor. 
(1)  In case of violation of this code, or any other code of the city, the electrical inspector may post a stop order upon the premises after which no further work shall be performed upon the structure until the premises are brought in compliance. 
(2)  Any person interfering with the electrical inspector while in the performance of his duties shall be deemed guilty of an offense punishable under this code. 
(b)  Enforcement. The electrical inspector shall enforce all state laws and city ordinances and lawful orders relating to the installation, repair, maintenance and inspection of electrical work. 
(c)  Records. The electrical inspector shall keep records of all applications for electrical permits in permanent bound books kept for such purpose and regularly number each permit in the order of issuance and each permit shall give a detailed and comprehensive description of the work to be performed and the equipment to be installed and the amount of fees charged. These records shall be in triplicate so two copies can be removed. 
(d)  Withholding permit. The electrical inspector is authorized to withhold approval of an application of an electrical permit to any person who has not complied with any lawful order of the electrical inspector or has failed to complete work on prior permits within a reasonable time or in a good workmanlike manner. The person refused such permit may appeal within ten days to the city council. 
(e)  Request for inspection. It shall be the duty of the electrician in charge to notify the electrical inspector whenever any work is ready for inspection, for temporary or permanent service, in accordance with the current applicable electrical codes. All electrical work shall be left exposed until such time as the inspector has certified his inspection. 
(f)  The electrical inspector will notify the building inspector stating that the work is completed in accordance with current applicable electrical codes. 
(g)  The electrical inspector shall file a proper affidavit with the Wisconsin Electric Power Company after inspection of temporary or permanent service and shall notify the building inspector stating that the work is completed in accordance with current applicable electrical codes. 
(Code 1997, § 16.12)  
Sec. 8-91. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, or any amendments thereto, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1997, § 16.13)  
Sec. 8-92. - Appeal. 
When the electrical inspector condemns all or part of the electrical installation in any building, the owner may, within five days after receiving written notice from the electrical inspector, file a petition in writing with the city clerk-treasurer for review of such action of the electrical inspector. Upon receipt of such petition, the clerk-treasurer shall submit such petition to the city council who shall at once proceed to determine whether such electrical construction complies with this article and shall make a decision in accordance with its findings as expediently thereafter as they may. 
(Code 1997, § 16.14)  
Sec. 8-93. - Liability of city. 
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person performing any electrical work or installing, owning, using or operating any electrical system, for damages to persons and property caused by any defect therein or therefrom; nor shall the city, the electrical inspector or their agents be held as assuming any such responsibility or liability by reason of the issuance of a permit, inspections or reinspections of work, approval or disapproval of any work or materials or equipment, or the issuance of a certificate of inspection authorized by this article. Nor shall the city be held liable for any damages resulting from the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1997, § 16.15)  
Sec. 8-94. - Permit fees. 
Fees as from time to time set by the city council by resolution shall be paid to the electrical inspector before any permit is issued. Whenever any work is commenced prior to obtaining a permit from the electrical inspector, the person on whose property such work has been commenced shall be liable for double the fees. 
(Code 1997, § 16.16; Rep. & Recr. #245)  
Sec. 8-95. - State electrical code. 
The Wisconsin Electrical Code SPS 316 is adopted. 
( Ord. No. 762 , § 1, 12-2-2019)  
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Regulation of nuisance type businesses. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall conduct within the city any business which has a tendency to create a public nuisance, except upon permit issued by the health officer and subject to such conditions as he may impose. 
(b)  Definition. A business which has a tendency to create a public nuisance is one which, unless properly regulated, may create a public nuisance as defined in section 32-2. 
(c)  Statutory authorization. This section is enacted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0415. 
(Code 1997, § 11.05; Am. # 703 )  
Sec. 10-2. - Cigarette licenses. 
(a)  Required. No person shall by any manner, directly or indirectly, upon any premises or by any device sell, exchange, buy, order, dispose of, give away or keep for sale any cigarettes, cigarette papers or wrappers or any substitute therefore without first obtaining a license as provided in this section. 
(b)  Application. A person desiring a license under this section shall file with the clerk-treasurer a written application stating the name and address of the person, firm or entity, or corporate name and name and address of its registered agent, as well as the location for which such license is desired. Each license shall be filed by the clerk-treasurer and name the licensee and place wherein he is authorized to conduct such business. The cigarette license shall not be delivered to the applicant until a $100.00 license fee is paid. 
(c)  Licenses nontransferable. Any license granted under this section shall not be transferable from one premises to another and, in case of a change in ownership, shall be automatically revoked and a new license shall not be granted until the new owner has complied with the terms and conditions contained in this section. 
(d)  Issuance. Licenses for sale, exchange, barter, disposition of or keeping for sale of nonalcoholic beverages, cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigarette wrappers or any substitute therefore shall be issued by the clerk-treasurer. Each license shall be issued on July 1 and continue in force from the date of issuance until the succeeding June 30, unless revoked for violation of the terms and conditions of this section or suspended by resolution of the city council for good reason. 
(e)  Vending machines. No licensee under this section shall maintain an automatic vending machine for the sale of nonalcoholic beverages, cigarettes, cigarette papers or wrappers or any substitute therefore, upon any licensed premises, except under the following conditions: 
(1)  The licensee shall locate the automatic vending machine in a place where he can easily view and supervise all purchases. 
(2)  The licensee shall maintain the licensed premises so as to be free and clear of all wrappers, bottles, cans, containers and other unsightly debris. 
(Code 1997, § 11.07; Cr. #707 )  
Sec. 10-3. - Adult oriented establishments. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having as its stock in trade for sale, rent, lease, inspection or viewing books, films, videocassettes, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specific sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein and, in conjunction therewith, have facilities for the presentation of adult entertainment as herein defined, including adult oriented film, movies or live performances, for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult cabaret means a cabaret which features topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers. 
Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as its dominant theme or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on any actual or simulated "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as herein defined or the removal of articles of clothing or appearing partially or totally nude. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material having as its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as herein defined for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material having as its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult oriented establishment shall include, but is not limited to, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture establishments or adult cabaret and further means any premises to which public patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purposes of viewing adult oriented motion pictures or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, whether or not such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. 
Council means the city council for the City of Delafield, Wisconsin. 
Operators means any person, partnership or corporation operating, conducting, maintaining or owning any adult oriented establishment. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities, simulated or actual, means: 
(1)  Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(2)  Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus. 
(3)  Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts. 
(b)  License. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(4) of this section, from and after the effective date of this section, no adult oriented establishment shall be operated or maintained in the city without first obtaining a license to operate issued by the city. 
(2)  A license may be issued only for one adult oriented establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any person who desires to operate more than one adult oriented establishment must have a license for each. 
(3)  No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person. 
(4)  All adult oriented establishments existing at the time of the passage of this section must submit an application for a license within 90 days of the passage of this section. If an application is not received within such 90-day period, then such existing adult oriented establishment shall cease operations. 
(c)  Application for license. 
(1)  Any person desiring to secure a license shall make application to the city clerk. The application shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the city clerk. A copy of the application shall be distributed promptly by the city clerk to the city police department and to the applicant. 
(2)  The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the city clerk. An applicant for a license interested directly in the ownership or operation of the business shall furnish the following information under oath: 
a.  Name and address, including all aliases. 
b.  Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
c.  The address of the adult oriented establishment to be operated by the applicant. 
d.  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent, the name and address of all shareholders owning more than five percent of the stock in such corporation and all officers and directors of the corporation. 
(3)  Within 21 days of receiving an application for a license, the city clerk shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted or denied. 
(4)  Whenever an application is denied, the city clerk shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. If the applicant requests a hearing within ten days of receipt of notification of denial, a public hearing shall be held within ten days thereafter before the council as hereinafter provided. 
(5)  Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the investigation of the application or his refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding such application or his refusal to submit to or cooperate with any investigation required by this section shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the city clerk. 
(d)  Standards for issuance of license. 
(1)  To receive a license to operate an adult oriented establishment, an applicant must meet the following standards: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual: 
1.  The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age. 
2.  The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated this section within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
b.  If the applicant is a corporation: 
1.  All officers, directors and stockholders required to be named under subsection (c)(2) of this section shall be at least 18 years of age. 
2.  No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under subsection (c)(2) of this section shall have been found to have previously violated this section within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
c.  If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of organization where two or more persons have a financial interest, all persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall be at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  No license shall be issued unless the city police department has investigated the applicant's qualifications to be licensed. The results of that investigation shall be filed in writing with the city clerk no later than 14 days after the date of the application. 
(e)  Fees. A license fee of $250.00 shall be submitted with the application for a license. If the application is denied, one-half of the fee shall be returned. 
(f)  Display of license or permit. The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adult oriented establishment. 
(g)  Renewal of license or permit. 
(1)  Every license issued pursuant to this section will terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of issuance unless sooner revoked and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the city clerk. The application for renewal must be filed not later than 60 days before the license expires. The application for renewal shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the city clerk. A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed promptly by the city clerk to the city police department and to the operator. The application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the city clerk and shall contain such information and data given under oath or affirmation as is required for an application for a new license. 
(2)  A license renewal fee of $250.00 shall be submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty of $100.00 shall be assessed against the applicant who files for a renewal less than 60 days before the license expires. If the application is denied, one-half of the total fees collected shall be returned. 
(3)  If the city police department is aware of any information bearing on the operator's qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the city clerk. 
(h)  Revocation of license. 
(1)  The council shall revoke a license or permit for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on any application or material facts were omitted from any application. 
b.  The operator or any employee of the operator violates any provision of this section or any rule or regulation adopted by the council pursuant to this section; provided, however, that in the case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days if the council shall find that the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive knowledge. 
c.  The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license or permit. 
d.  Any cost or fee required to be paid by this section is not paid. 
e.  Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or consumed on the premises of the adult oriented establishment. 
(2)  The council before revoking or suspending any license or permit shall give the operator at least ten days' written notice of the charges against him and the opportunity for a public hearing before the council as hereinafter provided. 
(3)  The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and immediately revoke the license. 
(4)  Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as an adult oriented establishment for six months from the date of revocation of the license. 
(i)  Physical layout of adult oriented establishment. Any adult oriented establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the adult oriented establishment and shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control type devices. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use, shall be a minimum of ten footcandles at all times as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth. 
(j)  Responsibilities of the operator. 
(1)  The operator shall maintain a register of all employees, showing the name and aliases used by the employee, home address, age, birth date, sex, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, phone numbers, social security number, date of employment and termination and duties of each employee. The above information on each employee shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a period of three years following termination. 
(2)  The operator shall make the register of employees available immediately for inspection by police upon demand of a member of the city police department at all reasonable times. 
(3)  Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs, either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission. 
(4)  Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. 
(5)  No employee of an adult oriented establishment shall allow any minor to loiter around or to frequent an adult oriented establishment or to allow any minor to view adult entertainment as defined herein. 
(6)  The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. 
(7)  The operator shall maintain at least ten footcandles of light in the public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisles; provided, however, at no time shall there be less than one footcandle of illumination in such aisles as measured from the floor. 
(8)  The operator shall insure compliance of the establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this section. 
(k)  Administrative procedure and review. Chapter 2, article V, concerning contested cases, shall govern the administrative procedure and review regarding the granting, denial, renewal, nonrenewal, revocation or suspension of a license. 
(l)  Exclusions. All private and public schools as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 115 located within the city are exempt from obtaining a license hereunder when instructing pupils in sex education as part of its curriculum. 
(m)  Penalties and prosecution. 
(1)  Any person who is found to have violated this section shall be fined a definite sum not exceeding $250.00 and shall result in the revocation of any license. 
(2)  Each violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense and any violation continuing more than one day shall be considered a separate offense. 
(n)  Enforcement. The city police department shall have the authority to enter any adult oriented establishment at all reasonable times to inspect the premises and enforce this section. 
(Code 1997, § 11.14; #225; Am. #241; Am. #263)  
Chapter 12 - COURTS AND JAILS 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Emergency government defined. 
The term "emergency government" means the preparation for and carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action or by fire, flood or other natural causes. 
(Code 1997, § 6.01)  
Sec. 14-2. - Emergency government director. 
(a)  Conditions of employment. The emergency government director shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council, and shall receive such salary as may be authorized by the council. He shall take and file an official oath. 
(b)  Duties. The director shall be the executive head of the city emergency government organization and shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of such organization, subject to the direction and control of the mayor and the city council. In addition to such powers and responsibilities as may be imposed on him from time to time by the council, he shall: 
(1)  Coordinate all activities for emergency government within the city. 
(2)  Maintain liaison and cooperate with emergency government agencies and organizations of other political subdivisions and of the state and federal governments. 
(3)  Participate in county and state emergency government activities upon request. 
(4)  Prepare a comprehensive general plan for the emergency government of the city and present such plan to the city council for its approval. 
(5)  Upon the declaration of an emergency, issue all necessary proclamations as to the existence of such state of emergency and such disaster warnings or alerts as are required by the emergency government plan. 
(c)  Assistants. Such deputy and assistant directors may be appointed by the director, subject to the approval of the emergency government commission, as may be deemed necessary. Such appointees shall receive such compensation as the city council may determine. 
(Code 1997, § 6.02)  
Sec. 14-3. - Utilization of existing services and facilities. 
In preparing and executing the emergency government plan, the director shall utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the existing departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable. When the city council has approved the plan, all municipal agencies and departments of the city shall perform the duties and functions assigned by the approved plan. 
(Code 1997, § 6.03)  
Sec. 14-4. - Wisconsin Emergency Operations Plan. 
The Wisconsin Emergency Operations Plan, as amended by general change order No. 4, is adopted as the official program of the city for emergency government. 
(Code 1997, § 6.04)  
Sec. 14-5. - Obstruction of emergency government organization; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency government organization in the enforcement of any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to this chapter or violate any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1997, § 6.10)  
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOODPLAIN ZONING CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-19. - Statutory authorization. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 and 62.23, for villages and cities; Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69, 59.692, and 59.694 for counties; and the requirements in Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Code 1997, § 20.11; Rep. & Recr. #698  
Sec. 16-20. - Finding of fact. 
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base. 
(Code 1997, § 20.12)  
Sec. 16-21. - Statement of purpose. 
This article is intended to regulate floodplain development to: 
(1)  Protect life, health and property; 
(2)  Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers; 
(4)  Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain; 
(6)  Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain; 
(7)  Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers; 
(8)  Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners; and 
(9)  Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain. 
(Code 1997, § 20.13)  
Sec. 16-22. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for the City of Delafield, Wisconsin." 
(Code 1997, § 20.14)  
Sec. 16-23. - General provisions. 
(a)  Areas to be regulated. This article regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or other maps approved by DNR. Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the flood insurance study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A and AO zones. Regional flood elevations (RFE) may be derived from other studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
(b)  Official maps and revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the flood insurance study (FIS) listed below. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in the FIS or on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA through the letter of map change process (see Part 8, Amendments) before it is effective. No changes to RFEs on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the office of the city clerk, City of Delafield. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
(1)  Official maps—Based on the FIS. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel number 55133C0156G, 55133C0157H, 55133C0158H, 55133C0159H, 55133C0166H, 55133C0167H, 55133C0176H, 55133C0178H, and 55133C0186G, dated November 5, 2014; with corresponding profiles that are based on the Flood Insurance Studies (FIS) 55133CV001C, 55133CV002C and 55133CV003C, dated November 5, 2014; approved by: The DNR and FEMA. 
(2)  Official maps—Based on other studies. Flood Storage Map, Panel number 6 of 12, dated November 5, 2014, approved by: The DNR. 
(c)  Establishment of floodplain zoning districts. The regional floodplain areas are divided into four districts as follows: 
(1)  The Floodway District (FW), is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters and are contained within AE zones as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  The Floodfringe District (FF) is that portion between the regional flood limits and the floodway and displayed as AE zones on the FIRM. 
(3)  The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood and does not have a BFE or floodway boundary determined, including A, AH and AO zones on the FIRM. 
(4)  The Flood Storage District (FSD) is that area of the floodplain where storage of floodwaters is calculated to reduce the regional flood discharge. 
(d)  Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in subsection (d)(1) or (2) of this section. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to Part 8, Amendments. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section. Disputes between the zoning administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according to section 16-201(3) and the criteria in subsection (d)(1) and (2) of this section. Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to Part 8, Amendments. 
(1)  If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies. 
(2)  Where flood profiles do not exist for projects, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the map scale. 
(e)  Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of this article shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to Part 8, Amendments. 
(f)  Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this article shall be in compliance with the terms of this article, and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
(g)  Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this article and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13), applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin department of transportation is exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.2022 applies. 
(h)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(1)  This article supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. § 59.69, 59.692 or 59.694 for counties; Wis. Stats. § 62.23 for cities; Wis. Stats. § 61.35 for villages; or Wis. Stats. § 87.30, which relate to floodplains. A more restrictive ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(2)  This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(i)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin statutes. If a provision of this article, required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this article or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this article. 
(j)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards in this article are based on engineering experience and research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. This article does not create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this article. 
(k)  Severability. Should any portion of this article be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected. 
(l)  Annexed areas for cities and villages. The Waukesha County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116, and 44 CFR 59-72, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the floodway location. 
(Code 1997, § 20.15)  
Sec. 16-24. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this article shall have their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not discretionary. 
A zones means those areas shown on the official floodplain zoning map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A zones. The A zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
AH zone. See Area of shallow flooding. 
AO zone. See Area of shallow flooding. 
Accessory structure or use means a facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building. 
Alteration means an enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other systems within a structure. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM. 
Basement means any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
Building. See Structure. 
Bulkhead line means a geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11, and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary highwater mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this article. 
Campground means any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area. 
Camping unit means any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including, but not limited to, a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use. 
Certificate of compliance means a certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this article. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water. 
Crawlways or crawl space means an enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities. 
Deck means an unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation. 
Department means the Wisconsin department of natural resources. 
Development means any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
Dryland access means a vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles. 
Encroachment means any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in the floodway. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The overflow or rise of inland waters; 
(2)  The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; 
(3)  The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior; or 
(4)  The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
Flood frequency means the probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average once in a specified number of years or as a percent (%) chance of occurring in any given year. 
Flood hazard boundary map means a map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A-Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood insurance study and a flood insurance rate map. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means a map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood insurance study means a technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A-Zones. Flood insurance rate maps that accompany the flood insurance study form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood profile means a graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river. 
Flood protection elevation means an elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. Also see Freeboard. 
Flood storage means those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge. 
Floodfringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water. 
Floodplain means land which has been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes. 
Floodplain island means a natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood. 
Floodplain management means policy and procedures to insure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge. 
Freeboard means a safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed. 
Habitable structure means any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation. 
Hearing notice means publication or posting meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 985. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums. 
High flood damage potential means damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is either: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Increase in regional flood height means a calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge. 
Land use means any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. Also see Development. 
Lowest adjacent grade means elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any of the exterior walls of a building. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3. 
Maintenance means the act or process of restoring to original soundness, including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent fixtures, systems or structures. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a "mobile recreational vehicle." 
Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision, existing, means a parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. At a minimum, this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Mobile/manufactured home park, expansion to existing, means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring if concrete pads. 
Mobile recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles." 
Model, corrected effective, means a hydraulic engineering model that corrects any errors that occur in the duplicate effective model, adds any additional cross sections to the duplicate effective model, or incorporates more detailed topographic information than that used in the current effective model. 
Model, duplicate effective, means a copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the effective FIS and referred to as the effective model. 
Model, effective, means the hydraulic engineering model that was used to produce the current effective flood insurance study. 
Model, existing (pre-project), means a modification of the duplicate effective model or corrected effective model to reflect any manmade modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which the revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date of the effective model, then this model would be identical to the corrected effective model or duplicate effective model. 
Model, revised (post-project), means a modification of the existing or pre-project conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected effective model to reflect revised or post-project conditions. 
Municipality or municipal means the county, city or village governmental units enacting, administering and enforcing this zoning ordinance. 
NAVD or North American Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment. 
NGVD or National Geodetic Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment. 
New construction, for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
Nonconforming structure means an existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.) 
Nonconforming use means an existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies (such as a residence in the floodway). 
Obstruction to flow means any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood height. 
Official floodplain zoning map means that map, adopted and made part of this article, as described in section 16-23(b), which has been approved by the department and FEMA. 
Open space use means those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures. 
Ordinary highwater mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
Person means an individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency. 
Private sewage system means a sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the department of safety and professional services, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure. 
Public utilities means those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer. 
Reasonably safe from flooding means base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE. 
Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts. 
Subdivision has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12). 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the work performed. The term does not, however, include either any project for the improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Unnecessary hardship means where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the article. 
Variance means an authorization by the board of adjustment or appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface profile means a graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas. 
Watershed means the entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water. 
Well means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use. 
(Code 1997, § 20.16)  
Sec. 16-25. - Enforcement and penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this article by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not less than $10.00 and not more than $50.00, together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Code 1997, § 20.90)  
Secs. 16-26—16-53. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 16-54. - Applicability. 
(a)  The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant materials; be constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions of flooding. 
(b)  Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this article and all other requirements in section 16-199(b). Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
(Code 1997, § 20.20)  
Sec. 16-55. - Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. 
(a)  No floodplain development shall: 
(1)  Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development, causing any increase in the regional flood height; or 
(2)  Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the regional flood height, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of division 8 of this article, Amendments, are met. 
(Code 1997, § 20.21)  
Sec. 16-56. - Watercourse alterations. 
(a)  No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the department and FEMA regional offices, and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The standards of section 16-55 must be met and the flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(b)  As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation and pursuant to division 8 of this article, Amendments, the community shall apply for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process. 
(Code 1997, § 20.22)  
Sec. 16-57. - Wis. Stats. chs. 30, 31 development. 
Development which requires a permit from the department, under Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to division 8 of this article, Amendments. 
(Code 1997, § 20.23)  
Sec. 16-58. - Public or private campgrounds. 
Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions: 
(1)  The campground is approved by the department of health services; 
(2)  A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator; 
(3)  The character of the river system and the campground elevation are such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants; 
(4)  There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation; 
(5)  This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated by the officials identified in subsection (4) of this section to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the state department of health services and all other applicable regulations; 
(6)  Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use are allowed; 
(7)  The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours; 
(8)  All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section; 
(9)  The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this section; 
(10)  All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either division 3, 4 or 5 of this article for the floodplain district in which the structure is located; 
(11)  The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued; and 
(12)  All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection, electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
(Code 1997, § 20.24)  
Secs. 16-59—16-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW) 
 
Sec. 16-90. - Applicability. 
This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 16-23. 
(Code 1997, § 20.31)  
Sec. 16-91. - Permitted uses. 
The following open space uses are allowed in the Floodway District and the floodway areas of the General Floodplain District, if: 
(1)  They are not prohibited by any other ordinance; 
(2)  They meet the standards in sections 16-92 and 16-93; and 
(3)  All permits or certificates have been issued according to section 16-199. 
a.  Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting. 
b.  Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips. 
c.  Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of section 16-92(d). 
d.  Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that comply with sections 16-92 and 16-93. 
e.  Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with section 16-92(d). 
f.  Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31. 
g.  Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with section 16-92(c). 
(Code 1997, § 20.32)  
Sec. 16-92. - Standards for developments in the floodway. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Any development in the floodway shall comply with division 2 of this article and have a low flood damage potential. 
(2)  Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to sections 16-55 and 16-199(b)(3): 
a.  A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or 
b.  An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height. 
(3)  The zoning administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will cause any increase in the flood elevations upstream or downstream, based on the data submitted for subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(b)  Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood damage potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; 
(3)  Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; 
(4)  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or flood proofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
(5)  It must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood. 
(c)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, if: 
(1)  Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and 
(2)  Construction meets the development standards of section 16-55. 
(d)  Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if: 
(1)  The requirements of section 16-55 are met; 
(2)  No material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is issued by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 30, and a permit pursuant to section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and all other requirements have been met; 
(3)  The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and 
(4)  The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material. 
(Code 1997, § 20.33)  
Sec. 16-93. - Prohibited uses. 
All uses not listed as permitted uses in section 16-91 are prohibited, including the following uses: 
(1)  Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with permanent open-space uses; 
(2)  Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life; 
(3)  Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts; 
(4)  Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383; 
(5)  Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812; 
(6)  Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(7)  Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 110.15(3)(b); and 
(8)  Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied. 
(Code 1997, § 20.34)  
Secs. 16-94—16-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF) 
 
Sec. 16-115. - Applicability. 
This division applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 16-23. 
(Code 1997, § 20.41)  
Sec. 16-116. - Permitted uses. 
Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the Floodfringe District if the standards in section 16-117 are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in section 16-199 have been issued. 
(Code 1997, § 20.42)  
Sec. 16-117. - Standards for development in the floodfringe. 
Section 16-55 shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the requirements of division 6 of this article, Nonconforming Uses; 
(1)  Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be newly constructed or moved into the floodfringe, shall meet or exceed the following standards. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the requirements of division 6 of this article, Nonconforming Uses; 
a.  The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill unless the requirements of subsection (1)b of this section can be met. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. 
b.  The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation; 
c.  Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in subsection (1)d of this section. 
d.  In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with subsection (1)c of this section impractical, the municipality may permit new development and substantial improvements where roads are below the regional flood elevation, if: 
1.  The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or 
2.  The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation plan. 
(2)  Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be constructed on fill with the lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation. 
(3)  Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe shall meet the requirements of subsection (1) of this section. Subject to the requirements of subsection (5) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(4)  Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in section 16-203. Subject to the requirements of subsection (5) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(5)  Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with section 16-203. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during flooding. 
(6)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans; and 
a.  When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction or repair of such facilities shall only be permitted if they are designed to comply with section 16-203. 
b.  Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation. 
(7)  Sewage systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system, pursuant to section 16-203(c), to the flood protection elevation and meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(8)  Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system, pursuant to section 16-203(c), to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(9)  Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas. 
(10)  Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this article. 
(11)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities. 
b.  In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and 
2.  Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood. 
c.  Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe in subsection (1) of this section. 
(12)  Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in subsection (11)b and c of this section. A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Code 1997, § 20.43)  
Secs. 16-118—16-147. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - OTHER FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 16-148. - Generally. 
Other floodplain districts may be established under the ordinance and reflected on the floodplain zoning map. These districts may include general floodplain districts and flood storage districts. 
(Code 1997, § 20.50)  
Sec. 16-149. - General Floodplain District (GFP). 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains mapped as A, AO or AH zones. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Pursuant to this division, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within the floodway or floodfringe. Those uses permitted in the floodway (section 16-91) and floodfringe (section 16-116) districts are allowed within the general floodplain district, according to the standards of subsection (c) of this section, provided that all permits or certificates required under section 16-199 have been issued. 
(c)  Standards for development. Division 3 of this article applies to floodway areas; division 4 of this article applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this division applies to either district. 
(1)  In AO/AH zones the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the conditions listed below whichever is higher: 
a.  At or above the flood protection elevation; or 
b.  Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the structure; or 
c.  The depth as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  In AO/AH zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters around structures. 
(d)  Determining floodway and floodfringe limits. Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries. 
a.  A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in section 16-199(b)(3). 
b.  Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information; 
c.  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
(Code 1997, § 20.51)  
Sec. 16-150. - Flood storage district. 
The flood storage district delineates that portion of the floodplain where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account and is relied upon to reduce the regional flood discharge. The district protects the flood storage areas and assures that any development in the storage areas will not decrease the effective flood storage capacity which would cause higher flood elevations. 
(1)  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all areas within the Flood Storage District (FSD), as shown on the official floodplain zoning maps. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Any use or development which occurs in a flood storage district must meet the applicable requirements in section 16-117. 
(3)  Standards for development in flood storage districts. 
a.  Development in a flood storage district shall not cause an increase equal or greater than 0.00 of a foot in the height of the regional flood. 
b.  No development shall be allowed which removes flood storage volume unless an equal volume of storage as defined by the pre-development ground surface and the regional flood elevation shall be provided in the immediate area of the proposed development to compensate for the volume of storage which is lost (compensatory storage). Excavation below the groundwater table is not considered to provide an equal volume of storage. 
c.  If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not be developed unless the entire area zoned as flood storage district - on this waterway - is rezoned to the floodfringe district. This must include a revision to the floodplain study and map done for the waterway to revert to the higher regional flood discharge calculated without floodplain storage, as per division 8 of this article, amendments of this article. 
d.  No area may be removed from the flood storage district unless it can be shown that the area has been filled to the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to other lands lying outside of the floodplain. 
(Code 1997, § 20.52)  
Secs. 16-151—16-168. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - NONCONFORMING USES 
 
Sec. 16-169. - General. 
(a)  Applicability. If these standards conform with Wis. Stats. § 59.69(10), for counties, or Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), for cities and villages, they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived or any amendment thereto. 
(b)  The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may continue subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this article. The words "modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification; this includes painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not considered maintenance. The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure. 
(2)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this article; 
(3)  The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent; 
(4)  No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 16-117(1). The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50 percent provisions of this paragraph; 
(5)  No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 16-117(1). 
(6)  If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done under subsection (4) and (5) of this section equals or exceeds 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value the work shall not be permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 16-117(1). 
(7)  Except as provided in subsection (8) of this section, if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current ordinance requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50 percent of the structure's present equalized assessed value. 
(8)  For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event, provided that the minimum federal code requirements below are met and all required permits have been granted prior to the start of construction. 
a.  Residential structures. 
1.  Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must meet the requirements of section 16-203(b). 
2.  Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy and shall be constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage. 
3.  Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4.  In A zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data available from a federal, state or other source. 
5.  In AO zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in division 5 of this article. 
6.  In AO zones, shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure. 
b.  Nonresidential structures. 
1.  Shall meet the requirements of subsection (b)(8)a.1 through 6 of this section. 
2.  Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet the standards in section 16-203(a) or (b). 
3.  In AO zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in division 5 of this article. 
(c)  A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with section 16-92(a), flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with section 16-203 are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the development standards of subsection (b)(8)a of this section if it is determined that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Code 1997, § 20.61)  
Sec. 16-170. - Floodway district. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the floodway district, unless such modification or addition: 
(1)  Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance requirements; 
(2)  Meets the requirements of section 16-169; 
(3)  Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height; 
(4)  Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 16-203, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation; and 
(5)  If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade; 
b.  The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials; 
c.  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
d.  The use must be limited to parking, building access or limited storage. 
(b)  No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, section 16-203(c) and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(c)  No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in the floodway district shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, section 16-203(c) and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(Code 1997, § 20.62)  
Sec. 16-171. - Floodfringe district. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the municipality, and meets the requirements of section 16-117 except where subsection (b) of this section is applicable. 
(b)  Where compliance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the board of adjustment/appeals, using the procedures established in section 16-201, may grant a variance from those provisions of subsection (a) of this section for modifications or additions using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if: 
(1)  No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures; 
(2)  Human lives are not endangered; 
(3)  Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed; 
(4)  Flood depths shall not exceed two feet; 
(5)  Flood velocities shall not exceed two feet per second; and 
(6)  The structure shall not be used for storage of materials as described in section 16-117(5). 
(c)  All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances, section 16-203(c) and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(d)  All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this division, section 16-203(c) and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(Code 1997, § 20.63)  
Sec. 16-172. - Flood storage district. 
No modifications or additions shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure in a flood storage area unless the standards outlined in section 16-150(3) are met. 
(Code 1997, § 20.64)  
Secs. 16-173—16-197. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 16-198. - Generally. 
Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under Wis. Stats. § 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7), these officials shall also administer this article. 
(Code 1997, § 20.70)  
Sec. 16-199. - Zoning administrator. 
(a)  Duties and powers. The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this article and shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Advise applicants of the article provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications. 
(2)  Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this article and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate. 
(3)  Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred. 
(4)  Keep records of all official actions such as: 
a.  All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved; 
b.  Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations; 
c.  Floodproofing certificates. 
d.  Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments. 
e.  All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures. 
f.  List of nonconforming structures and uses. 
(5)  Submit copies of the following items to the department regional office: 
a.  Within ten days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments; 
b.  Copies of case-by-case analyses and other required information including an annual summary of floodplain zoning actions taken. 
c.  Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning the assessments. 
(6)  Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this article to the municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the department regional office. 
(7)  Submit copies of amendments to the FEMA regional office. 
(b)  Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any new development; repair, modification or addition to an existing structure; or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the zoning administrator shall include: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor; 
b.  Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a modification; 
(2)  Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form and shall contain: 
a.  Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot; 
b.  Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
c.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and street center lines; 
d.  Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
e.  Location and elevation of existing or future access roads; 
f.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official floodplain zoning maps; 
g.  The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study - either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD); 
h.  Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of division 3 or 4 of this article are met; and 
i.  Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge according to section 16-55. This may include any of the information noted in section 16-92(a). 
(3)  Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the state. The study contractor shall be responsible for the technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and approved by the department. 
a.  Zone A floodplains. 
1.  Hydrology. 
(i)  The appropriate method shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116.07(3), Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge. 
2.  Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116.07(4), Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following: 
(i)  Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic model shall be based on detailed study information for downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting WSEL for the study. 
(ii)  Channel sections must be surveyed. 
(iii)  Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall be used for the development of cross section overbank and floodplain mapping. 
(iv)  A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross sections is allowed in developed areas with additional intermediate cross sections required at transitions in channel bottom slope including a survey of the channel at each location. 
(v)  The most current version of HEC_RAS shall be used. 
(vi)  A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of road is required at each structure. 
(vii)  Additional cross sections are required at the downstream and upstream limits of the proposed development and any necessary intermediate locations based on the length of the reach if greater than 500 feet. 
(viii)  Standard accepted engineering practices shall be used when assigning parameters for the base model such as flow, Manning's N values, expansion and contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data such as high water marks to determine the reasonableness of the model results. If no historical data is available, adequate justification shall be provided for any parameters outside standard accepted engineering practices. 
(ix)  The model must extend past the upstream limit of the difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The height difference between the proposed flood profile and the existing study profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet. 
3.  Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be provided, showing all cross section locations, floodway/floodplain limits based on best available topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed development and whether the proposed development is located in the floodway. 
(i)  If the proposed development is located outside of the floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on the regional flood elevation. 
(ii)  If any part of the proposed development is in the floodway, it must be added to the base model to show the difference between existing and proposed conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients remain the same as in the existing model, unless adequate justification based on standard accepted engineering practices is provided. 
b.  Zone AE floodplains. 
1.  Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be based on Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116.07(3), Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge. 
2.  Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116.07(4), Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following: 
(i)  Duplicate effective model. The effective model shall be reproduced to ensure correct transference of the model data and to allow integration of the revised data to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and downstream of the revised reach. If data from the effective model is available, models shall be generated that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations shown in the floodway data table in the FIS report to within 0.1 foot. 
(ii)  Corrected effective model. The corrected effective model shall not include any manmade physical changes since the effective model date, but shall import the model into the most current version of HEC-RAS for department review. 
(iii)  Existing (pre-project conditions) model. The existing model shall be required to support conclusions about the actual impacts of the project associated with the revised (post-project) model or to establish more up-to-date models on which to base the revised (post-project) model. 
(iv)  Revised (post-project conditions) model. The revised (post-project conditions) model shall incorporate the existing model and any proposed changes to the topography caused by the proposed development. This model shall reflect proposed conditions. 
(v)  All changes to the duplicate effective model and subsequent models must be supported by certified topographic information, bridge plans, construction plans and survey notes. 
(vi)  Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to the stream reach for which the revision is being requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the effective model and result in water surface elevations and top widths computed by the revised models matching those in the effective models upstream and downstream of the revised reach as required. The effective model shall not be truncated. 
3.  Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be submitted to the department for review which meet the following conditions: 
(i)  Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the revised flood profiles, topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary Floodway Maps (FBFMs), construction plans, bridge plans. 
(ii)  Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour interval, and a planimetric map showing the applicable items. If a digital version of the map is available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM may be more easily revised. 
(iii)  Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised one percent and 0.2 percent annual chance floodplains and floodway boundaries. 
(iv)  If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used then all supporting documentation or metadata must be included with the data submission along with the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and State Plane Coordinate System in accordance with FEMA mapping specifications. 
(v)  The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the effective floodplain boundaries. 
(vi)  All cross sections from the effective model shall be labeled in accordance with the effective map and a cross section lookup table shall be included to relate to the model input numbering scheme. 
(vii)  Both the current and proposed floodways shall be shown on the map. 
(viii)  The stream centerline, or profile baseline used to measure stream distances in the model shall be visible on the map. 
(4)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this article shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The permit may be extended for a maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient cause. 
(c)  Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, except where no permit is required, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit; 
(3)  If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after written notification that the permitted work is completed; 
(4)  The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the requirements of section 16-203 are met. 
(d)  Other permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit the applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including, but not limited to, those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(Code 1997, § 20.71)  
Sec. 16-200. - Zoning agency. 
(a)  The planning commission shall: 
(1)  Oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; and 
(2)  Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments to this article, maps and text. 
(b)  The planning commission shall not: 
(1)  Grant variances to the terms of this article in place of action by the board of adjustment/appeals; or 
(2)  Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the governing body. 
(Code 1997, § 20.72)  
Sec. 16-201. - Board of adjustment/appeals. 
The board of adjustment/appeals, created under Wis. Stats. § 59.694, for counties, or Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), for cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this article. The board shall exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The zoning administrator shall not be the secretary of the board. 
(1)  Powers and duties. The board of adjustment/appeals shall: 
a.  Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this article; 
b.  Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map; and 
c.  Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the article standards. 
(2)  Appeals to the board. 
a.  Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the municipality affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all records regarding the matter appealed. 
b.  Notice and hearing for appeals including variances. 
1.  Notice. The board shall: 
(i)  Fix a reasonable time for the hearing; 
(ii)  Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing; and 
(iii)  Ensure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the department regional office at least ten days in advance of the hearing. 
2.  Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The board shall: 
(i)  Resolve boundary disputes according to subsection (3) of this section; 
(ii)  Decide variance applications according to subsection (4) of this section; and 
(iii)  Decide appeals of permit denials according to section 16-202. 
c.  Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall: 
1.  Be made within a reasonable time; 
2.  Be sent to the department regional office within ten days of the decision; 
3.  Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary of the board; 
4.  State the specific facts which are the basis for the board's decision; 
5.  Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application; and 
6.  Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the board proceedings. 
(3)  Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the board in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries: 
a.  If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be examined; 
b.  The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the board; and 
c.  If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the board should inform the zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the governing body for a map amendment according to division 8 of this article, Amendments. 
(4)  Variance. 
a.  The board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this article if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that: 
1.  Literal enforcement of the ordinance will cause unnecessary hardship; 
2.  The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such case, the ordinance from which this article is derived or map must be amended; 
3.  The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and 
4.  The variance is consistent with the purpose of this article in section 16-21. 
b.  In addition to the criteria in subsection (4)a of this section, to qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met: 
1.  The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation; 
2.  Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE; and 
3.  Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the ordinance. 
c.  A variance shall not: 
1.  Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district; 
2.  Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss; 
3.  Be granted for a hardship which is self-created. 
4.  Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area; 
5.  Allow actions without the amendments to this article or map(s) required in division 8 of this article, Amendments; and 
6.  Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure. 
d.  When a floodplain variance is granted the board shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life and property and flood insurance premiums could increase up to $25.00 per $100.00 of coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record. 
(Code 1997, § 20.73)  
Sec. 16-202. - To review appeals of permit denials. 
(a)  The zoning agency (section 16-200) or board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include: 
(1)  Permit application data listed in section 16-199(b); 
(2)  Floodway/floodfringe determination data in section 16-149(d); 
(3)  Data listed in section 16-92(a)(2b) where the applicant has not submitted this information to the zoning administrator; and 
(4)  Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the board with the appeal. 
(b)  For appeals of all denied permits the board shall: 
(1)  Follow the procedures of section 16-201; 
(2)  Consider zoning agency recommendations; and 
(3)  Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal. 
(c)  For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the board shall: 
(1)  Uphold the denial where the board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners as per the requirements of division 8 of this article, Amendments; and 
(2)  Grant the appeal where the board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase provided no other reasons for denial exist. 
(Code 1997, § 20.74)  
Sec. 16-203. - Floodproofing standards for nonconforming structures or uses. 
(a)  No permit or variance shall be issued for a non-residential structure designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA floodproofing certificate. 
(b)  For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either: 
(1)  Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or 
(2)  Meets or exceeds the following standards: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(c)  Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to: 
(1)  Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other regional flood factors; 
(2)  Protect structures to the flood protection elevation; 
(3)  Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; 
(4)  Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters; and 
(5)  Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters. 
(Code 1997, § 20.75)  
Sec. 16-204. - Public information. 
(a)  Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood. 
(b)  All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely distributed. 
(c)  Real estate transfers should show what floodplain district any real property is in. 
(Code 1997, § 20.76)  
Secs. 16-205—16-231. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 16-232. - Regulations. 
Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made to the ordinance from which this article is derived, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 16-233. 
(1)  In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA and amendments are made to the ordinance from which this article is derived, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 16-233. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR. 
(2)  In A zones increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be permitted if the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA and amendments are made to the ordinance from which this article is derived, the official floodplain maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 16-233. 
(Code 1997, § 20.80)  
Sec. 16-233. - General. 
The governing body shall change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and this article in the manner outlined in section 16-234 below. Actions which require an amendment to the ordinance from which this article is derived and/or submittal of a letter of map change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height; 
(2)  Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations on the FIRM; 
(3)  Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in section 16-23(b)(2); 
(4)  Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain; 
(5)  Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain maps; 
(6)  Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.05, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the municipality; and 
(7)  All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA. 
(Code 1997, § 20.81)  
Sec. 16-234. - Procedures. 
Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any party according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23, for cities and villages, or Wis. Stats. § 59.69, for counties. The petitions shall include all data required by sections 16-149(d) and 16-199(b). The land use permit shall not be issued until a letter of map revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed changes. 
(1)  The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23, for cities and villages, or Wis. Stats. § 59.69, for counties. 
(2)  No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the department. 
(3)  All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height, shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be approved by the governing body. 
(Code 1997, § 20.82)  
Secs. 16-235—16-261. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-262. - Authority. 
(a)  The ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted by the City of Delafield under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 62.234. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body. 
(c)  The requirements of this article do not pre-empt more stringent erosion control or stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by any of the following: 
(1)  Wisconsin department of natural resources administrative rules, permits or approvals, including those authorized under Wis. Stats. §§ 281.16 and 283.33. 
(2)  Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin department of natural resources under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 151.004. 
(Code 1997, § 23.01; Rep. & Recr. # 730 )  
Sec. 16-263. - Findings of fact. 
The common council finds that uncontrolled construction site erosion and stormwater runoff from land development and land disturbing activities carry a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to the water and rights-of-way of the state and this city. This has a significant detrimental impact upon water resources and the health, safety, and general welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled erosion and stormwater runoff can: 
(1)  Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing stream bed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing stream base flows, and increase stream temperatures; 
(2)  Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational, and water supply uses by increasing loadings of nutrients and other urban pollutants; 
(3)  Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing pollutant loads; 
(4)  Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading; 
(5)  Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare by increasing major flood peaks and volumes, thereby overtaxing storm sewers, drainage ways, and other drainage facilities; 
(6)  Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and levels of flooding; 
(7)  Generate airborne particulate concentrations that are health threatening or may cause other damage to property or the environment. 
(Code 1997, § 23.02)  
Sec. 16-264. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to set forth requirements for land development and land disturbing activities designed to minimize sedimentation, water pollution, flooding, and related property and environmental damage caused by soil erosion and uncontrolled stormwater runoff during and after construction, in order to diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare, and the natural resources of the city and the state. Specific purposes are to: 
(1)  Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; 
(2)  Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater, prevent and control soil erosion, prevent and control water pollution, protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; 
(3)  Ensure the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of particulate matter; prevent conditions that endanger downstream property; and 
(4)  Establish erosion control and stormwater standards for building sites, placement of structures, and land uses, and preserve ground cover and scenic beauty. 
(b)  Intent. It is the general intent of the common council that this article achieves its purpose through management of the quantity and quality of long-term, post-construction erosion control and stormwater discharges from land development activities. It is not intended to limit activity or land divisions permitted under applicable zoning and land division ordinances. The common council recognizes that the preferred method of addressing erosion control and stormwater management problems and needs is through the preparation of comprehensive erosion control and stormwater management system plans for subwatershed areas which are designed to meet the purpose and intent of this article. Where such system plans have been developed and approved by the planning commission, it is the intent that all land development activities will include stormwater management measures that meet performance standards set forth in those approved plans. Where such stormwater management system plans have not been developed or approved by the commission, it is the intent of the commission that the generic stormwater management standards set forth in section 16-319(a) and (b) be applied unless otherwise excepted by the commission. 
(Code 1997, § 23.03)  
Sec. 16-265. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administering authority means the governmental council, commission, employee, or its agent empowered under Wis. Stats. § 62.234, designated by the City of Delafield to administer this article. 
Agricultural land use means use of land for planting, growing, cultivating, and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption, and pasturing or yarding of livestock. 
Applicant means any person or entity applying for a storm water or erosion control permit. Under this article, the applicant shall be the landowner, as herein defined. The applicant shall become the permit holder once the permit is issued. The applicant shall sign the permit application form in accordance with subsections (1) through (5) of this section. The applicant may provide the city written authorization for others to serve as the applicant's representative: 
(1)  In the case of a corporation, by a principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president or by the officer's authorized representative having overall responsibility for the operation of the site for which a permit is sought. 
(2)  In the case of a limited liability company, by a member or manager. 
(3)  In the case of a partnership, by the general partner. 
(4)  In the case of a sole proprietorship, by the proprietor. 
(5)  For a unit of government, by a principal executive officer, ranking elected official or other duly authorized representative. 
Best management practice or BMPs means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state. 
Business day means a day which the offices of both the City of Delafield and the permit holder are routinely and customarily open for business. 
Cease and desist order means a city-issued order to halt land developing activity that is being conducted without the required permit or in violation of permit provisions. 
City means the City of Delafield, and may be represented by the common council, planning commission, public works committee, city administrator, city engineer, building inspector, or other agency or official empowered by the city. 
Commercial land use means the use of land for the retail or wholesale of goods or services. 
Common plan of development or sale means all lands included within the boundary of a certified survey map or subdivision, condominium or communal development plat created for the purpose of development or sale of property where integrated, multiple, separate and distinct land developing activities may take place at different times and on different schedules by future owners. 
Connected impervious surface means an impervious surface connected to the waters of the state via a separate storm sewer, an impervious flow path, or a minimally pervious flow path. 
Construction site means an area upon which one or more land disturbing construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger common plan or development or sale where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules but under one plan. 
Control measure means a practice or combination of practices to control erosion and attenuate pollution or reduce discharge volume or peak flows. 
Design storm means a hypothetical rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency, and a total depth of rainfall. See section 16-318(2). 
Detention basin means a pond designed to store water after a rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency, and total depth of rainfall. 
Dewatering means the removal of trapped water from a construction site to allow land development or utility installation activities to occur. 
Discharge volume means the quantity of runoff discharged from the land surface as a result of a rainfall event. 
Effective infiltration area means the area of the infiltration system that is used exclusively to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access, berms or pretreatment. 
Erosion means the process of detachment, transport and deposition of soil, sediment, or rock fragments by action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
Erosion control plan means a written description and detailed site plan of best management practices designed to meet the requirements of this article submitted by the applicant for review and approval by the city. 
Extra-territorial means the unincorporated area within three miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1½ miles of a fourth-class city. 
Fee in lieu means a payment of money to the City of Delafield in place of meeting all or part of the erosion control or stormwater performance standards required by this article. 
Filtering layer means soil that has at least a three-foot deep layer with at least 20 percent that passes through a #200 sieve (fines); or at least a five-foot-deep layer with at least ten percent that passes through a #200 sieve (fines); or another medium exists with an equivalent level of protection, as determined by the reviewer of the permit. 
Final stabilization means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established with a density of at least 70 percent of the cover for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures. 
Financial guarantee means an irrevocable letter of credit, cash or similar guarantee(s) submitted to the city by the permit holder to assure that requirements of this article are performed in compliance with the erosion control and stormwater plans. 
Gross aggregate area means the total area, in acres, of all land located within the property boundary containing the land development activity. 
Groundwater enforcement standard means a numerical value expressing the concentration of a substance in groundwater which is adopted under Wis. Stats. § 160.07 and § NR 140.10 or Wis. Stats. § 160.09 and § NR 140.12. 
Groundwater preventive action limit means a numerical value expressing the concentration of a substance in groundwater which is adopted under Wis. Stats. § 160.15 and § NR 140.10, 140.12, or 140.20. 
Illicit discharge means any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer that is not composed entirely of runoff, except discharges authorized by a WPDES permit or any other discharge not requiring a WPDES permit such as water line flushing, landscape irrigation, individual residential car washing, firefighting and similar discharges. 
Impervious surface means an area that releases as runoff all or a large portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, gravel or paved parking lots, and streets are examples of surfaces that are typically impervious. 
In-fill means an undeveloped area of land located within an existing urban sewer service area, surrounded by development or development and natural or manmade features where development cannot occur. In-fill does not include any undeveloped area that is part of a larger new development also requiring a permit. 
Infiltration means the process by which rainfall or surface runoff percolates or penetrates into the underlying soil. 
Irrevocable letter of credit means an agreement with a bank or other institution to pay money or extend credit to honor the terms of the permit with the City of Delafield. 
Land development activity means the construction of buildings, roads, parking lots, paved and unpaved storage areas, patios, seawalls, and similar facilities but does not include agricultural land use or general maintenance of parking lots and drives. 
Land disturbing construction activity means any manmade alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, dewatering, dredging related to stormwater BMP maintenance, filling and grading activities. Repaving is not considered a land disturbing construction activity unless the subgrade material below the pavement is removed, replaced or significantly regraded. 
Land user means any person operating, leasing, renting, or having made other arrangements with the landowner by which the landowner authorizes use of his or her land. 
Landowner (or owner ) means any person or entity holding fee title, an easement or other interest in property, which allows the person to undertake cropping, livestock management, land disturbing construction activity or maintenance of stormwater BMPs on the property. 
Maintenance agreement means a legal document that is filed with the city clerk and recorded with Waukesha County and which provides for long-term maintenance of erosion control or stormwater management practices. 
Maximum extent practicable or MEP means an acceptable level of performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a performance standard specified in this article. MEP may provide flexibility when assessing plan acceptability and may vary based on the performance standard and site conditions. 
Non-storm discharge means a discharge to the storm sewer or drainage system created by some process other than the runoff of rain. 
Non-structural measure means a practice, technique, or measure to reduce the volume, peak flow rate, or pollutants in stormwater that does not require the design or installation of fixed stormwater management facilities. 
Off-site means located outside the property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
Other than residential development means development of the following land uses: commercial; industrial; government and institutional; recreation; transportation; communication; and utilities. 
Peak flow discharge rate means the maximum rate at which a unit volume of stormwater is discharged. 
Performance security means an irrevocable letter of credit, cash or similar guarantees submitted to the City of Delafield by the permit holder to assure that requirements of this article are carried out in compliance with the erosion control and stormwater management plans. 
Permit administration fee means a sum of money paid to the City of Delafield for the purpose of recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the permit. 
Permit holder means any person or entity issued an erosion control and/or storm water permit under this article or their successors in interest with respect to the property in which the permit applies. (See also definition of applicant). 
Pervious surface means an area that releases as runoff a small portion of the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious. 
Post-construction stormwater discharge means any stormwater discharged from a site following the completion of land disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization. 
Post-development condition means the extent and distribution of land cover types anticipated to occur under conditions of full development that will influence rainfall runoff and infiltration. 
Pre-development condition means the extent and distribution of land cover types present before the initiation of land development activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are managed in an environmentally sound manner. 
Pre-treatment means the treatment of stormwater prior to its discharge to the primary stormwater treatment practice in order to reduce pollutant loads to a level compatible with the capability of the primary practice. 
Professional services reimbursement means that services provided by the city attorney, city engineer, city planner or any other of the city's professional staff results in a charge to the city for that professional's time and service and such service is not a service supplied to the city as a whole, the city shall charge that service for the fees incurred by the city to the landowner or responsible party. 
Qualified professional means a professional landscape architect, professional hydrologist, or professional engineer licensed in Wisconsin, or a person certified in erosion control planning, implementation or inspection. 
Residential development means that which is created to house people, including the residential dwellings as well as all attendant portions of the development including lawns, driveways, sidewalks, garages, and access streets. This type of development includes single-family, multi-family, apartment, and trailer parks. 
Runoff means storm water or precipitation including rain, snow, ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow. 
Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing or land development activity is proposed. 
Site restriction means any physical characteristic which limits the use of a stormwater best management practice. 
Stabilize means that vegetation is well established or other surfacing material is in place and the risk of further soil erosion is minimal. 
Stop work order means an order issued by the city which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped, except for any prescribed work needed to be completed to bring a site back into compliance. 
Stormwater management measure means a practice, technique, or measure to reduce the volume, peak flow rate, or pollutants in stormwater, including, but not limited to structural stormwater measures. 
Stormwater management plan means a document that identifies what actions will be taken to reduce stormwater quantity and pollutant loads from land development activity to levels meeting the purpose and intent of this article. 
Structural measure means a source area practice, conveyance measure, or end-of-pipe treatment designed to control erosion and stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and peak flow discharge rates. 
Surface waters means all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, water courses, drainage systems or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within the City of Delafield, except those waters which are entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a person. 
Top of channel means an edge, or point on the landscape, commencing landward from the ordinary high water mark of a surface water of the state, where the slope of the land begins to be less than 12 percent continually for at least 50 feet. If the slope of the land is 12 percent or less continually for the initial 50 feet, landward from the ordinary high water mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary high water mark. 
Waters of the state means those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within the boundaries of Wisconsin, and all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within the state or its jurisdiction. 
Wet detention basin is a detention basin with a permanent pool of water, often designed to trap particulate pollutants. 
Wetlands mean an area inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency or duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. These wetlands include natural, mitigation, and restored wetlands. 
Working day means a calendar day, except Saturdays, Sundays, and state- and city-recognized legal holidays. 
(Code 1997, § 23.04)  
Sec. 16-266. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  This article applies to land disturbing and land development activities on the lands within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the City of Delafield and within its extra-territorial plat approval jurisdiction under Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
(b)  Exemptions. This article does not apply to land development activities conducted or contracted by any state agency, as defined under Wis. Stats. § 227.01(1), but also including the office of district attorney. 
(Code 1997, § 23.05)  
Sec. 16-267. - General administration. 
The common council has designated the director of public works to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The director of public works shall oversee the administration of this article and, working in consonance with the public works committee, city administrator, city engineer, and building inspector, will review erosion control and stormwater management plans, issue permits as appropriate, and monitor the effectiveness of land development measures. 
(Code 1997, § 23.06)  
Secs. 16-268—16-297. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 16-298. - Control of erosion and pollutants. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to the following sites of land development or land disturbing activities: 
(1)  Those requiring a subdivision plat approval or the construction of houses or commercial, industrial, or institutional buildings on lots of approved subdivision or condominium plats. 
(2)  Those requiring a certified survey map approval or the construction of houses or commercial, industrial, or institutional buildings on lots of approved certified survey maps. 
(3)  Those involving grading, removal of protective ground cover or vegetation, excavation, land filling or other land disturbing activity affecting a surface area of 3,000 square feet or more. 
(4)  Those involving excavation or filling or a combination of excavation and filling affecting 400 cubic yards or more of material. 
(5)  Those involving the laying, repairing, replacing, or enlarging of an underground utility, pipe or other facility, or the disturbance of road ditch, grass swale or other open channel for a distance of 300 feet or more. 
(6)  Those involving grading, removal of protective ground cover or vegetation, excavation, land filling or land disturbing activity within 200 feet of a lake, stream, or wetland when the work affects more than ten cubic yards of material. 
(7)  Those involving deposit of sediment from lake or river dredging. 
(8)  Those involving the maintenance of an existing storm water best management practice. 
(9)  Those involving a land disturbing activity, regardless of size, that the City of Delafield determines is likely to cause an adverse impact to an environmentally sensitive area or other property, or may violate any other erosion control standard set forth in this article. 
(b)  Exemptions. This article does not apply to the following: 
(1)  Construction projects that are exempted by state or federal statutes or regulations from the requirement to have a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued under 40 CFR 122, for land disturbing construction activity. 
(2)  Transportation facilities, except transportation facility construction projects that are part of a larger common plan of development such as local roads within a residential or industrial development. 
(3)  Land disturbing activities directly involved in the planting, growing and harvesting of any plant grown for human or livestock consumption and pasturing or yarding of livestock, including sod farms and tree nurseries. 
(4)  Installation of underground pipe or other utility that is plowed or bored into the ground outside of areas of channelized runoff. 
(5)  Routine maintenance for project sites that have less than five acres of land disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility. 
(c)  Exceptions. This article does not apply to state-funded or conducted sites involving street, highway, road, or bridge construction activities, meeting requirements contained in the department of transportation, department of natural resources cooperative agreement memorandum of understanding on erosion control. 
Note: Erosion and sediment control for all new construction of one- and two-family dwellings shall be consistent with the standards outlined in Wis. Stats. § 101.653. The city building inspector shall be responsible for review of proposed erosion and sediment control measures and the necessary inspection of the individual home sites. 
(d)  Erosion and sediment control plan requirements and performance standards. An erosion control plan shall describe how the permit holder and other responsible parties will minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, soil erosion and the transport of sediment from land disturbing activities to waters of the state or other property. The following requirements shall be met on all sites that are applicable to this division: 
(1)  All erosion control plans and associated BMPs shall comply with the planning, design, implementation and maintenance requirements of this division. 
(2)  All erosion control plans shall by design, achieve to the maximum extent practicable, a runoff discharge of no more than five tons of sediment per acre per year of the sediment load carried in runoff from initial grading to final stabilization. 
(3)  Erosion and sediment control BMPs may be used alone or in combination to meet the above noted performance standard. Soil loss prediction tools shall be used to estimate the sediment loss using the appropriate rainfall or runoff factor. 
(e)  General principles for preventing erosion and transport of sediment. Plans shall incorporate all of the following to the maximum extent practicable: 
(1)  Maintain existing vegetation, especially adjacent to surface waters whenever possible. 
(2)  Minimize soil compaction and preservation of topsoil. 
(3)  Minimize the time and overall area of disturbed soil surface exposed to erosive forces through project phasing and construction sequencing. 
(4)  Locate BMPs so that treatment occurs before runoff enters waters of the state. 
(f)  Specific erosion control plan requirements. The following applicable minimum requirements shall be addressed in erosion control plans. The city may require more stringent erosion and sediment control requirements set forth in this section if the city determines that additional protection is necessary due to protect environmentally sensitive areas or other property. 
(1)  Access drives and tracking. Provide access drive(s) for construction vehicles that minimize tracking of soil off site using BMPs such as stone tracking pads, tire washing or grates. Minimize runoff from adjacent areas from flowing onto or across the access drive. 
(2)  Diversion of upslope, off-site runoff. Divert off-site runoff from upslope land, if practicable, using BMPs such as earthen diversion berms and swales. Prevent erosion of the flow path and the outlet. Off-site flows that are not diverted need to be accounted for and managed on-site. 
(3)  Inlet protection. Protect inlets to storm drains, culverts and other storm water conveyance systems from sediment until the site is stabilized. 
(4)  Soil stockpiles. Locate soil stockpiles away from channelized flow and no closer than 25 feet from roads, ditches, lakes, streams, ponds, wetlands or environmental corridors, unless otherwise approved by the city. Soil stockpiles that remain in-place for more than seven days need to be protected. If a soil stockpile is inactive for more than 14 days needs to be stabilized. 
(5)  Cut and fill slopes. Minimize the length and steepness of proposed cut and fill slopes. Proper stabilization is required as soon as practicable. All slopes built to 4:1 slope or steeper require appropriate slope stabilization erosion mat. 
(6)  Channel flow. During construction, the discharge of sediment from drainage ways shall be prevented or minimized using appropriate best management practices. Ditch checks shall be placed within drainage ways and appropriately sized sediment traps or basins installed to capture sediment prior to leaving the site. All BMPs shall be designed and installed per WDNR technical standards. Stabilize drainage ways as soon as practicable and utilize appropriate channel erosion mat for all permanent drainage ways. Temporary swales may require channel erosion mat for stabilization based on duration of use and areas served, as directed by the city. 
(7)  Outlet protection. Protect outlets from erosion during site dewatering and storm water conveyance. Velocity dissipation measures may be required at discharge locations or along outfall channels to provide non-erosive flow from the structure in order to maintain and protect downstream watercourses' physical and biological characteristics and functions. 
(8)  Overland flow. Prevent or minimize sediment from leaving site overland using appropriate BMPs such as silt fence and vegetative buffers. 
(9)  Site dewatering. Treat pumped water to prevent or minimize sediment discharge. The discharge from the dewatering activities shall not cause erosion downstream. Appropriate BMPs shall be used to reduce sediment from the pumped water. 
(10)  Dust control. Minimize dust to the maximum extent practicable through proper construction phasing and timely stabilization. Use of BMPs such as site watering or mulch may be necessary if phasing and stabilization do not effectively control dust. 
(11)  Building and waste material. Properly dispose of all building and waste material in a timely manner. Prevent runoff from mingling with waste material. 
(12)  Sediment clean up. Clean up all sediment deposits that leave the site by the end of each work day, including tracked soil that originates from the permitted site. Flushing shall not be allowed unless runoff from the flushing is treated prior to discharge from the site. 
(13)  Final site stabilization. Establish vegetation with at least a density of 70 percent coverage for all areas that are not paved, not covered by a permanent structure or that employ an equivalent permanent stabilization measure. Stabilization shall be established as final grades are established. Minimize the areas of exposed soil to the maximum extent practicable. This typically requires restoration to be done in stages, especially for sites with larger areas of disturbance. 
(14)  Temporary site stabilization. Temporary stabilization measures shall be commenced for any disturbed construction site that temporarily ceases land disturbing construction activities for a period exceeding 14 calendar days. Frozen soil conditions do not exclude the site from this requirement. 
(15)  Removal of practices. Temporary BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment control shall be removed by the permit holder. 
(g)  Maintenance of construction site erosion control measures. All best management practices necessary to meet the requirements of this article shall be maintained consistent with the maintenance standards contained in the department of natural resources' stormwater construction and post-construction technical standards. The permit holder shall be responsible for maintaining the best management practices during the period of land disturbance and land development activity on the site until the site is stabilized and the permit is closed. Implementation of maintenance standards for best management practices that are not included in the stormwater construction and post-construction technical standards shall not be permitted unless prior approval is granted by the city. 
(Code 1997, § 23.07)  
Sec. 16-299. - Erosion control plan requirements. 
No landowner or land user may commence a land disturbance or land development activity subject to this section, as described above, without receiving prior approval of an erosion control plan for the site and a permit from the city. At least one landowner or land user controlling or using the site and desiring to undertake a land disturbing or land developing activity subject to this section shall submit an application for a permit and an erosion control plan or erosion control plan statement and pay an application fee to the city clerk. The applicant may file supplemental information with the city clerk to comply with directives resulting from the city's review(s). By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the city to enter the site to obtain information required for the review of the erosion control plan. Permit fees are referenced in section 16-324. 
(1)  Content of the erosion control plan for land disturbing and land development activities covering one or more acres. 
a.  Points of contact. Name, address, e-mail address and telephone number for the following or their designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice design and certification; person(s) responsible for installation of erosion control practices; and person responsible for maintenance and inspection of erosion control practices. 
b.  Site map of existing conditions. A map of existing site conditions on a scale of at least one inch equals 100 feet showing the site and immediately adjacent areas: 
1.  Site boundaries and adjacent lands, with landowner names, which accurately identify site location. 
2.  Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site. 
3.  100-year floodplains, flood fringes, and floodways. 
4.  Location of the predominant soil types. 
5.  Vegetative cover, types and locations. 
6.  Locations and dimensions of stormwater drainage systems. 
7.  Locations and dimensions of utilities, structures, roads, highways, and paving. 
8.  Site topography at a contour interval not to exceed two feet. 
9.  Any other information deemed necessary by the city. 
c.  Site plan of final conditions. A plan of proposed final site conditions on the same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes. 
d.  Site development plan. A site development plan, including: 
1.  Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing and land development activities. 
2.  Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles. 
3.  Locations and dimensions of all best management practices necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
4.  Schedule of anticipated starting and completion date of each land disturbing or land development activity, including the installation of construction site control measures needed to meet the requirements of this article. 
5.  Provisions for maintenance of the best management practices during construction. 
(2)  Content of erosion control plan for land disturbing and land development activities covering less than one acre. The erosion control plan will include a narrative that briefly describes the site; description of temporary best management practices intended for use during construction; a construction plan that describes sequence of construction, a site stabilization plan, and a work schedule. The statement will also provide the name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the landowner, developer, project engineer (if applicable), and the person(s) responsible for installation, maintenance, and inspection of erosion control practices. The applicant will also submit a simple map that indicates the location of existing and proposed dwellings, other buildings, and improvements with respect to the property lines. It will also show the direction of slopes before and after the land development or land disturbance on the site. 
(3)  Review of erosion control plan. Within three working days of receipt of the application, a copy thereof, together with a copy of the erosion control plan, shall be delivered by the clerk to the director of public works, or designee, for initial review. If the director of public works, or designee, finds the application or erosion control plan to be lacking necessary information or not in compliance with this section, the applicant shall be notified of the inadequacy as soon as practical after review. The director of public works', or designee's, report on this initial review shall be filed with the plan commission, along with the application. Within 30 days of receipt of the application, erosion control plan, and fee, the director of public works, or designee, shall review the application and erosion control plan to determine if the requirements of this section are met. The director of public works, or designee, shall approve the plan, inform the applicant, and issue a permit. If the conditions are not met, the director of public works, or designee, shall inform the applicant in writing and may either require needed information or disapprove the plan. Within 30 days of receipt of needed information, the director of public works, or designee, shall again determine if the plan meets the requirements of this section. If the plan is disapproved, the director of public works, or designee, shall inform the applicant in writing of the reasons for the disapproval. 
(4)  Permits. 
a.  Duration. Permits shall be valid for a period based on the construction schedule outlined in the approved plans. An expiration date will be issued based on the provided information but the initial permit duration shall be no longer than two years. Extension requests should be made two weeks prior to the expiration date. The director of public works, or designee, may require additional control measures as a condition of the extension, if they are necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
b.  Financial guarantee. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the city may require the applicant to provide an appropriate irrevocable letter of credit or cash to guarantee a good faith execution of the approved erosion control plan and any permit conditions. 
c.  Permit conditions. All permits shall require the permittee to: 
1.  Notify the director of public works, or designee, at least two days before commencing any land disturbing or land development activity associated with the approved plan. 
2.  Notify the director of public works, or designee, of any significant modifications proposed to be made to the approved plan. The city may require proposed changes to be submitted for review prior to incorporation into the approved plan or implementation. Any modifications made during the plan implementation without prior approval by the director of public works, or designee, is prohibited and may be subject to enforcement action. 
3.  Install all best management practices as identified in the approved erosion control plan. 
4.  Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, best management practices, and other facilities identified in the erosion control plan until maintenance responsibility is transferred to another party pursuant to the recorded maintenance agreement. 
5.  Repair any damage to adjoining properties, municipal facilities or drainage ways resulting from land developing or disturbing activities. The city may order immediate repairs or clean-up within road rights-of-way or other public lands if the city determines that such damage is caused by activities regulated by a permit under this article. With prior approval of the affected landowner, the city may also order repairs or clean-up on other affected property. 
6.  Inspect the construction control measures within 24 hours after each rain event of 0.5 inches or more and at least once each week and make needed repairs within 24 hours or as directed by the director of public works, or designee. An inspection log shall be kept and made available upon request that includes the name of the inspector, the date and time of inspection, description of present phase of construction, inspection findings that includes an assessment of the condition of erosion and sediment control measures and the installation of storm water management BMPs, and any action or repairs needed or already taken to comply with this article. 
7.  Allow the director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion control plan and other permit requirements. 
8.  Keep a copy of the approved erosion control plan on the site that includes all approved changes. 
9.  The permit holder authorizes the city, in accordance with the enforcement procedures under section 16-327, to perform any work or operations necessary to bring the erosion control practices into conformance with the approved plan and consents to charging such costs against the financial assurance per subsection (4)b of this article or to a special assessment or charge against the property as authorized under Wis. Stats. ch. 66, subch. VII. 
d.  Transfer. The city may transfer a permit issued under this article to a new applicant upon written request from the applicant and payment of the corresponding fee. The permit transfer shall not take effect until the city verifies in writing that the new applicant has satisfied all conditions of this article, including an updated list of responsible parties and the submittal of a new financial guarantee (letter of credit or cash) per subsection (4)b of this section, if applicable. 
e.  Summary approval. On parcels where land disturbing activities cover less than one acre, the director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator may review the erosion control plan and, if satisfied that there is minimal opportunity for runoff and/or erosion, grant a permit hereunder. The director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator shall consider the topography of the site and adjacent areas, proximity of the site to environmentally sensitive areas, the extent of land disturbing activities proposed, expected time to complete the proposed land disturbing activities, control measures proposed by the landowner or user, expected runoff from the subject site and adjacent areas, compliance with the department of natural resources' construction and post-construction technical standards, and any other factor deemed relevant by the director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator in determining whether to review, approve, and grant a permit. 
(Code 1997, § 23.08)  
Secs. 16-300—16-316. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 16-317. - Applicability. 
This division applies to land development and land disturbing activities which meet the applicability criteria specified in this section. Specifically, it applies to all subdivision, condominium, commercial, and industrial sites. The division also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that meets any of the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(1)  Construction site that consists of one acre or more of land disturbing construction activity. 
(2)  Construction of a new public or private road of any length. 
(3)  Construction that ultimately results in the addition of 0.5 acres or greater of impervious surfaces, including smaller individual sites that are part of a common plan or development. 
(4)  Land development activities, regardless of size of the development, which the city determines is likely to cause an adverse impact to an environmentally sensitive area or downstream property if no controls are employed. 
(Code 1997, § 23.09)  
Sec. 16-318. - Design criteria. 
Unless prior authorization is given by the director of public works, or designee, the following methods shall be used in meeting the requirements of this division: 
(1)  Water quantity components. The following methods shall be used in designing components of stormwater structures needed to meet the water quantity standards of this article: 
a.  Peak flow reducing components of stormwater structures shall be designed in accordance with standard engineering practice. 
b.  Runoff volumes and peak flow rates used in designing the water quantity components of stormwater structures shall be based on the NRCS runoff modeling methodology and are based on Volume 8 of Atlas 14, published by the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service, 2013. All peak flow calculations shall use MSE 3 rainfall distribution. 
24-Hour Precipitation Data 
1-Year 	2.40 inches 
2-Year 	2.70 inches 
10-Year 	3.81 inches 
100-Year 	6.18 inches 
 
c.  When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from off-site shall be taken into account in determining the treatment efficiency of the practice. Any impact on the efficiency shall be compensated for by increasing the size of the BMP accordingly. 
(2)  Water quality components. The following methods shall be used in designing components of stormwater structures needed to meet the water quality standards of this article: 
a.  Practices shall be designed in accordance with the department of natural resources' stormwater construction and post-construction technical standards. 
b.  Runoff volumes and peak flow rates used in the development of erosion control and storm water management plans in accordance with this article shall be based on United States Department of Agriculture - Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) methodology. Models such as SLAMM, P8 or other city-approved models may be used to evaluate the efficiency of the design in reducing total suspended solids to meet this article. Models such as SLAMM, RECARGA or other city-approved models may be used to evaluate the efficiency of the design in meeting the infiltration requirements of this article. Models distributed and supported by the Wisconsin department of natural resources may be used to determine compliance with calculating the soil loss on construction sites to meet the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1997, § 23.10)  
Sec. 16-319. - Stormwater management standards. 
(a)  Stormwater discharge quantity. Unless otherwise provided for in this article, all land development activities subject to this article shall establish on-site management measures to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharged from the site. Infiltration of stormwater runoff shall be incorporated to the maximum extent technically and financially practical to provide volume control in addition to control of peak flows. On-site management measures shall be used to meet the following minimum performance standards: 
(1)  All stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to restrict post-development flow rates to meet the following multiple storm conditions: 
a.  One-year post-developed conditions flow rate to discharge at no more than a one-year pre-developed flow, occurring under pre-development conditions specified in subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
b.  A ten-year post-developed conditions flow rate to discharge at no more than a two-year pre-developed flow, occurring under pre-development conditions specified in subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
c.  A 100-year post-developed conditions flow rate to discharge at no more than a ten-year pre-developed flow rate, occurring under pre-development conditions specified in subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(2)  Detention basin designs. 
a.  Dry detention basins. All dry detention basins shall be designed with maximum 4:1 sideslopes. All basins require emergency overflow spillways that can safely pass without overtopping the top of basin the 100-year developed conditions storm. The top of embankment shall be set at an elevation that provides a minimum of one foot of freeboard above the peak stage elevation of the 100-year post-developed conditions storm. 
b.  Wet detention basins. All wet detention basins shall be designed with maximum 3:1 side slope leading to the water's edge. The wet basin shall then include a safety shelf at a maximum 10:1 slope, with a maximum depth of 1.5 feet below permanent water surface and minimum of eight feet in width. The wet basin may then drop at a maximum 2:1 side slope below the safety shelf. The normal water depth should be no more than eight feet, unless otherwise approved by the plan commission. All wet detention basins must include an emergency spillway as outlined above. All wet detention basins shall be designed with a minimum surface area of a permanent pool, based on the particle size and the peak outflow during the one-year, 24-hour storm. Please reference Technical Standard 1001 for sizing criteria. 
(3)  Stormwater detention basins may be required to serve as temporary sedimentation facilities during the construction phase of the development. The sediment basin shall be designed per the department of natural resources' construction and post-construction technical standards, to include a minimum of three feet of sediment storage below the dewatering hole(s) and riser pipe(s) with trash guard(s). All temporary riser pipes and initial stone layer shall be wrapped with filter fabric and protected with six inches of clean stone riprap. At the end of construction when the area has been fully restored, the temporary riser pipe(s) shall be removed and permanent outlet structures established. Excess sediment needs to be removed to reestablish sediment storage prior to transferring maintenance responsibility to the maintenance agreement. 
(b)  Pre-development conditions for land developing activities shall assume a "good" level of land management. When the natural resource conservation service TR-55 method is used to calculate peak flow discharge rates and runoff values for the pre-development condition, NRCS curve numbers shall not exceed the following for the given soil hydrologic groups. When other methods for computing runoff are used, they shall assume a comparable pre-development condition. All non-developed, non-croplands should be represented as meadow/grassland or woodland, as appropriate. 
Soil Hydrologic Group: 	A 	B 	C 	D 
NRCS Curve Number for Meadow/Grassland 	39 	61 	71 	78 
NRCS Curve Number for Woodland 	30 	55 	70 	77 
NRCS Curve Number for Cropland 	55 	69 	78 	83 
 
(c)  Protective areas. 
(1)  Definition. The term "protective area" means an area of land that commences at the top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. However, in this section, the term "protective area" does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location. 
a.  For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource waters, 75 feet. 
b.  For perennial and intermittent streams identified on the Waukesha County GIS system, 50 feet. If there is a discrepancy between the Waukesha County GIS system and the applicable United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topographic map, the more stringent stream identification shall apply. 
c.  For lakes, 50 feet. 
d.  For wetlands not subject to subsection (1)e or f of this section, 50 feet. 
e.  For highly susceptible wetlands, 75 feet. Highly susceptible wetlands include the following types: calcareous fens, sedge meadows, open and coniferous bogs, low prairies, coniferous swamps, lowland hardwood swamps, and ephemeral ponds. 
f.  For less susceptible wetlands, ten percent of the average wetland width, but no less than ten feet nor more than 30 feet. Less susceptible wetlands include degraded wetlands dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass, cultivated hydric soils: and any gravel pits, or dredged material or fill material disposal sites that take on the attributes of a wetland. 
g.  In subsection (1)d to f of this section, determinations of the extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the standards and criteria in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 103.03. 
h.  Wetland boundary delineation shall be made in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 103.08(1m). This subsection does not apply to wetlands that have been completely filled in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have been partially filled in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been placed. Where there is a legally authorized wetland fill, the protective area standard need not be met in that location. 
i.  For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than 130 acres, ten feet. 
(d)  Infiltration performance standard BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to infiltrate runoff in accordance with Table 1 below. 
_____
Table 1. Post Development Infiltration Performance Standards 
% Connected 
Impervious Surface 	Description/Example Land Uses 	Post-Development 
Infiltration Volume 	Max. Effective 
Infiltration Area 
Required 
Up to 40% 	Low Imperviousness areas such as: low density residential, parks, cemeteries 	90% of pre-development 	1% of site 
More than 40% 
up to 80% 	Medium Imperviousness areas such as: medium and high density residential, multi-family residential, industrial, institutional, office park 	75% of pre-development 	2% of site 
Greater than 80% 	High Imperviousness areas such as: Commercial strip malls, shopping centers, commercial downtowns 	60% of pre-development 	2% of site 
 
Notes: 
1. All percentages are based on average annual rainfall. 
2. For low density residential developments, the post-development infiltration volume shall not be less than 25 percent of the two-year, 24-hour storm. 
_____ 
(1)  Pretreatment shall be required before infiltrating parking lot and road runoff from commercial, industrial and institutional areas. The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in accordance with subsection (g) of this section. Pretreatment options may include, but are not limited to, oil/grease separators, sedimentation or biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips. All designs shall comply with the department of natural resources' construction and post-construction technical standards. 
(2)  Infiltration source areas. 
a.  Prohibitions. Runoff from the following areas may not be infiltrated and may not qualify as contributing to meeting the requirements of this section unless demonstrated to meet the conditions of subsection (g) of this section: 
1.  Areas associated with a Tier 1 industrial facility identified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 216(2)(a), including storage, loading, and parking. Rooftops may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory authority. 
2.  Storage and loading areas of a Tier 2 industrial facility identified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 216.21(2)(b). Note that runoff from employee and guest parking and rooftop areas of a Tier 2 facility may be infiltrated but runoff from the parking area may require pretreatment. 
3.  Fueling and maintenance areas. Rooftops and canopies of fueling and vehicle maintenance areas may be infiltrated. 
(3)  Exemptions. Runoff from the following areas may be credited toward meeting the requirement when infiltrated, but the decision to infiltrate runoff from these areas is optional: 
a.  Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for commercial development. 
b.  Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for industrial development not subject to the prohibitions under subsection. 
c.  Re-development unless infiltration requirements were in-place prior for the site being re-developed. 
d.  In-fill development areas less than five acres. 
e.  Roads in commercial, industrial, and institutional land uses, and arterial residential roads. 
(4)  Location of infiltration practices. 
a.  Prohibitions. Infiltration practices may not be located in the following Areas: 
1.  Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet downgradient of direct conduits to groundwater. 
2.  Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as specified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.16(4), or within 100 feet of private well as specified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 812.08(4), for runoff infiltrated from commercial, including multi-family residential, industrial and institutional land uses or regional devices for one- and two-family residential development. 
3.  Areas where contaminates of concern, as defined in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 720.03(2), are present in the soil through which infiltration will occur. 
(e)  Separation distances. 
(1)  Infiltration practices shall be located so that the characteristics of the soil and the separation distance between the bottom of the infiltration system and the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock are in the accordance with the following table: 
Separation Distances 
and Soil Characteristics 
Source 
Area 	Separation 
Distance 	Soil 
Characteristic 
Industrial, commercial, institutional parking lots and roads 	5 feet or more 	Filtering layer 
Residential arterial roads 	5 feet or more 	Filtering layer 
Roofs draining to subsurface infiltration practices 	1 foot or more 	Native or engineered soil with particles finer than course sand 
Roofs draining to surface infiltration practices 	Not 
applicable 	
All other impervious source areas 	3 feet or more 	Filtering layer 
 
(2)  All storm water BMPs shall comply with the applicable provisions under Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 815 relating to injection wells. 
(f)  Infiltration rate exemptions. Infiltration practices located in the following areas may be credited toward meeting the requirement under the following conditions, but the decision to infiltrate under these conditions is optional: 
(1)  Where the infiltration rate of the soil measured at the proposed bottom of the infiltration system is less than 0.6 inches per hour using a scientifically credible field test method. 
(2)  Where the least permeable soil horizon to five feet below the proposed infiltration system using the U.S. Department of Agriculture method of soils analysis is one of the following: sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay. 
(g)  Alternate runoff uses. Where storage and reuse of runoff are employed, such as to support green roofs, landscape watering, toilet flushing, laundry or irrigation, such alternate uses shall be given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by this section. 
(h)  Groundwater protection. 
(1)  Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this subsection shall, to the extent technically and economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of standards application in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 140. However, if site-specific information indicates that compliance with a preventive action limit is not achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum extent practicable. 
(2)  The discharge of BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard at the point of standards application. 
(i)  Stormwater discharge quality. Unless otherwise provided for in this article, all land development activities subject to this article shall establish on-site management measures to control the quality of stormwater discharged from the site. On-site management measures shall be used to meet the following minimum standard: 
(1)  For new land development and in-fill development, stormwater discharges shall be treated to remove, based on an average annual rainfall basis, a minimum of 80 percent of the total suspended solids load, as compared to no runoff management controls. 
(2)  For redevelopment, 40 percent reduction of total suspended solids load from parking areas and roads. 
(j)  Stormwater drainage standards. All storm drainage facilities shall be installed, as indicated on the stormwater management plans required in section 16-321, as necessary to serve, and resulting from, the permitted land development. 
(1)  A drainage system shall be designed and constructed by the developer to provide for the proper drainage of the surface water of the land division or redevelopment and the drainage area of which it is a part and contributing off-site areas, unless routed around the site. 
(2)  The development shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and this drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. 
(3)  Stormwater drainage systems shall be designed to use the natural drainage and storage capabilities of the site to the fullest extent practicable. Stormwater drainage systems shall be designed to provide an economical gravity flow drainage system. 
(4)  Bridges and culverts. All new and replacement culverts and bridges over waterways shall be designed so as to accommodate, according to the categories listed below, the designated flood event without overtopping the adjacent related roadway, railway track, sidewalk, or footpath. 
(5)  Minor and collector streets used or intended to be used primarily for access to abutting properties: a ten-year recurrence interval flood discharge. 
(6)  Arterial streets and highways, other than freeways and expressways, used or intended to be used primarily to carry heavy volumes of traffic: a 50-year recurrence interval flood discharge. The depth of flow over the top of minor, collector, arterial streets and highways shall not exceed six inches above the centerline during the 100-year recurrence interval flood discharge. Bridges and culverts over waterways shall be designed to facilitate fish passage through elimination of hydraulic drops, maintenance of low flow channels, and minimization of excess stream enclosures. 
(7)  Street drainage. All streets shall be provided with an adequate storm drainage system. The street storm drainage system shall serve as the minor drainage system and shall be designed to carry street, adjacent land, and building stormwater drainage. Stormwater shall not be directed into the sanitary sewer system within the proposed subdivision development. In order to provide an acceptable level of access to property and traffic service, the drainage system shall be designed to provide two clear lanes of moving traffic on arterial streets and one ten-foot lane for moving traffic on collector and land access streets during the ten-year critical duration storm. Temporary accumulations of storm runoff from ponding or flowing water, in or near minor system components, shall be permitted during events greater than the ten-year storm, provided such accumulations do not encroach on any traffic lane of any collector or arterial street, nor be more than six inches deep as measured at the center line of any local street. 
(8)  Off-street drainage. The design of the off-street drainage system shall include the entire watershed affecting the land division and shall be extended to a watercourse, storm sewer, or ditch adequate to receive the storm drainage. When the drainage system is outside of the street right-of-way, the developer shall provide an easement for the maintenance of said system, as described in subsection (j)(13) of this section. 
(9)  Downstream drainage responsibility. In situations where the city determines that a development's stormwater contributions cause the existing downstream facilities to be exceeded for the design storm, the city reserves the right, where legally possible, to enter into a cost-sharing agreement with the owner or permittee for improvements to said downstream facilities. 
(10)  Drainage piping systems. Unless otherwise approved by the director of public works, or designee, all drainage piping of 12-inch diameter and greater size in street rights-of-way shall be constructed of reinforced concrete pipe, as follows: 
Pipe Size 	Required Class 
12" 	Class V 
15" 	Class IV 
18" or larger 	Class III 
 
(11)  Storm sewer manholes shall be 48-inch minimum diameter. Catch basins with two-foot sumps shall be provided at all storm inlets. 
(12)  Agricultural drains. Agricultural drain tiles that are disturbed during construction shall be restored, reconnected, or connected to public storm drainage facilities. 
(13)  Open channel systems. Where open channels are used in either the minor or major drainage system, they shall be designed so as to minimize maintenance requirements. They shall be also be designed to carry the peak flows from a ten-year, 24-hour design storm. Side slopes shall not be steeper than a three-to-one slope unless approved by the director of public works, or designee. 
(14)  Protection of drainage systems. The developer shall adequately protect all ditches to the satisfaction of the director of public works, or designee. Open channels shall be restored with appropriate materials (matting, rip-rap, etc.), as determined by director of public works, or designee, based on calculated flows and velocities. 
(15)  Drainage easements. Where a land division, development, or redevelopment is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, storm sewer, channel, or stream: 
a.  The developer or landowner shall provide a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse or storm sewer, and such further width for construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose and as may be necessary to comply with this section; or 
b.  The watercourse, drainageway, storm sewer, channel, or stream may be relocated in such a manner that the maintenance of adequate drainage will be assured. When channels are relocated, the developer or owner shall provide a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming to the lines of the relocated watercourse, and such further width for construction, or both. 
c.  Whenever possible, drainage shall be maintained in an easement by an open channel with vegetated banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume flow. In all cases, such easements shall be wide enough to convey the ten-year critical duration storm for the minor drainage system. The drainage easement shall not be less than 20 feet in width and should be 30 feet in width when site conditions allow. 
(16)  Structure protection and safety. Flows generated by the 100-year critical duration storm under planned land use conditions may exceed the design capacity of conveyance systems, but shall not come in contact with any buildings. For buildings designed for human occupation on a regular basis, the following additional requirements shall apply: 
a.  The lowest elevation of the structure that is exposed to the ground surface shall be a minimum of two feet above the maximum water elevation produced by the 100-year critical duration storm, including flows through any storm water BMP that is designed to store water at a depth of three feet or greater. 
b.  All structures shall be setback a distance, as follows, from the closest edge of the water elevation produced by the 100-year critical duration storm: 
1.  Residential structures 25 feet. 
2.  Commercial and industrial structures ten feet. 
(k)  Exceptions. The requirements for on-site stormwater management measures established in subsections (a) through (c) of this section are not applicable in areas which are determined by the plan commission to be covered by an approved stormwater management system plan which was developed and approved as an alternative stormwater management planning approach to carrying out on-site measures consistent with the purpose and intent of this article. In such cases, the recommendations of the approved stormwater management system plan shall be applied either through the installation of stormwater management provisions recommended to be included on the development site being considered and/or through the payment of a fee as set forth in section 16-324. These minimum requirements may also be waived in whole or in part by the plan commission, in cooperation with the director of public works, or designee, upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies: 
(1)  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. This requires meeting all the following conditions: the off-site facility is in place; is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the requirements of this division; and the facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and maintenance. 
(2)  Director of public works, or designee, finds that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is infeasible due to space or site restrictions. 
(l)  Fee in lieu of on-site stormwater management practices. Where the plan commission, in cooperation with the director of public works, or designee, waives all or part of the minimum on-site stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided by a responsible entity downstream, the applicant may be required to pay a fee set by the common council. In setting the fee for land development projects, the city shall consider an equitable distribution of the cost of land, engineering design, construction, and maintenance, as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 66.55. 
(m)  General considerations for on-site and off-site stormwater management measures. The following considerations shall be observed in managing stormwater runoff: 
(1)  Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used for stormwater infiltration and conveyance, to the extent practical and reasonably feasible, to meet the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream property or public safety. 
(n)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Internally drained sites. The site is internally drained and will not discharge runoff from the site after development occurs. The site must be evaluated using post developed conditions assuming frozen conditions (CN = 98), no infiltration and the 100-year critical duration storm when determining safe structure elevations. 
(2)  Site conditions. It may be impracticable to meet the requirements due to site conditions such as slopes, soils, proximity to structures or desirable trees, limited site dimensions, surrounding land uses, the potential for groundwater contamination, public health or safety problems, or other factors beyond the control of the developer. No site shall be entitled to an exemption under this section due solely to the size of the proposed land development activity in relation to the parcel size. However, the city shall provide special consideration in granting exemptions under this section for the following type of sites: 
a.  Redevelopment sites; 
b.  In-fill development areas less than five acres; 
c.  Highway projects where limited public right-of-way land is available for the installation of storm water BMPs. 
(Code 1997, § 23.11)  
Sec. 16-320. - Permit requirements and procedures. 
(a)  Permit required. No landowner or land operator may undertake a land development activity subject to this article without receiving a permit from the city prior to commencing the proposed activity. The permit will be a combined permit for erosion control and stormwater management. 
(b)  Permit application and fee. Unless otherwise excepted by this article, any landowner or operator desiring a permit shall submit to the city a permit application made on a form provided by the city for that purpose. At least one landowner or land user controlling or using the site and desiring to undertake a land developing activity subject to this section shall submit an application for a permit, a stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement, erosion control plan and pay required fees to the city clerk. The applicant may file supplemental information with the city clerk to comply with directives resulting from the city's initial review. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the city to enter the site to obtain information required for the review of the erosion control plan, stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement. 
(1)  Unless otherwise excepted by this article, a permit application must be accompanied by the following in order that the permit application be considered by the director of public works, or designee: a stormwater management plan with a maintenance agreement, erosion control plan, any payment of "fees in lieu" prior to permit issuance, a non-refundable permit administration fee and signed professional services reimbursement form. 
(2)  The erosion control plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 16-299; the stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 16-321; the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 16-322; and fees shall be those established by the plan commission as set forth in section 16-324. 
(c)  Review and approval of permit application. The stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement will be reviewed along the same timeline as that for review of the erosion control plan, as specified in section 16-299(3). 
(d)  Permit conditions. All permits issued under this article shall be subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under this article shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The director of public works, or designee, may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition, following written notification of the permittee. An action by the city to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in accordance with section 16-327. 
(1)  Compliance with this permit does not relieve the permit holder of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. The city may require applicant to obtain other permits or plan approvals prior to issuing a permit. 
(2)  The permit holder shall design, install, and maintain all structural and non-structural stormwater management measures in accordance with the approved erosion control plan, stormwater management plan, maintenance agreement, and the permit. A copy of all approved plans shall be maintained at the construction site all times during normal business hours until all temporary BMPs have been removed. 
(3)  The permit holder shall notify the director of public works, or designee, within 48 hours of commencing any work in conjunction with the stormwater management plan, and within three working days upon completion of the stormwater management practices. If required as a special condition, the permit holder shall make additional notification according to a schedule set forth by the plan commission in cooperation with the director of public works, or designee, so that practice installations can be inspected during construction. 
(4)  Completed structural stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection to determine if they are built in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and ordinance. The director of public works, or designee, shall notify the permit holder in writing of any changes required in such practices to bring them into compliance with conditions of this permit. The practice installation required as part of this division shall be certified as built by a licensed professional engineer representing the permit holder. 
(5)  The permit holder shall notify the director of public works, or designee, of any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved stormwater management or erosion control plan. The director of public works, or designee, may require that the proposed modifications be submitted for approval prior to incorporation into the stormwater management or erosion control plan and execution. 
(6)  The permit holder shall maintain all stormwater management practices specified in the approved stormwater management plan until the practices either become the responsibility of the city, or are transferred to subsequent private owners as specified in the approved maintenance agreement. 
(7)  The permit holder shall allow access to the director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator for the purpose of inspecting the property for compliance with the approved stormwater management and erosion control plan and permit. 
(8)  If so directed by the city, the permit holder shall repair at the permit holder's own expense all damage to adjoining properties, municipal facilities and drainage ways caused by erosion, siltation, stormwater runoff, or equipment tracking from the holder's permit site, where such damage is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the approved stormwater management or erosion control plan. 
(9)  The permit holder authorizes the city, following written notification, to perform any work or operations necessary to bring stormwater management or erosion control measures into conformance with the approved stormwater management or erosion control plan, and consents to placing associated costs upon the tax roll as a special lien against the property or to charging such costs against the financial guarantee posted for the project. 
(10)  Where a stormwater management plan involves changes in direction, increases in peak rate, and/or total volume of runoff off a site, the planning commission in cooperation with the director of public works, or designee, may require the permittee to make appropriate legal arrangements with adjacent property owners concerning the prevention of endangerment to downstream property or public safety. 
(11)  The permit holder is subject to the enforceable actions detailed in section 16-327 if the permit holder fails to comply with the terms of this permit. 
(12)  Letter of credit or cash. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the plan commission shall require the applicant to provide an appropriate irrevocable letter of credit or cash to guarantee good faith execution of the approved erosion control and stormwater management plan, maintenance agreement, and permit conditions. 
(e)  Permit duration. Permits shall be valid for a period based on the construction schedule outlined in the approved plans with an initial maximum duration of two years. An expiration date will be issued based on the provided information. Extension requests should be made two weeks prior to the expiration date. The director of public works, or designee, may require additional control measures as a condition of the extension, if they are necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1997, § 23.12)  
Sec. 16-321. - Stormwater management plans. 
(a)  Plan requirements. The stormwater management plan required under section 16-320(b) shall contain any information the director of public works, or designee, may need to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the area affected by the land development activity, the potential impacts of the proposed development upon the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges, the potential impacts upon water resources and drainage utilities, and the effectiveness and acceptability of proposed stormwater management measures in meeting the performance standards set forth in this article. Stormwater management plans shall contain at a minimum the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, e-mail address and telephone number for the following or their designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice design and certification; person(s) responsible for installation of erosion control and stormwater management measures; person(s) responsible for maintenance of stormwater measures prior to the transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party. 
(2)  A proper legal description of the property proposed to be developed referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat. 
(3)  Existing (pre-development) site conditions, including: 
a.  A site map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. The site map shall show the following: site location; predominant soil types and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition with accompanying runoff curve numbers; topographic contours of the site not to exceed two-foot contour interval; topography and drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; watercourses that may affect or be affected by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections, including time of travel and time of concentration applicable to each; watershed boundaries used in determinations of peak flow discharge rates and discharge volumes from the site; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site; limits of the 100-year floodplain; location of municipal or community wells located within 400 feet and private wells located within 100 feet of stormwater detention ponds, infiltration basins, or infiltration trenches; delineation of wellhead protection areas delineated pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.16. 
b.  Computations of the peak flow discharge rates and discharge volumes, from each discharge point in the development, including analysis of the capacity of downstream drainage conveyance systems. At a minimum, computations must be made for the following 24-hour storm events: one-year, two-year; ten-year; and 100-year. All major assumptions used in developing input shall be clearly stated. The areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map(s). 
c.  A storm sewer system map, showing the location, size, material type, and invert elevations of all existing and proposed storm sewers. 
(4)  Site development plan, including: 
a.  A narrative summary of the overall storm water management plan including an explanation of the BMPs proposed and why they were chosen, how the plan meets the requirements of this article, an explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural topography and land cover features to minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and wetlands, and explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management measures in the development area imposed by wellhead protection plans and ordinances. 
b.  A site map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet showing: proposed land uses including vegetative cover type and accompanying runoff curve numbers; proposed topographic contours of the site not to exceed two feet; proposed drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; locations and dimensions of drainage and access easements; flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections, including time of travel and time of concentration applicable to each; location and type of all stormwater management conveyance and treatment practices, including the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area; location and type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the drainage and treatment practices to the nearest adequate outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural drainage way; watershed boundaries used in determinations of peak flow discharge rates and discharge volumes; and amendments to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site. 
c.  Computations of the peak flow discharge rates and discharge volumes, from each discharge point in the development, including analysis of the capacity of downstream drainage conveyance systems. At a minimum, computations must be made for the following 24-hour storms: one-year, two-year; ten-year; and 100-year. All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be clearly stated. The areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map(s). 
d.  Investigations of soils and groundwater required for the placement and design of stormwater management measures. Adequate soil boring information must be provided based on WDNR Technical Standards 1002. 
e.  Design computations including type, size and location for all pipes, open channels and other proposed storm water conveyance systems and all applicable assumptions. Cross-sections of proposed conveyances may be required if determined critical. 
f.  Detailed cross-sections and profiles of each BMP showing all critical design features, side slopes, structures, soil profiles and applicable elevations, including seasonal highwater table. 
g.  Detailed drawings with specifications for inlets and/or outlets. 
h.  Detailed construction notes explaining all necessary procedures to be followed to properly implement the plan, including seeding and restoration specifications, timing and sequencing of construction and any temporary measures needed to protect BMPs during the construction phase. 
(b)  Exceptions. Director of public works, or designee, may prescribe alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site stormwater management performance standards under section 16-319(c). 
(c)  Waivers. Director of public works, or designee, may waive some of the requirements of subsection (a) of this section to accommodate smaller scale projects. 
(Code 1997, § 23.13)  
Sec. 16-322. - Maintenance agreement. 
(a)  Maintenance agreement required. The maintenance agreement required for stormwater management measures under section 16-320 shall be an agreement between the city and the permittee to provide for maintenance of stormwater management practices beyond the duration period of this permit. The agreement or recordable document shall be filed with the city clerk and recorded with the Waukesha County register of deeds so that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management measure(s). 
(b)  Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following provisions: 
(1)  Identification of the stormwater management measure(s), their design components, and description of all long term maintenance activities that will likely be required for each for each measure included in the agreement, and an estimated time interval between each activity. 
(2)  Identification of the landowner(s), organization or municipality responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management measure(s). For subdivisions, all storm water management measures that collect runoff from more than one lot shall be located on outlots, unless otherwise requested by the permittee and approved by the city. For all privately owned outlots, ownership shall be by proportional undividable interest of all properties that are within the control of the permittee and drain to the BMP. However, the permittee may combine ownership of more than one storm water management measure within the site. 
(3)  The landowner(s), organization, or city shall maintain stormwater management practices in accordance with the stormwater practice maintenance provisions contained in the approved stormwater management plan submitted under section 16-321. 
(4)  The director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator is authorized to access the property to conduct inspections of stormwater practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and operated in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(5)  The city representative conducting the inspection shall maintain public records of the results of the site inspections, shall inform the designated entity responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and shall specifically indicate any corrective actions required to bring the stormwater management practice into proper working condition. 
(6)  Upon notifying the designated entity of maintenance problems which require correction, the specified corrective actions shall be taken within 24 hours, or as specified by the city. 
(7)  The city is authorized to perform the corrected actions identified in the inspection report if the landowner does not make the required corrections in the specified time period. The costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special assessment against the property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the work is completed. 
(Code 1997, § 23.14)  
Sec. 16-323. - Financial guarantee. 
(a)  Establishment of the guarantee. 
(1)  The director of public works, or designee, may require the applicant to furnish the city with a financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall be acceptable to the city prior to release of a permit. The financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the director of public works, or designee, to be the estimated cost of constructing and installing the erosion control and stormwater management practices and the estimated cost of maintenance during the period which the designated party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. A financial guarantee shall not be required of departments, boards, commissions, public offices, and corporations having the authority of eminent domain under Wis. Stats ch. 32. 
(2)  The financial guarantee shall be sufficient to cover all phases of the plan from clearing and stockpiling operations to final grading, landscaping, and maintenance, and shall give the city the authority to use the funds to complete the project if the applicant defaults or does not properly implement the approved plan. 
(b)  Conditions for release. Conditions for release of the financial guarantee are as follows: 
(1)  The director of public works, or designee, shall release the portion of the financial guarantee pertaining to installation of erosion and sediment control and stormwater management practices, minus any costs incurred by the city to complete installation, once the site has been stabilized with vegetative cover (including vegetative cover required as a result of utility distribution system installation) and the best management practice installation, required as a part of this article, has been certified as built by a licensed professional engineer. 
(2)  The director of public works, or designee, shall release the portion of the financial security established to assure maintenance of stormwater practices, minus any costs incurred by the city, at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance agreement. 
(Code 1997, § 23.15)  
Sec. 16-324. - Fee schedule. 
The fees referred to in other sections of this article shall be established by the city council and may be modified from time to time by resolution. A schedule of fees established by the city shall be available for review at the office of the city clerk. The landowner, land user, permit holder, or other responsible party is also responsible for payment of costs related to review of proposed erosion control and stormwater management plans and for project inspection and related administrative costs related to city inspections conducted to ensure compliance with approved erosion control and stormwater management plans, per the inspection schedule specified in section 16-325. 
(Code 1997, § 23.16)  
Sec. 16-325. - Inspection. 
(a)  The director of public works, or designee, shall inspect construction sites at least once a month to ensure compliance with the erosion control plan and the stormwater management plan. The frequency of inspections may increase based on the proximity of the project to outstanding resources or if site conditions warrant it. After the project has been completed and accepted by the city, the director of public works, or designee, may inspect the site as needed to ensure stormwater management practices are being maintained in accordance with the approved stormwater management maintenance agreement. The director of public works, or designee, will notify the permittee in writing of any deficiencies which require correction. The permittee shall correct said deficiencies within ten days or notify the director of public works, or designee, of a reasonable time frame in which the repairs will be accomplished. 
(b)  The city authorizes the director of public works, or designee, or other city staff access to property to inspect all existing basins within the city, within a drainage easement, a minimum of once per year, regardless of when the basins were constructed, to determine whether repairs are necessary. The director of public works, or designee, will create a record of the inspection and, if necessary, notify the responsible party that repairs are required to be made within a ten-day period, depending on weather conditions. If the repairs are not made within this period or an acceptable schedule for repairs is not submitted, the city shall have the authority to make said repairs and bill the property owner immediately following the repairs, or make an assessment against the property on the tax rolls. 
(c)  If land disturbing or land development activities are being carried on without a permit, the director of public works, or designee, shall enter the land pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 66.122 and 66.123. 
(Code 1997, § 23.17)  
Sec. 16-326. - Illicit discharges. 
(a)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  Discharges. Except for stormwater and other discharges specifically exempted under subsection (b) of this section, no discharge, spilling or dumping of substances or materials shall be allowed into receiving water bodies or onto driveways, sidewalks, parking lots or other areas that drain into the storm drainage system. 
(2)  Connections. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practice applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this section unless found to have an adverse impact on the stormwater: 
(1)  Discharges authorized by a permit issued by the Wisconsin department of natural resources. 
(2)  Discharges resulting from firefighting activities. 
(3)  Discharges from uncontaminated ground water, potable water source, roof drains, foundation drain and sump pump, air conditioning condensation, springs, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, water main and hydrant flushing and swimming pools if the water has been dechlorinated. 
(c)  Notice of violation. Whenever the City of Delafield finds a violation of this section, the City of Delafield may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible party. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(2)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(3)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contaminated hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(4)  Any responsible party that fails to comply with a notice of violation under this section shall be subject to further enforcement under the provisions of section 16-327 below. 
(Code 1997, § 23.18)  
Sec. 16-327. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Issuance of a stop work order. The director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator may post a stop work order if: 
(1)  Any land disturbing or land development activity regulated under this article is being undertaken without a permit; or 
(2)  The approved erosion control plan, stormwater management plan, or maintenance agreement are not being implemented in a good faith manner; or 
(3)  The conditions of the permit are not being met. 
(b)  Noncompliance. If the permittee does not cease the activity or comply with the erosion control plan, stormwater management plan, maintenance agreement, or permit conditions within ten days, the director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator may revoke the permit. 
(c)  Cease and desist order. If the landowner or land user where no permit has been issued does not cease the activity within ten days, the director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator may request the city to issue a cease and desist order. 
(d)  Retraction of stop work order or revocation. The director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator may retract the stop work order or the revocation. 
(e)  Nonemergency and emergency violations. 
(1)  Nonemergency violations. Ten days after posting a stop work order, the director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator may issue a notice of intent to the permittee, landowner, or land user of the city's intent to perform work necessary to comply with this section. The director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator may enter the land and commence work after 14 days from issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work performed or caused to be performed by the city and, in addition, all administrative costs of the city, including office staff and legal, plus interest at the rate authorized by the city council, shall be billed to the permittee, landowner, or land user. In the event a permittee, landowner, or land user fails to pay the amount due, the clerk shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special charge against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.60(16) or deduct the amount from the financial guarantee. 
(2)  Emergency violations. Improper or inadequate installation of erosion control or stormwater management facilities or lack of maintenance of these facilities may cause irreparable environmental damage. Accordingly, a summary procedure is necessary to install, repair, or replace erosion control or stormwater facilities should it be necessary to prevent irreparable harm to the environment. In situations where in the opinion of the director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator irreparable harm may result if corrective measures are not immediately taken, the city may order immediate installation, repair, or replacement of erosion control or stormwater management facilities. An emergency is defined as a situation existing which, if not rectified immediately, would cause damage to neighboring properties, public properties, or the environment. The director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator shall allow no more than 24 hours for compliance with the order for installation, repair, or replacement or erosion control or stormwater management facilities. In the absence of compliance, the city may go on the land and commence the work or cause the work to be completed by third parties. The costs of the work performed, plus interest at the rate authorized by the city council, and in addition all indirect expenses set forth in subsection (e)(1) of this section, shall be billed to the permittee, landowner, or land user. In the event a permittee, landowner, or land user fails to pay the amount due, the clerk shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect the costs as a special charge against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.60(16). 
(f)  Penalty. The city is authorized to refer any violation of this article, or of a stop work order or cease and desist order issued pursuant to this article, to the city attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings in any court with jurisdiction. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance and is subject to the penalties described in section 1-4. 
(g)  Injunction, etc. Compliance with the provisions of this section may also be enforced by injunction, abatement of nuisances, or other appropriate and available remedy. 
(Code 1997, § 23.19)  
Sec. 16-328. - Appeals. 
(a)  Board of appeals. The board of appeals created pursuant to section 52-291 pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e): 
(1)  Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision, or determination made by the plan commission, director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator in administering this section. 
(2)  Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this section which are not contrary to the public interest and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this section will result in unnecessary hardship. 
(3)  Shall use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances. 
(b)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the plan commission, director of public works, or designee, building inspector, or administrator. 
(Code 1997, § 23.20)  
Sec. 16-329. - Validity. 
The several sections, subsections, and paragraphs of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any section, subsection, or paragraph of this article shall be declared by a decision of a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the other provisions of the article, or of the section of which the invalid portion or paragraph may be a part. 
(Code 1997, § 23.21)  
Sec. 16-330. - Effective date. 
This article shall be effective upon passage, approval, and publication, and shall apply to all projects of land disturbing and land development activities commenced after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except that this article shall not apply to construction activities for which a building permit or other construction authorization has been issued as of the said effective date. 
(Code 1997, § 23.22)  
Chapter 18 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Recognition, bylaws, funds and compensation. 
(a)  Adoption of inter-municipal agreement. Pursuant to article XIII of the inter-municipal agreement between the Villages of Nashotah and Chenequa and the City of Delafield dated June 17, 2009, that created the lake country fire and rescue, the terms of said inter-municipal agreement are incorporated herein and made part of this chapter along with any amendments duly made to such inter-municipal agreement adopted subsequent to its adoption, for purposes of creating the lake country fire and rescue, lake country fire board, and lake country fire commission referred to therein. A copy of the inter-municipal agreement as amended from time-to-time shall be attached hereto as an addendum. 
(b)  Recognition. The lake country fire and rescue is hereby officially recognized as the fire and rescue department of the city, and the duty of providing fire, ambulance and rescue services in the city is delegated to that department. 
(Code 1997, § 5.01; Rep. & Recr. #655)  
Sec. 18-2. - State codes adopted; automatic sprinkler protection. 
(a)  State codes adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the statutory provisions of Wis. Stats. § 101.14, Fire Inspections, Prevention, Detection and Suppression, and the following chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Codes and National Fire Protection Association Codes are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Code as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute or code provision incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this Code. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes and codes incorporated herein are considered to be made a part of this Code in order to secure uniform statewide regulation: 
SPS 	307 	Explosives 
SPS 	310 	Flammable and Combustive Liquids 
SPS 	311 	Liquefied Petroleum Gases 
SPS 	312 	Liquefied Natural Gas 
SPS 	313 	Compressed Natural Gas 
SPS 	314 	Fire Prevention 
SPS 	316 	Electrical Code 
SPS 	328 	Smoke Detectors 
SPS 	350 	Administration and Enforcement 
SPS 	351 	Definitions and Standards 
SPS 	352 	General Requirements 
SPS 	353 	Structural Requirements 
SPS 	354 	Factories, Office and Mercantile Buildings 
SPS 	355 	Theaters and Assembly Halls 
SPS 	356 	Schools and Other Places of Instruction 
SPS 	357 	Residential Occupancies 
SPS 	358 	Health Care, Detention and Correctional Facilities 
SPS 	359 	Hazardous Occupancies 
SPS 	360 	Child Care Facilities 
SPS 	361 	Community-Based Residential Facilities and Sheltered Facilities for Battered Women 
SPS 	362 	Specialty Occupancies 
SPS 	364 	Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning 
SPS 	366 	Uniform Multi-Family Dwellings 
SPS 	370 	Historic Building Code 
SPS 	375-379 	Existing Buildings 
NFPA 	13 	Installation of Sprinkler Systems 
NFPA 	13R 	Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies (multi-family) 
NFPA 	14 	Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems 
NFPA 	24 	Installation of Private Fire Service Mains 
NFPA 	25 	Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire Protection Systems 
NFPA 	72 	National Fire Alarm Code 
NFPA 	291 	Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants 
NFPA 	704 	Identification of the Fire Hazards of Materials for Emergency Response 
NFPA 	231D 	Storage of Rubber Tires 
NFPA 	1231 	Water Supplies for Suburban and Rural Fire Fighting 
 
(b)  Automatic sprinkler protection. 
(1)  Purpose. To provide the means for the automatic extinguishment of fire in buildings or parts of buildings which because of their size, construction or occupancy or lack of suitable protective equipment, constitute a special fire hazard to life or property or an excessive burden upon the fire extinguishing capabilities of the fire department. 
(2)  Design and installation. The design and installation of said automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed per National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 13, 13D, and 13R, and maintained per NFPA 25 codes. All single-family and two-family dwellings under the Uniform Dwelling Code (UDC) are exempt. 
(3)  Where required. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained in operable condition in the following new occupancies and locations: 
a.  Buildings used as chapter 54—Factories, offices, and mercantile occupancies. This classification includes all factories, workshops, office buildings, mercantile establishments, warehouses, exhibition buildings, and places where not more than 100 persons assemble for recreation, entertainment, worship, or dining purposes. 
1.  Building is of Class 1 or Class 2 fire-resistive construction, where the area exceeds 15,000 square feet per floor or 25,000 square feet total area of all floors. 
2.  Building is of Class 3—6 non-fire-resistive construction, where the area exceeds 12,000 square feet per floor or 21,000 square feet total area of all floors. 
3.  Building is of Class 7 or Class 8 non-fire-resistive construction, where the area exceeds 10,000 square feet per floor or 10,000 square feet total area of all floors. 
4.  Building has three floor levels or more in height above grade regardless of area. 
b.  Buildings used as chapter 55—Theaters and assembly halls occupancies. This classification includes theaters and assembly halls. 
1.  Building is one level and 6,000 square feet or more, regardless of building construction class. 
2.  Building has two floor levels or more in height above grade regardless of area. 
c.  Buildings used as chapter 56—Schools and places of instruction occupancies. This classification includes all public and private schools, universities, colleges, academies, seminaries, libraries, and museums and art galleries. 
1.  Building is of Class 1 or Class 2 fire-resistive construction, where the area exceeds 10,000 square feet per floor or 20,000 square feet total area of all floors. 
2.  Buildings of Class 3—8 non-fire-resistive construction, automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed throughout the building, regardless of size. 
3.  Building has three floor levels or more in height above grade regardless of area. 
d.  Buildings used as chapter 57—Residential occupancies. This classification includes motels, hotels, dormitories, homes for the aged, sheltered facilities for battered women serving more than 20 occupants, rooming houses, convents and monasteries, and community-based facilities located in existing buildings serving more than 20 unrelated adults. 
1.  Automatic sprinklers shall be installed throughout such buildings regardless of size or type of construction. 
2.  Building that has residential units mixed with other types of occupancies, such as mercantile space on the first floor and residential space on the second floor, shall be sprinkled throughout the entire building. 
e.  Buildings used as chapter 58—Health care, detention and correctional facilities occupancies. This classification includes health care facilities, nursing homes, and detention and correctional facilities. 
Automatic sprinklers shall be installed throughout such buildings regardless of size or type of construction. 
f.  Buildings used as chapter 59—Hazardous occupancies. This classification includes storage garages, body shops, and repair garages. 
1.  Buildings of Class 1 or Class 2 fire-resistive construction, and is 10,000 square feet or more in total area. 
2.  Buildings of Class 3—8 non-fire-resistive construction, and is 6,000 square feet or more in total area. 
3.  Building has two floor levels or more in height above grade regardless of area. 
4.  In any basement or sub-basement if a vehicle can be parked therein. 
g.  Buildings used as chapter 61—Community-based residential facilities and sheltered facilities for battered women occupancies. This classification includes all buildings used as CBRF, providing care, treatment and services to nine through 20 unrelated adults, to be located in existing buildings. 
Automatic sprinklers shall be installed throughout such buildings regardless of size or type of construction. 
h.  Buildings used as chapter 66—Uniform multi-family dwellings occupancies. This classification includes all multi-family dwellings and any addition to an existing multi-family dwelling constructed after April 1, 1995, and to any building or portion of a building which is converted to a multi-family dwelling after April 1, 1995. 
Buildings shall be sprinklered in accordance with Table 66.33-B. 
(4)  New additions, remodeling, change of use. 
a.  If more than 50 percent of the gross interior area of a building is remodeled and/or added to, sprinkler protection shall be provided throughout the entire building. However, if the addition or remodeled area is separated from the existing building by a fire division wall as specified by the Wisconsin Administrative Code, the existing may be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
b.  Any building, with or without an existing sprinkler system, that has a change of use, and the hazard and/or life safety becomes more severe, the entire building shall conform to section 18-2. 
c.  Substitute fire suppression systems may be used in lieu of a sprinkler system when the jurisdictional authority determines the use of water could damage equipment or materials, or such system is impossible or impracticable to install. Said equivalent shall depend on the type of occupancies, and the type of structure. Smoke detectors and/or other fire protection devices may be required. 
(5)  Approval of plans and systems. 
a.  Prior to the installation of a sprinkler system, plans must be submitted to the fire department for review. All sprinkler systems and plans must meet the standards of the National Fire Protection Association, Wisconsin Commercial Building Code, and codes of the City of Delafield. 
b.  Two or more copies of sprinkler plans have been submitted to, and approved by the fire department. 
c.  All submitted plans must be drawn to a scale no less than one-eighth inch equal to one foot. Site plans shall show the location of water laterals, hydrants, and fire department connection. All plans must be stamped and signed in accordance with Wisconsin department of commerce division of industry, labor and human relations. 
d.  Approved plans must be stamped approved by the fire department along with the date of approval. One copy shall be kept on file with the fire department. 
e.  The fire department's approval of sprinkler plans does not affirm the accuracy of any calculations or system design performed by the contractor. Full responsibility for the accuracy of any calculations or the system's design is the contractor's. 
f.  The fire department must witness the final acceptance test of the sprinkler system. The building or area of the building may not be occupied before the test is completed. The fire department must be notified two working days in advance of an acceptance test. 
(6)  Maintenance. 
a.  Sprinkler systems and standpipe systems shall be maintained in operative condition at all times, regardless if required. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection so required; except this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from temporarily reducing or discontinuing the protection where necessary to make tests, repairs, alterations, or additions. 
c.  The fire department shall be notified when the system has been shut down for any reason, and again when the system has been restored to service. 
d.  Records of inspections, tests, and maintenance as specified in NFPA 25 shall be kept and shall be made available, upon request, to the department. 
(7)  Inspections. Every sprinkler system required by the Municipal Code, or by the Administrative Rules of the State of Wisconsin, shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 25. The results of the testing shall be forwarded to the fire department on an annual basis. 
(8)  Fees. The fee schedule for automatic sprinkler protection fees are established, from time and time, by resolution adopted by the lake country fire and rescue department fire board. 
(c)  Alarm systems. All sprinkler, suppression, and detection systems shall be connected to an approved alarm system and installed and maintained to NFPA 72 standard. 
(1)  Approval of plans and systems. 
a.  Prior to the installation of a fire alarm system, plans must be submitted to the fire department for review. All fire alarm systems and plans must meet the standards of the National Fire Protection Association, Wisconsin Commercial Building Code, and codes of the City of Delafield. 
b.  Two or more copies of fire alarm plans have been submitted to, and approved by the fire department. 
(2)  Installation. 
a.  The alarm system shall be monitored by an Underwriters Laboratory (U.L.), or equal, listed monitoring station. 
Exception: A monitoring station is not required if the building has occupants in the premises on a 24-hour basis. 
b.  The alarm/indicator panel shall be located in the main entry foyer or airlock of the building or in a location approved by the department. All functions for reset and area identification shall be performed at this panel. 
c.  The alarm system shall be audible to the interior of the building in all areas of the building. 
(3)  Maintenance and inspections. 
a.  The alarm system shall be maintained in operative condition at all times. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection so required; except this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from temporarily reducing or discontinuing the protection where necessary to make tests, repairs, alterations, or additions. 
c.  The fire department shall be notified when the system has been shut down for any reason, and again when the system has been restored to service. 
d.  Records of inspections, tests, and maintenance as specified in NFPA 72 shall be kept and shall be available, upon request, to the department. 
(4)  Fee. Plan review: $75.00. 
(d)  Fire department standpipes/risers. 
(1)  The design, installation, and maintenance of standpipe systems shall be in accordance with this section and NFPA 14, Standard for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems. 
(2)  The installation of a fire suppression system will not supersede the requirements for installation of fire department standpipes. 
(3)  Standpipes shall be installed in all buildings with three floor levels or more above grade or as required by the fire department. 
(4)  Standpipe connections shall have a 2½-inch to 1½-inch reducer cap. 
(e)  Security key and vault system. 
(1)  Purpose. When access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or firefighting purposes. 
(2)  Key box required. The Knox Box vault system has been adopted for use by this fire department. A Knox Box shall be installed in all existing buildings which have an automatic alarm system which is monitored or an automated sprinkler system. The key box shall be a type approved by the fire department and shall contain those keys found to be necessary to provide emergency access. 
Exception: This section does not apply to one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Location. The Knox Box shall be installed at such location as designated by the fire chief or deputy fire inspector. 
(4)  Property owner responsible. The property owner is responsible to assure that keys maintained within a key box are those of the current type. When a change of locks within the building is necessary, the fire department shall be notified with new keys placed in the key box. 
(5)  Installation. The Knox Box shall be installed at owner's or occupant's expense. 
(f)  Fire hydrants/water systems—Private. 
(1)  General. The requirements of this section apply to private water systems that supply fire suppression systems. All fire hydrants in the City of Delafield and water mains serving said hydrants are considered public unless specifically exempted by the fire department and city council. Section 44-225 of the City of Delafield Subdivision Control Code shall apply, where applicable. (Am. #515) 
(2)  Installation and maintenance standards. Private fire hydrants and water mains shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 24 and the City of Delafield water utility regulation. All fire hydrants and water mains shall be maintained in accordance with NFPA 25. 
(3)  Approval required. Plans shall be submitted to the fire chief for review to determine compliance with the applicable standards prior to the installation of fire hydrants. 
(4)  Hydrant locations. All portions of exterior walls of newly constructed commercial, industrial and multifamily residential buildings and open storage of combustible materials shall be within 500 feet of at least two fire hydrants. Hydrant spacing shall not exceed 500 feet between any two hydrants. One- and two-family dwellings shall be within 500 feet of at least one fire hydrant. On new streets, hydrants shall be located at the intersections and the end of dead-end streets. Distances shall be measured along the path of the hose lay. Private fire hydrants shall not be located in the public right-of-way. Hydrant requirements in accordance with this standard may be met with existing public or private hydrants. The fire chief may approve alternative locations and spacing of hydrants provided hydrants meet fire suppression tactical needs. 
(5)  Setback distances. Fire hydrants shall not be located within 40 feet of any building. Fire hydrants shall be no more than ten feet and no less than five feet from the curb or edge of the street or fire apparatus access. Fire hydrants located in parking lot islands shall be a minimum of 3.5 feet from the center of the hydrants to the curb. Alternative setback distances may be considered when site conditions conflict with the provisions of this section. 
(6)  Minimum flow and system design. 
a.  Size of mains. Private water mains serving fire hydrants shall be the same size as the public main supplying the private water system, unless hydraulically calculated to provide the minimum required flow and pressure in accordance with nationally recognized standards. In all cases, mains do not need to exceed 12 inches but shall be at least eight inches in diameter. Alternative designs, based on nationally recognized standards for calculating fire flow demands, may be approved. If the minimum flow and pressure requirements cannot be supplied by a private water supply system, the owner may be required to install a public water supply system and/or multiple points of connection to public water main(s). 
b.  Valves. Control valves shall be provided to limit the number of private hydrants affected by maintenance, repair or construction. Valves shall be located at street intersections and at no more than 1,000-foot intervals. Valves shall be provided in each hydrant lead. 
c.  Outlet position. All hydrants shall be positioned so that the largest outlet faces the street or fire apparatus access route. 
d.  Hydrant height above grade. The center of the lowest outlet cap of fire hydrants shall be at least 18 inches above grade and not more than 24 inches above grade. 
e.  Hydrant colors. All fire hydrants shall have a red barrel and bonnet with white caps or as specified by city fire department. The paint shall be a reflective-type paint. (Am. #515) 
f.  Hydrant markers. Whenever the location of a fire hydrant may be obscured by its placement, or due to the placement of a building, structure, fencing, grade or land, vegetation, snow accumulation or other obstruction of vision, the fire chief may require such fire hydrants to be marked with "above grade markers." Above grade markers are any device approved for use by the fire chief, designed to promote and enhance the ready identification of fire hydrant locations. 
g.  Obstructions. No obstructions, including but not limited to power poles, trees, bushes, fences or posts may be located within five feet of a fire hydrant. Grade changes exceeding 1.5 feet are not permitted within five feet of a fire hydrant or hydrant lead. Owners shall remove snow, vegetation or other material that has covered or obscured the view of the hydrant(s) on their property. 
h.  Installation prior to construction. Fire hydrants shall be installed and in service prior to combustible construction. 
i.  Maintenance. Inspection, tests and maintenance shall be recorded and a copy shall be forwarded to the fire chief. Fire hydrants located on private property shall be routinely inspected, repaired and maintained by the owner thereof and all fire hydrants shall satisfy the minimum performance requirements established by the city water department for city fire hydrants. Water department personnel shall have free access to any property within the city at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting, repairing and maintaining fire hydrants. Any and all costs for repair and maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
j.  Out of service hydrants. Any fire hydrant that is out of service for any reason whether for repair, maintenance, or during construction shall be covered with a durable and weather-resistant bag to indicate the fire hydrant is not useable. The fire department shall be immediately notified when fire hydrants and/or systems are out of service. Fire hydrants and/or water systems shall be repaired and returned to service within 48 hours. 
(g)  Pump access sites. 
(1)  General. "Pump access sites" are areas throughout the city as determined by the fire chief that provide access to public waterways. These areas have been designated as no parking zones. 
(2)  Parking prohibited. No person shall park any motor vehicle, trailer, wagon, or conveyance upon, or in the roadside, curb, or shoulder area immediately in front of the tract of land designated as a pump access site. 
(3)  Penalty. Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects, omits or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4. 
(h)  Underground water tanks. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  To ensure adequate water is available for the purposes of fire suppression, any developer or owner who subdivides lands into five or more residential or commercial lots shall provide an underground water tank within the platted area for fire protection purposes. The full and total cost of all engineering and legal fees, tank, installation, plumbing, fire fittings, painting, access lanes/roads, initial filling of water, land restoration, and other cost of compliance with this chapter shall be the responsibility of the developer or owner. 
b.  The underground water tank shall be in place, approved and functional before occupancy is approved for any new building within the platted areas. 
c.  A fire protection underground water tank surety in a form and in an amount determined by the city council, shall be required to ensure the system is installed and fully functional prior to any building construction. The required surety amount shall not be less than $5,000.00 in any case. Application for release of the surety shall not be considered until final approval of the system is obtained from the fire and department of public works (DPW) and all materials defined are provided. 
d.  The requirements for fire protection underground water tanks shall apply equally to new and existing developments if, after the date of enactment, in excess of four lots are created. 
e.  All specifications and installations shall follow established engineering practices, the fire department's tank installation guidelines and NFPA 1231, Standard on Water Supplies for Suburban and Rural Fire Fighting as they may be amended from time to time. All proposed installation plans and specifications shall be approved by the department before work is begun. 
f.  Within 30 days of final approval of the system, a complete set of record drawings, specifications, warranties and other requested information shall be provided to the department and DPW. 
g.  The complete installation and all associated items shall have a 24-month warranty, beginning at the final acceptance date, to be free from defects in materials and/or workmanship. If corrective actions are necessary, the developer shall make the corrections at his expense in a period determined by the city but not to exceed 60 days from notification of defect. 
(2)  When required. 
a.  The developer of new or expanded plats shall provide underground water tanks as hereby defined: 
1.  5 to 25 lots/units: minimum of one 25,000-gallon storage tank. 
2.  26 or more lots/units: 1,000-gallon storage capacity minimum for each lot. 
b.  The city, upon recommendation of the fire chief, may require greater or less capacity if it is determined, after reviewing the proximity of other water sources, that such capacity is appropriate. 
c.  All fire fittings used for installation shall be as specified by the department and the cost of these fittings shall be included as part of the overall installation. 
(3)  Location. Tank location shall be determined by the city after reviewing a recommendation from the fire chief, DPW superintendent and city engineer. 
(4)  Inspection and acceptance. 
a.  When all work has been completed and the tanks are functional, the developer may request an inspection. This inspection will be made by the fire chief using the fire department water tank inspection report form. In addition, a test pumping may be performed to insure that adequate water flow can be obtained. 
b.  When all requirements contained herein have been satisfied, the city shall provide final acceptance of the water source. 
(5)  In lieu of underground water tank. In lieu of an underground water tank(s), the owner or developer may contribute funds to the city that would be used to help offset the purchase of future firefighting apparatus. 
(i)  Prohibited discharges. 
(1)  Prohibited discharges. No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or cause to discharge, leak, leach or spill upon any public street, alley, or public property, or onto the ground, surface waters, subsurface waters, or aquifers, or on any private property, within the city, any explosive, flammable or combustible solid, liquid or gas, any radioactive material at or above nuclear regulator restriction levels, etiologic agents or any solid, liquid or gas creating a hazard, potential hazard, or public nuisance or any solid, liquid or gas having a deleterious effect on the environment. 
(2)  Containment, cleanup and restoration. Any person, firm or corporation in violation of subsection (i)(1) of this section must, upon direction of the fire chief of the fire department or his designee, begin immediate actions to contain, cleanup and remove to any approved repository the offending material(s) and restore the site to its original condition, with the offending person, firm or corporation being responsible for all expenses incurred. Should any person, firm or corporation fail to engage or complete the requirements of this section, the fire chief of the fire department or his designee may order the required actions to be taken by public or private resources and allow the recovery of any and all costs incurred by the city under subsection (i)(5) of this section. 
(3)  Emergency services response. Includes, but is not limited to, fire service, emergency medical service, law enforcement. A person, firm, or corporation who possesses or controls a hazardous substance which is discharged or who causes the discharge of a hazardous substance shall be responsible for reimbursement to the responding agencies for actual and necessary expenses incurred in carrying out their duties under this chapter. Actual and necessary expenses may include but not be limited to: replacement of equipment damaged by the hazardous material, cleaning, decontamination and maintenance of the equipment specific to the incident, costs incurred in the procurement and use of specialized equipment specific to the incident, specific laboratory expenses incurred in the recognition and identification of hazardous substances in the evaluation of response, decontamination, clean up and medical surveillance, and incurred costs of future medical surveillance of response personnel as required by the responding agencies medical advisor. 
(4)  Site access. Access to any site, public or private, where a prohibited discharge is indicated or suspected will be provided to the chiefs of the fire department or his designee for the purpose of evaluating the threat to the public and monitor containment, cleanup and restoration activities. 
(5)  Public protection. Should any prohibited discharge occur that threatens the life, safety or health of the public at, near, or around the site of a prohibited discharge, and that the situation is so critical that immediate steps must be taken to protect life and limb, the fire chief, or incident commander, on the scene of the emergency may order an evacuation of the area or take other appropriate steps for a period of time until the city council can take appropriate action. Incident commander shall be determined under the provisions of the incident command system set forth in Title 49, Federal Registry. 
(6)  Civil liability. Any person, firm or corporation in violation of this section shall be liable to the city for any expenses incurred by the city or loss or damage sustained by the city by reason of such violation. 
(j)  Building address numbers. 
(1)  New buildings. Whenever any new house or building is erected in the city, the owner or his agent shall procure the correct number of numbers as designated for the property and the owner or agent shall immediately install the number or numbers so assigned upon the house or building. 
(2)  Location of number. 
a.  All numbers shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the front of each house, building or occupancy so as to be easily seen and read from the public way. 
b.  If the house, building or occupancy is serviced by an alley or rear drive thorough fare, an additional set of numbers shall be posted to the rear of each house or building so as to be easily seen from the public way. 
(3)  Number style. All numbers shall be in numerical form. 
(Code 1997, § 5.06; Rep. #494; Am. #515; Am. #562; Rep. & Recr. # 684 ; Rep. & Recr. #697 )  
Sec. 18-3. - Fire inspection and occupancy fees. 
Fees. The fee schedule for fire inspection and occupancy fees are established, from time and time, by resolution adopted by the lake country fire and rescue department fire board. 
(Code 1997, § 5.07; Cr. # 684 )  
Sec. 18-4. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, any provision of the articles of association or the district bylaws adopted herein, or any provision of the state fire prevention manual herein adopted by reference, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1997, § 5.30; Rn. MCC '95)  
Chapter 20 - HEALTH AND PUBLIC WELFARE 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Health administration. 
The city and/or county health department shall enforce any provisions of this Municipal Code affecting the public health and may initiate any action on behalf of the city to prosecute a violation of this chapter or to abate a public health nuisance. As used in this chapter, "health officer" means the county health department. 
(Code 1997, § 11.01; Am. #263)  
Sec. 20-2. - Rules and regulations. 
The city and/or county health department may enact rules and regulations pertaining to health and sanitation which, when approved by the city council, may be enforced within the city as city ordinances, and violations thereof may be prosecuted by the county health department or by the city. 
(Code 1997, § 11.02; Am. #263)  
Sec. 20-3. - Health nuisances, abatement of. 
Wis. Stats. § 254.59 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. The city and/or county health department may enforce the provisions of this section within the city. 
(Code 1997, § 11.03; Rep. & Recr. # 703 )  
Sec. 20-4. - Communicable diseases. 
Wis. Stats. § 252.01 and Wis. Admin. Code ch. DHS 145 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter and the city and/or county health department shall enforce the provisions thereof. 
(Code 1997, § 11.04; Rep. & Recr. # 703 )  
Sec. 20-5. - Regulation of the application and use of fertilizers. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The common council finds that Delafield's lakes and streams are a natural asset, which enhance the environmental, recreational, cultural and economic resources of the area and contribute to the general health and welfare of the public. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations which will enable the city to protect its water resources for the health, safety, and welfare of the public without detracting from the natural beauty of homeowners' lawns and gardens. The common council further finds that regulating the amount of nutrients and contaminants contained in fertilizer, including phosphorus, that enter the bodies of water as a result of runoff from lawns and turf will improve and maintain lake water quality. 
(b)  Applicability. This chapter applies in all areas of the City of Delafield. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fertilizer has the meaning set forth in Wis. Stats. § 94.64(1)(e). 
Impervious surface means a highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, or other material that prevents infiltration of water into the soil. 
Lawn fertilizer means any fertilizer, whether distributed by property owner, renter or commercial entity, distributed for nonagricultural use, such as for lawns, golf courses, parks and cemeteries. "Lawn fertilizer" does not include fertilizer products intended primarily for garden and indoor plant application. 
(d)  Concerning the use and application of lawn fertilizer. 
(1)  No person shall apply any lawn fertilizer within the City of Delafield that is labeled as containing more than zero percent phosphorus or other compound containing phosphorus, such as phosphate, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(2)  No lawn fertilizer shall be applied when the ground is frozen. 
(3)  No lawn fertilizer shall be applied when conditions exist which promote or create runoff. 
(4)  No person shall apply fertilizer to any impervious surface. If such application occurs, the fertilizer must be immediately contained and either legally applied to turf or placed in an appropriate container. 
(5)  A sign containing the regulations set forth in this chapter and the effects of phosphorus on Delafield's waters must be prominently displayed where lawn fertilizers are sold within the city. 
(e)  Exemptions. The prohibition against the use of fertilizer under subsection (d) of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Turf or lawn areas newly established via seed or sod procedures during their first growing season. 
(2)  Turf or lawn areas that soil tests, performed within the past three years by a state-certified soil testing laboratory, confirm are below phosphorus levels established by the University of Wisconsin Extension Service. The lawn fertilizer application shall not contain an amount of phosphorus exceeding the amount and rate of application recommended in the soil test evaluation. 
(3)  Agricultural uses, vegetable and flower gardens, or application to trees or shrubs. 
(4)  Yard waste compost, biosolids or other similar materials that are primarily organic in nature and are applied to improve the physical condition of the soil. 
(f)  Enforcement. Violations of this chapter will be enforced by the city administrator or the city administrator's designee upon a complaint basis. 
(g)  Penalty. Unless otherwise exempted under subsection (e) of this section, any person who violates subsection (d) of this section in the application of fertilizer at his or her residence shall be subject to a forfeiture of $50.00 per violation. Any commercial fertilizer applicator, residential or commercial developer, industrial or commercial owner, or other person who violates subsection (d) of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of $50.00 for the first violation within a 12-month period, $150.00 for the second violation within a 12-month period, and $300.00 for the third and each subsequent violation within a 12-month period. 
(Code 1997, § 11.10; Cr. #556)  
Chapter 22 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 24 - HUMAN RELATIONS AND SOCIAL SERVICES 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 26 - LAW ENFORCEMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 26-19. - Police department personnel. 
(a)  Enumerated. The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such police officers as the city council may prescribe by ordinance or resolution. 
(b)  Salary; collection of fees. The chief and the police officers shall receive a salary fixed by the city council and shall not be entitled to any other compensation. All fees, bail deposits and other special remuneration or funds collected or received by the department or any officers thereof shall be deposited with the treasurer not less than monthly, provided, in actions in municipal court deposited and forfeited penalties other than parking violation forfeitures shall be paid into the court. 
(Code 1997, § 4.01)  
Sec. 26-20. - Chief of police—Duties and powers. 
(a)  The chief of police shall possess the powers, enjoy the privileges and be subject to the liabilities conferred and imposed by law upon marshals and constables. 
(b)  He shall obey all lawful written orders of the mayor and council. 
(c)  He shall cause the public peace to be preserved and see that all laws and ordinances of the city and state are enforced; and whenever any violation thereof comes to his knowledge, he shall cause the requisite complaint to be made and see that the evidence is procured for the successful prosecution of the offender. 
(d)  He shall exercise supervisory control over all department personnel and may adopt rules and regulations for the government, discipline, equipment and uniforms of police officers. 
(e)  He shall be solely responsible for the care and condition of the equipment used by his department. 
(f)  He shall keep an accurate and complete record of all complaints, arrests, traffic violations, convictions and dispositions of the department. 
(Code 1997, § 4.02; Am. #691 )  
Sec. 26-21. - Police officers—Duties and powers. 
Each officer of the department shall possess the powers conferred on marshals and constables by law and shall preserve the public peace and enforce the laws and ordinances of the state and city subject to the lawful orders, rules and regulations of the chief, the mayor and the council. 
(Code 1997, § 4.03)  
Sec. 26-22. - Power of arrest. 
The chief of police and police officers shall arrest any person in the city found in the act of violating any law or ordinance of the city or state or aiding or abetting in such violation and arrest without warrant any person whom they have reasonable grounds to believe has violated any law or ordinance and who will not be apprehended unless immediately arrested, shall take any arrested person in charge and confine him and shall within a reasonable time bring such person before the court having jurisdiction thereof to be dealt with according to law. 
(Code 1997, § 4.04)  
Sec. 26-23. - Destruction of police records. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish records retention schedules for police records and authorize destruction of police records pursuant to the schedule on an annual basis. Records custodians do not have authority to destroy records prior to the established retention period, unless such records have been photographically reproduced as original records under Wis. Stats. § 16.61(7), and under this section. 
(b)  Historical records. The State Historical Society of Wisconsin (SHSW) has waived the required 60 days' statutory notice under Wis. Stats. § 19.21(5)(d), for the records marked "W," which designates waived notice. SHSW must be notified prior to destruction of records marked "N," designating nonwaiver. "N/A" indicates not applicable and applies to all records designated for permanent retention. 
(c)  Destruction after request for inspection. No requested record may be destroyed until after the request is granted or 60 days after the request is denied. If an action is to commence under Wis. Stats. § 19.37, the requested record may not be destroyed until a court order is issued and all appeals have been completed. 
(d)  Destruction pending litigation. No record subject to pending litigation shall be destroyed until the litigation has been resolved. 
(e)  Electronic records. Any police department records may be kept on an electronic content management (ECM) software, provided the applicable standards established in Wis. Stats. § 16.61(7) are met. Factors, such as retention periods and estimated costs and benefits of converting records between different media, should be considered in deciding whether or not to digitize. The retention periods identified in this section apply to records in any media. 
(f)  Listing of records. All of the records listed below have been given a "W" designation by the State Historical Society of Wisconsin: 
Record 	Retention 
Radio tape recordings 	CR + 120 days 
Videotapes of patrol activities 	CR + 120 days 
Overnight parking permissions 	CR + 120 days 
Jail register 	CR + 8 years 
Personnel files 	EVT + 8 years 
Incidents and complaints 	CR + 10 years 
Arrest records, including support documents 	EVT + 8 years 
Traffic and parking ordinance violations 	EVT + 1 year 
Municipal ordinance violations 	EVT + 2 years 
Traffic accident reports 	EVT + 8 years 
Juvenile violation reports 	EVT + 7 years 
Municipal or circuit court dockets (final decision) 	EVT + 180 days 
Fine and fee collection records 	CR + 3 years 
Correspondence 	CR + 7 years 
Purchase orders 	EVT + 7 years 
License and permit applications and related investigations 	EVT + 7 years 
Bicycle licenses 	EVT + 3 years 
Administrative reports and statistics 	CR + 7 years 
Property inventory reports 	EVT (until 
superseded) 
Calls for service logs 	CR + 3 years 
Vacant property check requests 	CR + 2 years 
Vehicle maintenance records 	EVT (life of 
vehicle) 
Radio logbooks 	CR + 3 years 
Teletype message records 	CR + 3 years 
Dispatch case number assignments 	CR + 3 years 
Legend: 
"CR" means time is counted from creation or 
  receipt of the record. 
"EVT" means an event, such as filing a lawsuit or 
  writing a ticket, and time is counted from the 
  date of this significant event. The date is 
  specified above. 
 
(Code 1997, § 4.06; Cr. #339; Am. # 691 )  
Sec. 26-24. - Penalty. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1997, § 4.10)  
Chapter 28 - LIBRARY 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 30 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 32 - NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Public nuisances prohibited. 
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the city. 
(Code 1997, § 10.01)  
Sec. 32-2. - Public nuisances affecting health. 
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are specifically declared to be public health nuisances: 
(1)  Adulterated food. All decayed, adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public. 
(2)  Unburied carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human consumption or food which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death. 
(3)  Breeding places for insects or vermin. Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin can breed. 
(4)  Stagnant water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply. 
(5)  Privy vaults and garbage cans. Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not fly-tight. 
(6)  Noxious weeds. All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation. All weeds and grass shall be kept cut to a height not to exceed one foot. The city may cause all weeds and grass to be cut and removed and brush to be removed and the cost thereof charged to the property under Wis. Stats. § 66.60(16). 
(7)  Water pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances. 
(8)  Noxious odors, etc. Any use of property, substances or things within the city emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, noxious or disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the city. 
(9)  Street pollution. Any use of property which causes any noxious or unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place within the city. 
(10)  Air pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash, industrial dust or other atmospheric pollutants within the city or within one mile therefrom in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or threaten or cause substantial damage to property in the city. Determining levels of pollution harmful to health or property shall be in accordance with guidelines established by EPA and DNR. 
(11)  Feeding of bird, fowl or other nondomestic animals prohibited. The feeding, in any manner, of birds, fowl or other nondomestic animals, that results in the attraction of such animals which, due to the number or type of animals, is likely to cause property damage, or to constitute a threat to the public health, or to the health of the animals, is deemed a public nuisance and is prohibited. 
(Code 1997, § 10.02; Cr. #600)  
Sec. 32-3. - Public nuisances offending morals and decency. 
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency: 
(1)  Disorderly houses. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill-fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling. 
(2)  Gambling devices. All gambling devices and slot machines. 
(3)  Unlicensed sale of liquor and beer. All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified for sale or resale to the public without a permit or license as provided for by the ordinances of the city. 
(4)  Continuous violation of city ordinances. Any place or premises within the city where city ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated. 
(5)  Illegal drinking. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of state laws. 
(Code 1997, § 10.03)  
Sec. 32-4. - Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. 
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety: 
(1)  Dangerous signs, billboards, etc. All signs, billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety. See also chapter 52, article VIII. 
(2)  Illegal buildings. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of city ordinances relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures within the city. See also chapter 8. 
(3)  Unauthorized traffic signs. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as official traffic control devices or railroad signs or signals or which, because of their color, location, brilliance or manner of operation, interfere with the effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal. 
(4)  Obstruction of intersections. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. See chapter 48. 
(5)  Low-hanging tree limbs. All limbs of trees which project over and less than six feet, 11 inches above any public sidewalk, or less than ten feet above any street or other public place. 
(6)  Dangerous trees. All trees which are a menace to public safety or are the cause of substantial annoyance to the general public. 
(7)  Fireworks. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by state laws and city ordinances. 
(8)  Dilapidated buildings. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use. 
(9)  Low-hanging wires and cables. All wires and cables over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface thereof. 
(10)  Obstructions of streets; excavations. All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the city but including those which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished or which do not conform to the permit. 
(11)  Unlawful assemblies. Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks. 
(12)  Blighted buildings and premises. Premises existing within the city which are blighted because of faulty design or construction, failure to maintain them in a proper state of repair, improper management, or due to the accumulation thereon of junk or other unsightly debris, structurally unsound fences, and other items which depreciate property values and jeopardize or are detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the people of the city. The blighted premises contribute to conditions that are dangerous to the public health, safety and general welfare of the people; the conditions necessitate excessive and disproportionate expenditure of public funds for public health, public safety, crime prevention, fire protection and other public services; the conditions cause a drain upon public revenue and impair the efficient and economical exercise of governmental functions in such areas. 
(13)  Refrigeration vehicles. The operation of any refrigeration or similar vehicle within 1,500 feet of any building being used for residential purposes so as to cause noise and disturbance. 
(Code 1997, § 10.04; Cr. #130, 7-6-1981)  
Sec. 32-5. - Elm trees infected with Dutch elm disease or oak trees infected with oak wilt disease a nuisance. 
(a)  Public nuisance declared. 
(1)  The city council, having determined that the health of the elm trees within the city is threatened by a fatal disease known as Dutch elm disease, hereby declares the following to be public nuisance: 
a.  Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected with Dutch elm disease fungus or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichh) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh). 
b.  Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, firewood, stumps or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle destroying insecticide. 
(2)  The city council, having determined that the health of the oak trees within the city is threatened by a fatal disease known as oak wilt disease (Ceratocystis fagacearum), hereby declares the following to be a public nuisance: 
a.  Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected with the oak wilt disease fungus. 
b.  Any dead oak tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other oak material from which the bark has not been removed. 
(b)  Nuisances prohibited. No person, firm, or corporation shall permit any public nuisances as defined in subsection (a) of this section to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him within the City of Delafield. 
(c)  City forester. The city forester shall have the powers and perform the duties imposed by this section and by Wis. Stats. ch. 27. 
(d)  Inspections. 
(1)  The city forester shall inspect or cause to be inspected at least twice a year all premises and places within the city to determine whether any public nuisance as defined in subsection (a) of this section exists thereon and shall also inspect or cause to be inspected any elm tree or oak tree reported or suspected to be infected with the diseases defined in subsection (a) of this section or any elm bark or oak bark bearing material reported or suspected to be infested with the diseases or vectors listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  Whenever necessary to determine the existence of any public nuisance as defined in subsection (a) of this section, the city forester shall remove or cut specimens from the tree in such manner as to avoid permanent injury thereto and forward them to the state department of agriculture for analysis to determine the presence of such nuisances. 
(3)  The forester and his agents or employees may enter upon private premises at reasonable times for the purpose of carrying out any of the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Abatement of nuisances. 
(1)  The forester shall order, direct, supervise and control the abatement of public nuisances by treatment, removal, burning or other means which he determines to be necessary to prevent as fully as possible the spread of any public nuisance as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  Whenever the forester determines that a public nuisance exists on property owned or controlled by the city, he shall immediately abate or cause the abatement of such nuisance in such manner as to destroy or prevent as fully as possible the spread of any public nuisance as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  When the forester determines with reasonable certainty that a public nuisance exists upon private premises, he shall immediately serve personally or by registered mail upon the owner of such property, if he can be found, or upon the occupant thereof, a written notice of the existence of such nuisance, directing that the nuisance be abated within ten days after service of such notice. Such notice shall describe the nuisance and recommend the procedure for its abatement and shall state that, unless the owner abates the nuisance as specified in the notice, the forester will cause the abatement thereof at the expense of the property served. If the owner or occupant cannot be found, such notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(f)  Special assessments for tree care and abatement. 
(1)  The cost of abatement of a public nuisance or spraying elm trees or elm wood at the direction of the forester, if the nuisance tree or wood is located in a public park or on other public grounds, shall be borne by the city. 
(2)  The cost of abating a public nuisance or spraying elm trees or elm wood located on private premises or in the public right-of-way, when done at the direction and under the supervision of the forester, shall be assessed to the property on which such nuisance tree or wood is located or which abuts on the public right-of-way in which such nuisance tree or wood is located, as follows: 
a.  The forester shall keep account of the cost of such work or spraying and the amount chargeable to each lot or parcel and shall report such work charges, the description of lands to which they are chargeable and the names and addresses of the owners of such lands to the clerk-treasurer on or before October 15 of each year. 
b.  The clerk-treasurer shall mail notice of the amount of such final assessment to each owner of property assessed at his last known address, stating that, unless paid within 30 days of the date of the notice, such assessment shall bear interest as specified and will be entered on the tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property; and all proceedings in relation to the collection, return and sale of property for delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to such assessment. 
c.  The city hereby declares that, in making assessments under this section, it is acting under its police power. No damages shall be awarded to any owner for the destruction of any diseased or infested elm tree or elm wood or part thereof. 
(g)  Prohibited acts. No person shall: 
(1)  Transport or harbor any bark bearing elm wood or diseased oak wood or materials without first securing the written permission of the forester. 
(2)  Interfere with or prevent any act of the forester or his agents or employees while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this section. 
(3)  Refuse to permit the forester or his duly authorized representative to enter upon his premises at reasonable times to exercise the duties imposed by this section. 
(4)  Permit any public nuisance to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him when ordered by the forester to abate such nuisance. 
(Code 1997, § 10.05; Am. #554)  
Sec. 32-6. - Box elder trees. 
All female box elder trees and all other box elder trees infected with box elder bugs are a nuisance and the box elder bugs shall be removed by the owner thereof within five days after written notice to remove such bugs given by the city forester. If the owner of the land upon which any such infested tree is located fails to remove the bugs within five days as required by the city forester, the forester may enter upon the land and remove such bugs and assess the cost thereof to the property owner as a special charge against the property. 
(Code 1997, § 10.06)  
Sec. 32-7. - Obstructing streets and sidewalks prohibited. 
No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle or stand, sit, loaf or loiter or engage in any sport or exercise on any public ground, street or alley within the city in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon or to prevent or hinder free ingress to or egress to or egress from any place of business or amusement of any church, public hall or meeting place. 
(Code 1997, § 10.07; Cr. # 702 )  
Sec. 32-8. - Littering prohibited. 
No person shall throw any glass, refuse, waste, filth or other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the city, upon any private property or upon the surface of any body of water within the city. 
(Code 1997, § 10.08; Cr. # 702 )  
Sec. 32-9. - Open cisterns, wells, basements or other dangerous excavations prohibited. 
No person shall have or permit on any premises owned or occupied by him, any open cistern, cesspools, wells, unused basements, excavations or other dangerous openings. All such places shall be filled, securely covered or fastened in such manner as to prevent injury to any person and any cover shall be of such design, size and weight that the same cannot be removed by small children. 
(Code 1997, § 10.09; Cr. # 702 )  
Sec. 32-10. - Abandoned or unattended refrigerators, etc., prohibited. 
No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his control in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, unless such door or lid, snap lock or other locking device has been removed from such icebox, refrigerator or container or unless such container is displayed for sale on the premises of the owner or his agent and is securely locked or fastened. 
(Code 1997, § 10.0901; Cr. # 702 )  
Sec. 32-11. - Abatement of public nuisances. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to apply to nuisances generally when abatement procedures are not otherwise specifically set forth. This chapter shall apply not only to abatement of nuisances prohibited by the provisions of this chapter but also to nuisances described in any other chapter of this Code or other city ordinance; provided, however, that if any enforcement and abatement procedure is provided specifically for a prohibited nuisance in this or any other chapter, the specific procedure made applicable to that nuisance shall apply. 
(1)  Enforcement. The chief of police, the fire chief and the building inspector shall enforce those provisions of this chapter that come within the jurisdiction of their offices; and they shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under this section to abate a public nuisance unless the officer has inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and has satisfied himself that a nuisance does in fact exist. 
(2)  Summary abatement. If the inspecting officer determines that a public nuisance exists within the city and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, or decency, the mayor may direct the proper officer to cause the same to be abated and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be. 
(3)  Abatement after notice. If the inspecting officer determines that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that such nuisance does not threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall serve notice on the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the same within ten days. If such nuisance is not removed within ten days, the proper officer shall cause the nuisance to be removed as provided in subsection (2) of this section. 
(4)  Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the city or its officials in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(5)  Court order. Except when necessary under subsection (2) of this section, an officer hereunder shall not use force to obtain access to private property to abate a public nuisance but shall request permission to enter upon private property if such premises are occupied and, if such permission is denied, shall apply to any court having jurisdiction for an order assisting the abatement of the public nuisance. 
(Code 1997, § 10.10; Rep. & Recr. # 702 )  
Sec. 32-12. - Chronic nuisance premises. 
(a)  Findings. The common council finds that certain premises within the city receive and require more than the general, acceptable level of police services. Such premises place an undue and inappropriate burden on City of Delafield taxpayers, and constitute public nuisances. The common council therefore authorizes the chief of police to charge the owners of such premises the costs associated with abating the violations at premises where nuisance activities chronically occur and to provide for forfeitures for the failure of property owners to abate such nuisance activities. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of police means the chief of the Delafield police department or his or her designee. 
Chronic nuisance premises means premises that meet any of the following criteria: 
(1)  The premises has had three or more nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action on separate occasions within a 12-month period of time; or 
(2)  The premises has had six or more nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action on separate occasions within a 24-month period of time. 
Enforcement action means any of the following: The physical arrest of a person(s), the issuance of a citation(s) for a law violation and/or referral of charges by the police department to the city attorney or district attorney for prosecution for nuisance activities. 
Nuisance activity means any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct occurring on or within 200 feet of a premises whenever engaged in by premises owners, operators, occupants or a person or persons associated with a premises: 
(1)  An act of harassment, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 947.013. 
(2)  Disorderly conduct, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 947.01. 
(3)  Crimes of violence, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 940. 
(4)  Theft, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 943.20. 
(5)  Receiving stolen property, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 943.34. 
(6)  Arson, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 943.02. 
(7)  Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 961. 
(8)  Trespassing, as defined in Wis. Stats. §§ 943.13 and 943.14 and section 34-29 of the Delafield Municipal Code. 
(9)  The production or creation of excessive noise, as defined in section 34-22 of the Delafield Municipal Code. 
(10)  Loitering, as defined in section 34-23 of the Delafield Municipal Code. 
(11)  Crimes involving illegal possession or use of firearms, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 941 and § 948.60 and section 34-20 of the Delafield Municipal Code. 
(12)  Illegal sale, discharge and use of fireworks, as defined in section 34-21 of the Delafield Municipal Code. 
(13)  Illegal sale of intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 125 and section 4-3 of the Delafield Municipal Code. 
(14)  Violation of outdoor burning regulations, as defined in section 34-27 of the Delafield Municipal Code. 
Person associated with a premises means the premises owner, operator, manager, officer, director, resident, occupant, guest, visitor, customer, patron or employee or agent of any of the above individuals, or one who waits to enter or attempts entry to the premises. 
Premises means an individual or multi-family dwelling unit; any property used for residential purposes whether or not owner occupied; an individual business or commercial property; and associated common areas. 
(c)  Chronic nuisance premises prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any property owner, operator, tenant, occupant, or person associated with a premises to allow the establishment of, keep, or maintain a chronic nuisance premises as described herein. 
(d)  Notice of chronic nuisance. Whenever the chief of police determines that: 
(1)  Three or more nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action have occurred on separate occasions at the premises within a 12-month period of time; or 
(2)  Six or more nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action have occurred on separate occasions at the premises within a 24-month period of time; 
the chief of police shall notify the premises owner in writing that the premises is a chronic nuisance premises. Nuisance activities which were reported by the owner or manager of the premises shall not be counted in determining whether a premises is a chronic nuisance premises. 
(e)  Procedure. 
(1)  Upon determining that a premises meets the definition of a chronic nuisance premises, the chief of police shall provide written notice to the owner of the premises which shall contain the following information: 
a.  The street address or legal description sufficient to identify the premises; 
b.  Description of the nuisance activities that have occurred at the premises, including the dates that the nuisance activities are alleged to have occurred; 
c.  A statement indicating that the cost of future enforcement may be assessed as a special charge against the premises pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627; 
d.  A statement that the owner shall respond to the chief of police within ten days to propose a written course of action to abate the nuisance activities or to appeal the determination, and that failure to submit a plan to abate such nuisance activities within ten days shall subject the owner to a forfeiture of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00; 
e.  A statement that the owner of the premises may be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each and every day the owner maintains, keeps or allows the chronic nuisance premises to exist; 
f.  A notice as to the appeal rights of the owner. 
(2)  The above notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered to the owner if delivered by any one of the following methods: 
a.  By personally delivering the notice to the premises owner; or 
b.  By sending it registered mail or by certified mail return receipt requested to the owner of the premises' last known address; or 
c.  If the premises owner cannot be located, the notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered if a copy of it is left at the owner's usual place of abode in the presence of some competent member of the family at least 14 years of age, or a competent adult currently residing there and who shall be informed of the contents of the notice; or 
d.  By publication as a Class 1 notice together with mailing the notice to the owner's last known residential or business address. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the notice, the premises owner shall respond within ten days to the chief of police with a written course of action outlining the abatement actions the premises owner proposes to take in response to the notice. The chief of police may accept, reject or work with the owner to modify the proposal. The proposal shall be deemed acceptable if it can reasonably be expected to abate the nuisance activities within 60 days after submission of the proposal. 
(f)  Cost recovery. 
(1)  Whenever the chief of police determines that additional nuisance activity has occurred on the premises for which a notice has been served pursuant to subsection (e)(2) of this section, that this nuisance activity has occurred not less than 15 days after the notice has been served, and that the owner has not complied with the requirements of subsection (e)(3) of this section, the chief of police shall then cause all costs, fees and expenses to be charged against the owner of the premises and if unpaid, levied and collected by the city as a special charge against the premises pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(2)  Calculation. In calculating the fees and expenses that may be levied and collected by the city as a special charge under subsection (f)(1) of this section, the chief may consider but is not limited to the actual labor costs, including overtime, materials, vehicle expenses and related administrative time for enforcement action upon and/or pertaining to the premises in calculating the total costs, fees and expenses. 
(g)  Penalties. In addition to the recovery of costs, expenses and fees as provided in subsection (f)(1) and (2) of this section, the following penalties may be jointly and severally sought and/or employed by the city and may be ordered and/or imposed for violations herein: 
(1)  A premises owner who fails to respond to the chief of police within ten days with a written course of action to abate the nuisance activities, pursuant to subsection (e)(3) of this section, shall forfeit and pay to the city a forfeiture of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00 plus court costs and fees. 
(2)  Any person who shall allow the establishment of, keep, or maintain a chronic nuisance premises after notice by the chief of police that the premises were designated chronic nuisance premises shall forfeit and pay to the city not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each separate incident of nuisance activity. 
(3)  The foregoing penalties and remedies are not in lieu of any other legal or equitable remedies available pursuant to other city ordinances, state statutes, or state administrative codes. 
(h)  Appeal. Appeal of the determination of the chief of police declaring a property to be a chronic nuisance premises or appeal of the imposition of special charges against the premises, shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk within ten days of receipt of notice of the determination or imposition of special charges. In the event such appeal is timely filed, all parties shall be afforded an opportunity to present to the common council evidence and to rebut or offer countervailing evidence at a hearing determined by the common council, after reasonable notice being given to all parties. The determination of the common council shall be final and binding. 
(i)  When nuisance deemed abated. The public nuisance created by a chronic nuisance premises shall be deemed abated when no enforcement action to address nuisance activities occurs for a period of six months from the date stated on the notice declaring the premises a chronic nuisance premises. 
(Code 1997, § 10.1001; Cr. #710 )  
Sec. 32-13. - Cost of abatement. 
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the city shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance; and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. 
(Code 1997, § 10.11)  
Sec. 32-14. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder, or permit or cause a public nuisance shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1997, § 10.12)  
Sec. 32-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 748 , § 1, adopted August 20, 2018, repealed § 32-15, which pertained to application, dispersal or land spreading of animal manures and animal waste prohibited and derived from Ord. No. 743 , § 1, adopted January 15, 2018.  
Chapter 34 - OFFENSES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 
 
Sec. 34-19. - Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture. 
The following statutes following the prefix "9" defining offenses against the peace and good order of the state are adopted by reference to define offenses against the peace and good order of the city, provided the penalty for commission of such offenses hereunder shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under section 1-4: 
9.29.601 	Waste and Refuse in Waters Prohibited 
9.254.92 	Purchase or Possession of Tobacco Products Prohibited 
9.254.76 	Careless Smoking 
9.101.123 	Prohibition of Smoking in Various Enclosed Places. Penalties for violation shall be as provided in section 34-45. As prescribed by state statutes, a warning notice shall be issued to the "person in charge" for the first violation. (Cr. #636) 
9.110.075(7) 	Producing/Using Inspection Sticker Fraudulently 
9.134.06 	Motor Vehicle Sales/Bonus to Chauffeur Prohibited 
9.134.66 	Restrictions on Sale or Gift of Cigarettes or Tobacco Products 
9.285.30 	Pollution by Motor Vehicle/Failure to Repair 
9.175.25 	Illegal Storage of Junked Vehicles 
9.218.0145 	Used Cars/Prohibited Acts 
9.218.0147 	Motor Vehicles/Sale to Minor 
9.939.05 	Parties to Crime 
9.939.22 	Words and Phrases Defined 
9.940.20 	Battery 
9.941.10 	Negligent Handling of Burning Materials 
9.941.12 	Interfering With or Failing to Assist in Fire Fighting 
9.941.13 	False Alarms and Interference With Fire Fighting 
9.941.20 	Reckless Use of Weapon 
9.941.23 	Carrying Concealed Weapon 
9.941.24 	Possession of Switchblade Knife 
9.943.01(1) 	Criminal Damage to Property 
9.943.012 	Criminal Damage to or Graffiti on Religious and Other Property 
9.943.017 	Graffiti 
9.943.11 	Entry Into Locked Vehicle 
9.943.125 	Entry Into Locked Coin Box 
9.943.13 	Trespass to Land 
9.943.14 	Criminal Trespass to Dwellings 
9.943.20 	Theft (Value $1,000.00 or Less) 
9.943.21 	Fraud on Hotel or Restaurant Keeper, Recreational Attraction, Taxicab Operator, or Gas Station 
9.943.212 	Fraud on Hotel or Restaurant Keeper, Recreational Attraction, Taxicab Operator, or Gas Station; Civil Liability 
9.943.215 	Absconding Without Paying Rent 
9.943.22 	Use of Cheating Tokens 
9.943.225 	Refusal to Pay for a Motor Bus Ride 
9.943.24 	Issue of Worthless Checks 
9.943.46 	Theft of Video Service 
9.943.47 	Theft of Satellite Cable Programming 
9.943.50 	Shoplifting (Value $1,000.00 or Less) 
9.943.55 	Removal of Shopping Cart 
9.943.61 	Theft of Library Material 
9.943.70 	Computer Crimes 
9.943.84 	Theft of Telecommunications Service 
9.944.15 	Fornication 
9.944.20 	Lewd and Lascivious Behavior 
9.944.21 	Obscene Material or Performance 
9.944.23 	Making Lewd, Obscene or Indecent Drawings 
9.944.25 	Sending Obscene or Sexually Explicit Electronic Messages 
9.944.30 	Prostitution 
9.944.31 	Patronizing Prostitutes 
9.944.33 	Pandering 
9.944.34 	Keeping Place of Prostitution 
9.944.36 	Solicitation of Drinks Prohibited 
9.945.01 	Definitions Relating to Gambling 
9.945.02 	Gambling 
9.945.03 	Commercial Gambling 
9.945.04 	Permitting Premises to be Used for Commercial Gambling 
9.946.40 	Refusing to Aid Officer 
9.946.41 	Resisting or Obstructing Officer 
9.946.42 	Escape 
9.946.44 	Assisting or Permitting Escape 
9.946.495 	Violation of Non-Secure Custody Order 
9.946.65 	Obstructing Justice 
9.946.70 	Impersonating Peace Officer 
9.946.72 	Tampering With Public Records and Notices 
9.947.01 	Disorderly Conduct 
9.947.011 	Disrupting a Funeral or Memorial Service 
9.947.012 	Unlawful Use of Telephone 
9.947.0125 	Unlawful Use of Computerized Communication Systems 
9.947.013 	Harassment 
9.947.06 	Unlawful Assemblies 
9.947.76 	Littering 
9.948.40 	Contributing to the Delinquency of a Child 
9.948.45 	Contributing to Truancy 
9.948.51 	Hazing 
9.951.01—9.951.16 	Crimes Against Animals 
9.961.14(4)(t); 9.961.41; 9.961.571 to 
9.961.577 	Possession of Marijuana; Prohibited Acts A - Penalties 
 
(Code 1997, § 9.01; Am. #480; #593; # 701 )  
Sec. 34-20. - Firearms, bows and arrows, crossbows, missiles and projectiles. 
(a)  Discharge and use restricted. It is hereby determined and declared necessary in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare that the discharge of firearms, bows and arrows and crossbows and the shooting or throwing of missiles and projectiles be regulated within the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 29.038(3)(b)1.a. 
Developed land means an area of land of the following density: three or more residential dwellings situated on adjacent parcels of individual size of five acres or less. 
Firearm means a rifle, smooth bore muzzle-loading firearm, of any caliber, spring powered rifle, air rifle, shotgun of any gauge, or handgun, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 175, of any caliber. 
(c)  Discharge of firearms prohibited. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, no person shall fire or discharge any firearm, air rifle, spring or air gun of any description, or any instrument which impels a missile or pellet by compressed air, spring or other means within the city. 
(2)  Exceptions. Subsection (c)(1) of this section shall not apply to any of the following: 
a.  Any duly authorized law officer in the performance of his/her duties. 
b.  Any supervised rifle or pistol range or shooting gallery authorized by the common council. 
c.  Any deer or animal management program duly authorized by the common council. 
d.  Goose and duck hunting, using shot only, is permitted on Lake Nagawicka, or undeveloped land, but not within 100 yards from any building devoted for human occupancy unless the person who owns the land on which the building is located provides express written permission to hunt within 100 yards of the building. 
e.  The discharge of a firearm if the person's conduct is justified or, had it been subject to a criminal penalty, would have been subject to a defense described in Wis. Stats. § 939.45. 
f.  Starting guns shooting blanks and fired into the air for starting sporting events. 
(d)  Possession of firearms, bows and arrows and crossbows restricted. No person may possess any firearms, bows and arrows or crossbows in the following locations: 
(1)  That portion of any city-owned building while municipal court is in session. 
(2)  On property or in a building owned by a public or private school unless that person is a licensee as defined in Wis. Stats. § 175.60(1)(d), or an out-of-state licensee as defined in Wis. Stats. § 175.60(1)(g). 
(e)  Throwing or shooting of missiles and projectiles. No person shall throw or shoot any object, missile, or projectile by hand or by any other means at any person under any circumstance which is likely to result in injury or harm to that person, or at, in or into any building, street, sidewalk, path, trail, walkway, alley, highway, park, playground or other public place within the city. 
(f)  Throwing, shooting or hunting with bow and arrow or crossbow on city property unlawful. It shall be unlawful for a person to throw, shoot or hunt with a bow and arrow or crossbow on or across any city-owned or leased property whether posted as such or unposted. This section shall not apply to the discharge or use of any bow and arrow or crossbow on city property that is specifically approved by the common council for the purpose of nuisance wildlife management. This section shall also not apply to the discharge or use of any bow and arrow or crossbow for the catching or hunting of carp or other rough fish. 
(g)  Throwing, shooting or hunting with bow and arrow or crossbow on private property restricted. 
(1)  Throwing, shooting or hunting with bow and arrow or crossbow is allowed in the City of Delafield on personally owned private property or with express written permission from the property owner, except as restricted by subsection (g)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Restrictions. 
a.  Throwing, shooting or hunting with bow and arrow or crossbow on private property is not allowed within 100 yards from a building located on another person's land. This restriction does not apply if the person who owns the land on which the building is located provides express written permission to hunt within 100 yards of the building. 
b.  Throwing, shooting or hunting with bow and arrow or crossbow on private property is only allowed if the arrow or bolt from the respective weapon is discharged toward the ground. 
(h)  Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced as provided by this section and state law, including, but not excluding because of enumeration, Wis. Stats. chs. 29, 66, 345, 751, 757 and 800, or as subsequently renumbered. 
(i)  Penalties. In addition to any other penalties, the provisions of section 1-4 shall apply to this section. 
(Code 1997, § 9.02; Rep. & Recr. # 738 ) 
( Ord. No. 757 , § 1, 11-4-2019)  
Sec. 34-21. - Fireworks prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section, the term "fireworks" means anything manufactured, processed or packaged for exploding, emitting sparks or combustion which does not have another common use. Wis. Stats. § 167.10 is also adopted by reference to define "fireworks" to include a novelty device that spins or moves on the ground, but does not include any of the following: 
(1)  Fuel or a lubricant. 
(2)  A firearm cartridge or shotgun shell. 
(3)  A flare used or possessed or sold for use as a signal in an emergency or in the operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or motor vehicle. 
(4)  A match, cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space heater. 
(5)  A cap containing not more than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture, if the cap is used or possessed or sold for use in a device which prevents direct bodily contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion. 
(6)  A toy snake which contains no mercury. 
(7)  A model rocket engine. 
(8)  Tobacco and a tobacco product. 
(9)  A sparkler on a wire or wood stick not exceeding 36 inches in length that is designed to produce audible or visible effects. 
(10)  A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and which contains less than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture. 
(11)  A fuseless device that is designed to produce audible and visible effects, and that contains less than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture. 
(12)  A device that is designed primarily to burn pyrotechnic smoke-producing mixtures, at a controlled rate, and that produces audible or visible effects. 
(13)  A cylindrical fountain that consists of one or more tubes and that is classified by the federal department of transportation as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50. 
(14)  A cone fountain that is classified by the federal department of transportation as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50. 
(b)  Possession and use, state statutes adopted. Possession and use of fireworks shall be regulated according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 167.10, as the same are from time to time amended, which are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference herein. 
(c)  User's permit. 
(1)  No person may possess or use fireworks without a user's permit which may be issued by the mayor of the City of Delafield. A user's permit, if issued, shall authorize the holder of the user's permit to use fireworks for public or private celebrations as identified in the user's permit. Application for issuance of a user's permit shall be submitted to the city clerk, on forms provided by the clerk, together with a user's permit fee as determined by resolution by the common council from time to time. 
(2)  All applications for a user's permit shall be referred to the fire chief for investigation, and no user's permit shall be granted unless the mayor, from the report of the fire chief, determines that the applicant will use the fireworks in a public or private exhibition, that all reasonable precautions will be exercised with regard to the protection of the lives and property of all persons, and that the display will be handled by a competent operator and conducted in a suitable, safe place and manner. Before granting any fireworks permit, the applicant shall file with the city clerk, a certificate of liability insurance issued by the insurance company issuing liability and property damage insurance coverage for the property, or any insurance company authorized to write such policies in the State of Wisconsin in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, and in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for damage to property that may arise by reason of use or discharge of the fireworks under the user's permit. The City of Delafield shall be named as an additional insured under the terms of those policies. 
(3)  Any user's permit [issued] under this section shall specify all of the following: 
a.  The name and address of the permit holder. 
b.  The date on and after which fireworks may be purchased. 
c.  The kind and quality of fireworks which may be purchased. 
d.  The date, time and location of permitted use. 
e.  Such other information as may be required by the city, from time to time. 
(4)  Notice of issuance of a user's permit shall be given to the fire department and police department at least 48 hours before the date of authorized use. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  In addition to other penalties prescribed under this section, the city may petition the circuit court for an order enjoining any violation of this section or Wis. Stats. § 167.10. 
(2)  Any fireworks stored, handled, sold, possessed or used by the person who violates any provision of this section shall be seized. The fireworks shall be destroyed after conviction for a violation or otherwise returned to the owner. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, pay a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of the action, and upon default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days or until such forfeiture and costs are paid. Each day during which a violation of this section is permitted to exist shall be deemed to be a separate violation. 
(Code 1997, § 9.04; Rep. & Recr. #633; Rep. & Recr. # 701 )  
Sec. 34-22. - Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited. 
No person shall make or cause to be made any loud, disturbing or unnecessary sounds or noises which may annoy or disturb a person of ordinary sensibilities in or about any public street, alley or park or any private residence. 
(Code 1997, § 9.06; Rep. # 701 )  
Sec. 34-23. - Loitering. 
(a)  Loitering or prowling prohibited, generally. No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police or peace officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a police or peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this subsection, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted by requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this subsection if the police or peace officer, at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. 
(b)  Obstruction of traffic by loitering. No person shall loaf or loiter in a group or crowd upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street crossings or bridges or in any other public place within the city in such manner as to prevent, interfere with or obstruct the ordinary free use of such public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street crossings or bridges or other public places by persons passing along and over the same. 
(c)  Obstruction of entryways by loitering. No person shall loiter in a group or a crowd upon the public streets or sidewalks or in adjacent doorways or entrances so as to obstruct the free entry of persons to the adjacent property, driveways, or other entrances to such property. It shall be evidence of obstruction if such person is requested to move by the owner or occupant of the adjoining premises or a police officer and refuses to do so. 
(d)  Loitering in places of public assembly or use. No person shall by loitering interfere with the free use of any place of public assembly or public use by others using such place of public assembly. It shall be evidence of violation of this subsection if a person is requested to discontinue loitering by a police officer or by the person in charge of the place of public assembly and refuses to do so. 
(e)  Loitering on private premises without invitation. No person shall loiter on any private premises without invitation from the owner or occupant. It shall be evidence of violation of this subsection if such person is requested to discontinue loitering by a police officer or by the owner or occupant and refuses to do so. 
(f)  Obstructing public ways after request to move. No person shall obstruct any street, bridge, sidewalk, crossing or other public way by loitering after being requested to discontinue loitering by a police officer. 
(Code 1997, § 9.07)  
Sec. 34-24. - Animals and fowl not to run at large. 
No person having in his possession or under his control any animal or fowl shall allow the same to run at large within the city. 
(Code 1997, § 9.08)  
Sec. 34-25. - Junked or discarded property. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Restricted. No person shall store junked or discarded property, including automobiles, automobile parts, trucks, tractors, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery or machinery parts, wood, bricks, cement blocks or other unsightly debris which substantially depreciates property values in the neighborhood, except in an enclosure which screens such property from public view or upon permit issued by the city council. 
(2)  Order for compliance. The building inspector may require by written order any premises in violation of this subsection (a) to be put in compliance within the time specified in such order and, if the order is not complied with, may have the premises put in compliance and the cost thereof assessed as a special tax against the property. 
(b)  Abandoned vehicles. 
(1)  Vehicle abandonment prohibited. No person shall leave unattended any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home on any public street or highway or public or private property for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned. When any such vehicle has been left unattended on any city street or highway or on any public or private property within the city without the permission of the owner for more than 48 hours, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance. A motor vehicle shall not be considered an abandoned motor vehicle when it is out of ordinary public view. 
(2)  Removal and impoundment of abandoned vehicles. Any vehicle in violation of this subsection (b) shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of under subsection (b)(3) of this section; except if the chief of police or his authorized representative determines that the cost of towing and storage charges for the impoundment would exceed the value of the vehicle, the vehicle may be junked by the city prior to expiration of the impoundment period upon determination by the chief of police or his authorized representative that the vehicle is stolen or not wanted for evidence or any other reason. 
(3)  Disposal. 
a.  Any vehicle which is deemed abandoned by the chief of police or his authorized representative and not disposed of under subsection (b)(2) of this section shall be retained in storage for a minimum period of ten days after certified mail notice has been sent to the owner and lienholders of record to permit reclamation of the vehicle after payment of accrued charges. Such notice shall set forth the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle, the place where the vehicle is being held, and shall inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the vehicle. The notice shall state that the failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle under this section shall be deemed a waiver of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle. 
b.  Each retained vehicle not reclaimed by its owner or lienholder may at the discretion of the chief of police, as permitted by Wis. Stats. § 342.40, either be retained by the city or sold to the towing company hired by the city. 
c.  Any interested person may offer bids on each abandoned vehicle to be sold. A public notice shall be posted at the office of the city police department. The posting of the notice at the police department shall be in the same form as the certified mail notice sent to the owner or lienholders of record. 
d.  Upon sale of an abandoned vehicle, the city shall supply the purchaser with a completed form designed by the department of transportation enabling the purchaser to obtain a regular certificate of title for the vehicle. The purchaser shall have ten days to remove the vehicle from the storage area, but shall pay a reasonable storage fee established by the city for each day the vehicle remains in storage after the second business day subsequent to the sale date. Ten days after the sale, the purchaser shall forfeit all interest in the vehicle and the vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be sold again. 
e.  Any listing of vehicles to be sold by the city shall be made available to any interested person or organization which makes a written request for such list. The city may charge a fee for the list. 
(4)  Owner responsible for impoundment and sale costs. The owner of any abandoned vehicle, except a stolen vehicle, is responsible for the abandonment and all costs of impounding and disposing of the vehicle. Costs not recovered by the sale of the vehicle may be recovered in a civil action by the city against the owner. 
(5)  Notice of sale or disposition. Within five days after the sale or disposal of a vehicle as provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section, the chief of police or his authorized representative shall advise the state department of transportation, division of motor vehicles, of such sale or disposition on a form supplied by the division. A copy of such form shall be given to the purchaser of the vehicle, and a copy shall be retained on file in the city. 
(c)  Junked vehicles. 
(1)  Junked vehicles prohibited. No person owning or having in his possession or under his control any disassembled, dismantled, junked, wrecked or inoperable and unlicensed motor vehicle or any part or parts of any motor vehicle shall store or permit any such vehicle or part to remain on any private property within the city for more than ten days after receipt of the notice referred to in subsection (c)(3) of this section, and no person owning any private property in the city shall store or permit to remain any such vehicle or part on his property for more than a like period. No person, after receipt of such notice, shall remove such motor vehicle or parts to any other private property upon which storage is not permitted or onto any public highway or other public property for purposes of storage. Such storage is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated or removed and penalties imposed as provided in this Code. 
(2)  Storage permitted. This subsection (c) shall not apply to any motor vehicle or parts stored within an enclosed building; in a storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner; or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise. Such business enterprises shall include auto junkyards, auto repair and auto body shops but shall not include automobile service stations. 
(3)  Notice of removal. Whenever the chief of police or any member of his department finds or is notified that any such motor vehicle or motor vehicle parts have been stored or permitted to remain on any private property within the city, the chief of police shall send by certified mail a notice to the owner of record of such motor vehicle or parts, if such owner can be ascertained, and also to the owner of the property upon which stored to remove the vehicle or vehicle parts within ten days. Such notice shall describe the vehicle or parts, shall order the removal within ten days and shall set forth the possible penalties. 
(Code 1997, § 9.09; #132, 1981; Am. # 701 )  
Sec. 34-26. - Obedience to officers. 
No person shall resist or interfere with any officer of the city while such officer is doing any act in his official capacity and with lawful authority, nor shall any person refuse to assist an officer in carrying out his duties when so requested by the officer. 
(Code 1997, § 9.11)  
Sec. 34-27. - Outdoor burning regulations. 
(a)  Open burning. Open burning is defined as a controlled, limited size, open area fire. Except as otherwise provided in this section, open burning within the city limits is prohibited. 
(b)  Open burning regulations. Open burning not otherwise prohibited by this section, shall be subject to the following regulations, restrictions and limitations: 
(1)  Size of pile. The size of the pile of material to be burned shall not exceed four feet by four feet by three feet high or as permitted by the fire chief on two acres or larger lot size. 
(2)  Material for burning. Fuel for open burning shall consist of dry material only and shall not be ignited with flammable or combustible liquids. 
(3)  Restrictions on locations. Materials used, or intended to be used for open burning shall be subject to the following location restrictions: 
a.  Piles of material or noncontained material being burned shall be at a distance of 50 feet from any structure, wood or lumber pile, wooden fence, trees or brushes; and provision shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to such items; or 
b.  Contained burning shall be an approved burner located at least 25 feet from any structure, wood or lumber pile, wooden fence, tree or brush. 
(4)  Time of burn. Open burning shall be permitted only from 7:00 a.m. to one-half hour after sunset or as permitted by the fire department. 
(5)  Prohibited activities. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, open burning shall be prohibited under the following circumstances: 
a.  When the wind velocity exceeds nine mph or local circumstances make the fire potentially hazardous. Local circumstances include, but are not limited to, thermal inversions, ozone alerts, and very dry conditions. 
b.  No open burning shall be permitted when the location of the pile of material and the wind velocity may cause smoke to create a nuisance for adjacent property owners as determined by the police or fire department on scene. This prohibition shall apply regardless of the wind velocity. 
c.  No burning shall take place within 25 feet of the high watermark of lakeshores, streams or other watercourses or in roadside ditches in the city. 
d.  Burning of standing or razed buildings. No building, structure or materials from a razed building shall be burned, unless it shall be a fire for the practice and instruction of firepersons or the testing of firefighting equipment and shall be under the supervision of the fire department. 
e.  There shall be no burning on construction sites of any building materials at any time. 
f.  No burning shall be permitted on any day deemed by the state as an "atmospheric alert" day. 
g.  Burning shall not be permitted on any federal holiday or the weekend associated with it. If the holiday falls on Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday there is no weekend associated with the holiday. 
(6)  Prohibited materials. The following materials may not be burned within the city limits: rubbish or garbage, including, but not limited to, food wastes, food wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, animal waste, paint or painted materials, furniture, composite shingles, construction or demolition debris or other household or business wastes. Any material made of or coated with rubber, plastic, leather or petroleum based materials. Materials containing any flammable or combustible liquids. Treated or painted wood, including, but not limited to, plywood, composite wood products or other wood products that are painted, varnished or treated with preservatives. Any materials required to be recycled by law. 
(c)  Exceptions. The open burning restrictions contained in this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Recreational fires. 
(2)  Fire department training exercises. 
(3)  Outdoor grilling or cooking. 
(d)  Recreational fires. A recreational fire is any small fire such as a campfire, built in a fire pit or portable manufactured fire container, for the purpose of recreational and personal enjoyment, and not intended for the disposal of waste wood or yard waste. 
(1)  Recreational fires are allowed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight, subject to the following restrictions and limitations: 
a.  Material for burning. Only dry wood materials may be used for recreational fires. No yard waste, grass clippings, leaves, pine branches, Christmas trees, or other similar materials may be used. 
b.  Size of fire. The size of the burning materials shall not exceed 36 inches in diameter or 24 inches in height and shall not have a flame height exceeding four feet from the base of the fire at any time. 
c.  Location. The burning materials shall be located at a minimum 20 feet from any property lines, buildings, wood fences, utility poles, overhead wires or piles of combustible materials. The burning material must also be a minimum of 50 feet from any flammable or combustible liquid storage container. A fire pit used for recreational fires shall include a noncombustible outdoor fire ring extending not more than 18 inches above ground level, and not exceeding 36 inches in diameter. The fire pit shall be surrounded by noncombustible materials, extending at least 12 inches in all directions around the perimeter of the fire pit. 
(2)  Exceptions. The recreational fire restrictions contained in this section shall not apply to campfires at established camp sites in Naga-Waukee Park. Campfires in Naga-Waukee Park shall be regulated by Waukesha County. 
(e)  Bonfires. A bonfire is defined as a large (greater than three feet wide by two feet high) open area fire kindled to mark a public event, victory celebration or similar occurrence where dry, combustible materials, such as wood, paper and similar items, are burned. Bonfires, which are included within the definition of open burning, shall be subject to the following additional restrictions and limitations: 
(1)  Prior approval. All persons shall obtain authorization from the fire chief before kindling or maintaining any bonfire or authorizing the kindling or maintaining of any bonfire on any premises in the city. 
(2)  Quantity of material to be burned. The allowable quantity of material to be burned shall be determined by the fire chief and shall be based upon the fire safety considerations of the situation and the desired duration of the burn. 
(3)  Material for burning. Fuel for bonfires shall consist of dry material only and shall not be ignited with flammable or combustible liquids. Material for bonfires may not include rubbish, garbage, trash, any material made of or coated with rubber, plastic, leather or petroleum-based materials and may not contain any flammable or combustible liquids. 
(4)  Other regulations. Persons kindling or maintaining bonfires or authorizing the kindling or maintenance of bonfires shall be subject to the ordinances and regulations of the city fire department. 
(f)  Supervision. All open burning, bonfires, and recreational fires shall be constantly attended and supervised by a competent person at least 16 years of age until such fire is extinguished. This person shall have fire extinguishing equipment available, and shall be responsible for properly and thoroughly extinguishing all open burning, bonfires or recreational fires before leaving the fire unattended. 
(g)  Prohibitions. The prohibitions and restrictions that apply to open burning, as set forth in subsection (b)(5)a through f of this section shall apply to recreational fires. 
(h)  Nuisances. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any open burning, bonfire or recreational fire which is determined by fire or police officials, to create a health or safety hazard, or otherwise unreasonably interferes with the use and enjoyment of other residential properties within the city, shall be extinguished if so ordered by either police or fire department officials. 
(i)  Emergencies. Whenever because of extreme dryness or drought the fire chief shall deem it necessary to prohibit the setting of fires upon any land within the city, the chief shall, by proclamation, declare an emergency and cause to be published in the official newspaper a notice forbidding the setting of fires within the city. 
(Code 1997, § 9.14; Rep. & Recr. #641; Am. # 686 ; # 701 )  
Sec. 34-28. - Curfew. 
(a)  Hours. 
(1)  Specified. No child under the age of 17 years shall loiter, idle or remain upon any street, alley or other public place in the city between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the next day unless such child is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody of such child. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
a.  This section shall not apply to a child: 
1.  Who is performing an errand as directed by his parent, guardian or person having lawful custody. 
2.  Who is on his own premises or in the areas immediately adjacent thereto. 
3.  Whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or public places or in any motor vehicle during such hours. 
4.  Who is returning home from a supervised school, church or civic function. 
b.  These exceptions shall not, however, permit a child to unnecessarily loiter about the streets, alleys or public places or be in a parked motor vehicle on the public streets. 
(b)  Parental violation. No parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a child under the age of 17 years shall permit such child to loiter, idle or remain upon any street, alley or other public place in the city between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the next day unless such child is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody of such child. 
(c)  Responsibility of operators of places of amusement. No person operating a place of amusement or entertainment within the city, or any agent, servant or employee of such person, shall permit a child under the age of 17 years to enter or loiter in such place of amusement or entertainment between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the next day unless such child is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody of such child. 
(d)  Responsibility of operators of hotels, motels and rooming houses. No person operating a hotel, motel or lodging or rooming house within the city, or any agent, servant or employee of such person, shall permit any child under the age of 17 years to visit, idle, wander or stroll in any portion of such hotel, motel or lodging or rooming house between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the next day unless such child is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody of such child. 
(e)  Loitering in school and playground areas. No person not in official attendance or on official school business shall enter into, congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or play in any school building or in or about any playground area adjacent thereto within the city between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on official school days. 
(f)  Detaining a child. A child believed to be violating the provisions of this section shall be taken to the police department or the county sheriff's department for proper identification. Any law enforcement officer on duty may detain any child violating subsection (a), (c), (d) or (e) of this section until such time as the parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody of the child has been immediately notified and the person so notified has, as soon as reasonably possible thereafter, reported to the location the child is being detained. 
(g)  Warning. The first time a child is detained by law enforcement officers as provided in subsection (f) of this section, the parent, guardian or person having legal custody shall be advised as to the provisions of this section; and any violation of this section occurring thereafter by this child or any other child under such adult's care or custody shall result in a penalty being imposed as provided in subsection (h) of this section. 
(h)  General penalty. 
(1)  Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a child described in subsection (a), (c), (d) or (e) of this section who has been warned in the manner provided in subsection (g) of this section and who thereafter violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4. 
(2)  Any child who violates this section after being detained and released under subsection (f) of this section shall be dealt with under Wis. Stats. ch. 48. 
(Code 1997, § 9.15; Am. # 701 )  
Sec. 34-29. - Trespassing. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall: 
(1)  Enter any enclosed or cultivated land of another with intent to catch or kill any birds, animals or fish on such land or gather any products of the soil without the express or implied consent from the owner or occupant to engage in any of those activities. 
(2)  Enter or remain on any land of another after having been notified by the owner or occupant not to enter or remain on the premises. 
(3)  Hunt, shoot, fish or gather any product of the soil on the premises of another or enter the premises with intent to do any of the foregoing after having been notified by the owner or occupant not to do so. 
(b)  Determination of notice. A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning of this section if he has been notified personally, either orally or in writing or if the land is posted. For land to be posted, a sign at least 11 inches square shall be placed in at least two conspicuous places or on every 40 acres to be protected. The sign shall carry an appropriate notice and the name of the person giving the notice followed by the word "owner" if the person giving the notice is the holder of legal title of the land and by the word "occupant" if the person giving the notice is not the holder of legal title but is a lawful occupant of the land. Proof that appropriate signs as herein provided were erected or in existence upon the premises to be protected within six months prior to the event complained of shall be prima facie proof that the premises to be protected were posted as herein provided. 
(Code 1997, § 9.16)  
Sec. 34-30. - Handbill distribution regulated. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall distribute advertising materials of any kind, in or upon any automobile, sidewalk, street, alley or public place within the city, unless these articles are securely fastened in a manner which disallows them to become scattered about. 
(b)  Distribution to vacant or posted dwellings. No distribution of any of the printed material referred to previously in this section shall be made to any dwelling or apartment which is or appears to be vacant, or where the owner or occupant has placed a visible sign stating "No Handbills." 
(c)  Protection of lawns. No person engaged in distributing any of the advertising matter described in this section shall cross any lawn or pass over or through any hedges or shrubbery. 
(d)  Religious or educational matter. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of religious or educational matters or newspapers or other publications printing news of a general nature, or keeping space therein open to the public for the publication of advertising matter, and which is capable of being entered as second class matter in the United States mails, nor to the distribution of election cards from person to person. 
(Code 1997, § 9.17)  
Sec. 34-31. - Leaving keys in cars prohibited. 
No person shall leave the ignition keys in the lock of any unattended motor vehicle, while such vehicle is parked in any public place in the city. 
(Code 1997, § 9.18)  
Sec. 34-32. - Sound trucks prohibited. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall play, use or operate on the public streets, alleys, etc., any device known as a sound truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier, or radio or phonograph with a loudspeaker or sound amplifier, or any other instrument known as a calliope, or any instrument which emits therefrom loud and raucous noises, and is attached to a vehicle operated or standing upon the streets of public places, between 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., nor shall such apparatus be used at any time in congested areas, hospital areas, church areas or school areas. 
(b)  Exception. From December 14 to January 1, Christmas music may be played from such an amplifying device at a moderate volume in residential areas from moving vehicles between 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 1997, § 9.19)  
Sec. 34-33. - Large gatherings regulated. 
(a)  Intent. 
(1)  It is the purpose of the city council to regulate the assemblage of large numbers of people, in excess of those normally needing the health, sanitary, fire, police, transportation and utility services regularly provided in the city, in order that the health, safety and welfare of all persons in the city, residents and visitors alike, may be protected. 
(2)  It is the intent of the city council that all subsections and provisions of this section have an independent existence, and, should any subsection or provision be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is the intent that any subsection or provision so declared shall be severable from and shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the section. 
(b)  License required. 
(1)  No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise, act as entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage, or sell or give tickets to an actual or reasonably anticipated assembly of 150 or more people which continues or can reasonably be expected to continue for 12 or more consecutive hours, whether on public or private property, unless a license to hold the assembly has first been issued by the city council, application for which must be made to the city clerk at least 30 days in advance of the assembly. A license to hold an assembly issued to one person shall permit any person to engage in any lawful activity in connection with the holding of the licensed assembly. 
(2)  As used in this legislation "assembly" means a company of persons gathered together at any single time for any purpose. 
(3)  A separate license shall be required for each day and each location in which 150 or more people assemble or can reasonably be anticipated to assemble; the fee for each license shall be $100.00. 
(4)  A license shall permit the assembly of only the maximum number of people stated in the license. The licensee shall not sell tickets to nor permit to assemble at the licensed location more than the maximum permissible number of people. 
(5)  The licensee shall not permit the sound of the assembly to carry unreasonably beyond the enclosed boundaries of the location of the assembly. 
(6)  This section shall not apply to events which are regularly established or which are sponsored by local civil, charitable or social organizations nor shall this section apply to assemblies which are regularly established, permanent places of worship, stadiums, athletic fields, arenas, auditoriums or other similar established places of assembly for assemblies which do not exceed by more than 250 people the maximum seating capacity of the structure where the assembly is held. 
(7)  This legislation shall not apply to government sponsored fairs held on regularly established fairgrounds nor to assemblies required to be licensed by other laws and regulations of the city. 
(c)  Conditions for issuing license. Before he may be issued a license, the applicant shall first: 
(1)  Determine the maximum number of people which will be assembled or admitted to the location of the assembly, provided that the maximum number shall not exceed the maximum number which can reasonably assemble at the location of the assembly in consideration of the nature of the assembly and provided that, where the assembly is to continue overnight, the maximum number shall not be more than is allowed to sleep within the boundaries of the location of the assembly by the zoning or health ordinances of the municipality. 
(2)  Provide proof that he will furnish at his own expense before the assembly commences: 
a.  A fence completely enclosing the proposed location, of sufficient height and strength to prevent people in excess of the maximum permissible number from gaining access to the assembly grounds, which shall have at least four gates, at least one at or near four opposite points of the compass. 
b.  Potable water, meeting all federal and state requirements for purity, sufficient to provide drinking water for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one gallon per person per day and water for bathing at the rate of at least five gallons per person per day. The requirement for water for bathing shall be only required in the event the gathering is going to be overnight. 
c.  Separate enclosed toilets for males and females, meeting all state and local specifications, conveniently located throughout the grounds, sufficient to provide facilities for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one toilet for every 50 females and at least one toilet for every 75 males together with an efficient, sanitary means of disposing of waste matter deposited, which is in compliance with all state and local laws and regulations; a lavatory with running water under pressure and a continuous supply of soap and paper towels shall be provided with each toilet. 
d.  A sanitary method of disposing of solid waste, in compliance with state and local laws and regulations, sufficient to dispose of the solid waste production of the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least 2.5 pounds of solid waste per person per day, together with a plan for holding and a plan for collecting all such waste at least once each day of the assembly and sufficient trash cans with tight fitting lids and personnel to perform the task. The sanitary disposal system described above shall be approved by the Waukesha County health department. 
e.  Physicians and nurses licensed to practice in Wisconsin sufficient to provide the average medical care enjoyed by residents of Wisconsin for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one physician for every 200 people; and at least one nurse for every 1,000 people, together with an enclosed covered structure where treatment may be rendered, containing separately enclosed treatment rooms for each physician, and at least one emergency ambulance available for use at all times. 
f.  If the assembly is to continue during hours of darkness, illumination sufficient to light the entire area of the assembly at the rate of at least five footcandles, but not to shine unreasonably beyond the boundaries of the enclosed location of the assembly. 
g.  A free parking area inside of the assembly grounds sufficient to provide parking space for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one parking space for every four persons. 
h.  Telephones connected to outside lines sufficient to provide service for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one separate line and receiver for each 500 persons. 
i.  If the assembly is to continue overnight, camping facilities in compliance with all state and local requirements as set forth in the Wisconsin Administrative Code and ordinances of this municipality, sufficient to provide camping accommodations for the maximum number of people to be assembled. The facilities for camping shall be laid out in detail and shall be subject to the approval of the Waukesha County board of health department. 
j.  Security guards, either regularly employed, duly sworn, off duty Wisconsin peace officers or private guards, licensed in Wisconsin, sufficient to provide adequate security for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one security guard for every 250 people. 
k.  Fire protection, including alarms, extinguishing devices and fire lanes and escapes, sufficient to meet all state and local standards for the location of the assembly as set forth in the Wisconsin Administrative Code and ordinances of the city and sufficient emergency personnel to efficiently operate the required equipment. This shall be subject to the approval of the fire chief. 
l.  All reasonably necessary precautions to ensure that the sound of the assembly will not carry unreasonably beyond the enclosed boundaries of the location of the assembly. 
m.  A bond filed with the city clerk either in cash or underwritten by a surety company licensed to do business in Wisconsin in the principal sum of $7,500.00 which shall indemnify and hold harmless the city or any of its agents, officers, servants and employees from any liability or causes of action which might arise by reason of granting this license and from any cost incurred in cleaning up any waste material produced or left by the assembly. The city shall have the right under the terms of such bond to enter upon the premises where the assembly was held without notice to the bonding company and clean up and repair and charge the reasonable cost thereof to such bonding company without any requirement that the city shall attempt to collect from the sponsor or applicant hereof. 
(d)  Application. 
(1)  Application for a license to hold an assembly of 150 or more persons shall be made in writing to the governing body of the city at least 30 days in advance of the assembly. 
(2)  The application shall contain a statement made upon oath or affirmation that the statements contained therein are true and correct to the best knowledge of the applicant and shall be signed and sworn to or affirmed by the individual making application in the case of a human being, by all officers in the case of a corporation, by all partners in the case of a partnership or by all officers or an unincorporated association, society or group or, if there be no officers, by all members of such association, society or group. 
(3)  The application shall contain and disclose: 
a.  The name, age, residence and mailing address of all persons required to sign the application by subsection (d)(2) of this section, in the case of a corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation together with the name, age, residence and mailing address of each person holding ten percent or more of the stock of the corporation. 
b.  The address and legal description of all property upon which the assembly is to be held together with the name, residence and mailing address of the record owner(s) of the property. 
c.  Proof of ownership of all property upon which the assembly is to be held or a statement made upon oath or affirmation by the record owner(s) of all such property that the applicant has permission to use such property for an assembly of 150 or more persons. 
d.  The nature or purpose of the assembly. 
e.  The total number of days and/or hours during which the assembly is to last. 
f.  The maximum number of persons which the applicant shall permit to assemble at any time, not to exceed the maximum number which can reasonably assemble at the location of the assembly, consideration of the nature of the assembly, or the maximum number of persons allowed to sleep within the boundaries of the location of the assembly by the zoning ordinances of the city if the assembly is to continue overnight. 
g.  The maximum number of tickets to be sold, if any. 
h.  The plans of the applicant to limit the maximum number of people permitted to assemble. 
i.  The plans for fencing the location of the assembly and the gates contained in such fence. 
j.  The plans for supplying potable water, including the source, amount available and location of outlets. 
k.  The plans for providing toilet and lavatory facilities, including the source, number and location, type, and the means of disposing of waste deposited. 
l.  The plans for holding, collection, and disposing of solid waste material. 
m.  The plans to provide for medical facilities, including the location and construction of a medical structure, the names and addresses and hours of availability of physicians and nurses, and provisions for emergency ambulance service. 
n.  The plans, if any, to illuminate the location of the assembly including the source and amount of power and the location of lamps. 
o.  The plans for parking vehicles, including size and location of lots, points of highway access and interior roads including routes between highway access and parking lots. 
p.  The plans for telephone service, including the source, number and location of telephones. 
q.  The plans for camping facilities, if any, including facilities available and their location. 
r.  The plans for security, including the number of guards, their deployment, and their names, addresses, credentials and hours of availability. 
s.  The plans for fire protection, including the number, type and location of all protective devices, including alarms and extinguishers, and the number of emergency fire personnel available to operate the equipment. 
t.  The plans for sound control and sound amplification, if any, including number, location and power of amplifiers and speakers. 
u.  The plans for food concessions and concessioners who will be allowed to operate on the grounds, including the names and addresses of all concessioners and their license or permit numbers. 
v.  The applicant shall be available at all times the assembly is in process to answer to any complaints or to discuss matters of security, safety, health and welfare that may arise during the course of the assembly. The applicant shall maintain a location at the assembly where he may be located at any time by any official of the city. 
(4)  The application shall include the bond required in subsection (c)(2)m of this section and the license fee. 
(5)  The city, in the course of investigation and approval of the application herein, shall have the right to call upon the assistance of the Waukesha County health department, and any other state, county or local body it feels necessary for assistance in promoting the safety, health, welfare and security of the residents of the city and the persons attending the assembly. 
(e)  Issuance. The application for a license shall be processed within 20 days of receipt and shall be issued if all conditions are complied with, with the exception that the city reserves the right to disapprove any application if it appears that the safety, health, welfare and security of the city or persons attending the assembly will not be promoted by the assembly. 
(f)  Revocation. The license may be revoked by the governing body of the city at any time if any of the conditions necessary for the issuing of or contained in the license are not complied with, or if any condition previously met ceases to be complied with. 
(g)  Enforcement. 
(1)  The provisions of this section may be enforced by injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  The holding of an assembly in violation of any provision or condition contained in this section shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such. 
(3)  Any person who violates subsection (b)(1) of this section or who violates any condition upon which he is granted a license may be fined not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $10,000.00. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(4)  In addition to the penalties and the remedies provided above, if any condition of this license is not complied with or is broken during the course of the assembly, the police department of the city shall have the right to order the assembly disbanded immediately. 
(Code 1997, § 9.20)  
Sec. 34-34. - Trapping. 
(a)  "Trapping" includes the taking, or the attempting to take, of any wild animal by means of setting or operating any device, mechanism or contraption that is designed, built or made to close upon, hold fast or otherwise capture a wild animal or animals. When the word "trap" is used as a verb, it shall have the same meaning as the word "trapping" as defined herein. 
(b)  No person shall, within the city, set or operate any leghold trap within 50 feet of the nearest edge of the traveled portion of any public or private street, pedestrian way or bridle path. 
(c)  No person shall, within the city, set or operate any leghold trap within 200 yards of any building used for human habitation, except with the written permission of the owner or occupant of each such building. 
(d)  No person shall, within the city, set or operate any conibear trap other than a water set conibear trap with a diameter of less than 6½ inches. 
(e)  No person under the age of 16 years may trap within the city without first having completed the trapper education course conducted by the department of natural resources and the Wisconsin Trapper's Association. 
(Code 1997, § 9.21; #188)  
Sec. 34-35. - Rummage sales. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Personal property means property which is owned, utilized, maintained and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment. 
Rummage sale means all general sales open to the public, conducted from or on a residential premises as defined by the Zoning Code for the purpose of disposing of personal property, including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "rummage," "lawn," "yard," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "flea market" or "garage sale." 
(b)  Property permitted to be sold. No person shall sell or offer for sale at a rummage sale property other than personal property. 
(c)  Hours and place of operation. Rummage sales shall be conducted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. No more than four rummage sales in one calendar year may be conducted from any premises. Each sale may last no longer than three consecutive days. 
(d)  Advertising signs. "Rummage Sale," "Garage Sale" or similar signs shall be permitted to advertise the rummage sale. There shall not be more than one such sign per lot, except that on a corner lot two signs are allowed, one facing each street. No sign shall exceed four square feet in area and shall be located not less than eight feet from the nearest lot line. Such signs may be placed only upon the property of the residence where the sale is being held or upon other residential property with permission of the owner or other person in charge of such at the time of the sale. No sign shall be placed within the area of any public lands or right-of-way. No advertising sign may be posted more than 72 hours before the sale commences, and all advertising signs must be removed within 12 hours after the close of the sale. 
(Code 1997, § 9.22; Cr. #198; Am. #393)  
Sec. 34-36. - Sale of nonhousehold items in residential areas. 
(a)  Permitted. Nonhousehold items, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following items due to failure to enumerate, may be sold on property zoned for residential use: automobiles, including trucks not exceeding three-fourths ton; motorcycles (licensed or not); snowmobiles; all-terrain vehicles; parts of vehicles; boats; sailboats; canoes or any type of watercraft, with or without trailers; campers, whether towed or intended to be mounted on a vehicle; yard equipment, whether power-driven or not. 
(b)  Limitations. Nonhousehold items being sold in areas zoned for residential purposes shall be displayed only in a driveway access. Such items may be displayed for no more than 14 consecutive days within any one 30-day period. Advertising signs for the sale of nonhousehold items shall not exceed four square feet in area. No more than two of any such [advertising signs for the sale of] nonhousehold items shall exceed four square feet in area. No more than two of any such nonhousehold items may be offered for sale at one time on any one residential property. 
(Code 1997, § 9.221; Cr. #393)  
Sec. 34-37. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definition. In this section, the term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, primarily intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 161, in violation of this section. It includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, primarily intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 
(2)  Kits used, primarily intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances. 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, primarily intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance. 
(4)  Testing equipment used, primarily intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances. 
(5)  Scales and balances used, primarily intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances. 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, primarily intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances. 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, primarily intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana. 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, primarily intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes or other containers used, primarily intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, primarily intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, primarily intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body. 
(12)  Objects used, primarily intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls. 
b.  Water pipes. 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices. 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks. 
e.  Objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials. 
g.  Chamber pipes. 
h.  Carburetor pipes. 
i.  Electric pipes. 
j.  Air-driven pipes. 
k.  Chillums. 
l.  Bongs. 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(b)  Determination of drug paraphernalia. 
(1)  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, in addition to all other legally relevant factors, the following shall be considered: 
a.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use. 
b.  The proximity of the object in time and space to a direct violation of this section. 
c.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances. 
d.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object. 
e.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom the person knows or should reasonably know intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section. The innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the object as to a direct violation of this section shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
f.  Oral or written instructions provided with the object concerning its use. 
g.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use. 
h.  Local advertising concerning its use. 
i.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
j.  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
k.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
l.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(2)  In determining under this section whether an item is designed for a particular use, a court or other authority shall consider the objective physical characteristics and design features of the item. 
(3)  In determining under this section whether an item is primarily intended for a particular use, a court of other authority shall consider the subjective intent of the defendant. 
(c)  Prohibited activities. 
(1)  Possession of drug paraphernalia. No person may use or possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section. 
(2)  Manufacture, sale or delivery of drug paraphernalia. No person may sell, deliver, possess with intent to deliver or manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section. 
(3)  Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor. 
a.  Any person 17 years of age or over who violates subsection (c)(2) of this section by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person 17 years of age or under, who is at least three years younger than the violator shall upon conviction be subject to a forfeiture of $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and upon default of payment, be imprisoned in the county jail or house of correction until the costs are paid, but not to exceed 40 days. 
b.  Any person who violates subsection (c)(2) of this section who is under 17 years of age is subject to a disposition under Wis. Stats. § 938.344(2e). 
(4)  Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. No person may place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication or upon any outdoor billboard or sign any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(5)  Exemption. This subsection (c) does not apply to manufacturers, practitioners, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with Wis. Stats. ch. 161. This section does not prohibit the possession, manufacture or use of hypodermics in accordance with Wis. Stats. ch. 161. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any drug paraphernalia used in violation of this section shall be seized and forfeited to the city. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by subsection (c)(3) of this section, any person who violates subsection (c)(1), (2) or (4) of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and upon default of payment, be imprisoned in the county jail or house of correction until the costs are paid, but not to exceed 20 days. 
(3)  Any person who violates subsection (c)(3) of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and upon default of payment, be imprisoned in the county jail or house of correction until the costs are paid, but not to exceed 40 days. 
(Code 1997, § 9.23; Cr. #260; Am. # 701 )  
Sec. 34-38. - Smoking regulations. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Educational facility means any building used principally for educational purposes in which a school is located or a course of instruction or training program is offered that has been approved or licensed by a state agency or board. 
Smoking means the carrying of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other lighted smoking material or equipment. 
(b)  Smoking in educational facilities prohibited. Smoking in all educational facilities is strictly prohibited. 
(c)  Smoking on school district grounds prohibited. Smoking on all school district grounds, including administrative offices or other buildings owned by the school district and not included within the definition of educational facilities, as that term is used herein, as well as on all parking lots operated or maintained by the school district is strictly prohibited. 
(Code 1997, § 9.24; Cr. #270)  
Sec. 34-39. - Theft of or damage to library materials. 
(a)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Intentionally fail to return any book, document or other movable property which is under his control by reason of any agreement with the public library within ten days after the due date for the book, document or other movable property has passed. 
(2)  Cause damage to any book, document or other movable property of the public library without the consent of the librarian. 
(b)  Definitions in this section shall conform to Wis. Stats. § 943.20(2). 
(c)  The parent or guardian of a child under 18, which child is a borrower of a book, document or movable property, shall be subject to the penalties for the above offenses in the place of the child borrower at the option of the complainant. 
(d)  Proof that whoever is charged with an offense described in subsection (a)(1) of this section has failed to return the item or items described therein within five days after receiving notice to return any book, document or movable property which is under his control or in the possession of his child is prima facie evidence that he intended to retain possession of the book, document or movable property without the consent of the owner or the public library. 
(Code 1997, § 9.25; Cr. #300)  
Sec. 34-40. - Orderly conduct—Miscellaneous business regulations. 
(a)  Any person who owns or operates a hotel, motel, inn or other transient lodging facility shall maintain records of: 
(1)  The name and given address of the person renting sleeping facilities in the establishment. 
(2)  The room number occupied. 
(3)  The date and time of registration and checkout. 
(4)  Where maintained by the establishment in the ordinary course of business, the license plate number and state of registration of any motor vehicle parked or kept by the person on the hotel, motel, inn or other transient lodging facility premises. 
(b)  A person may not knowingly give or cause to be given an incorrect name, address or license plate number to the owner, manager or agent of any establishment required to maintain records under this section. 
(c)  The records required to be kept in accordance with subsection (a) of this section and records and billing information maintained by any hotel, motel, inn or other transient lodging facility, including records of telephone calls made from the individual rooms in the establishment, shall be made available for immediate inspection upon the request of any law enforcement officer of the city. 
(d)  The register and records required to be kept in accordance with this section shall be retained for one year after the date the last entry is recorded. 
(Code 1997, § 9.26; Cr. #308)  
Sec. 34-41. - E 9-1-1 emergency telephone line abuse. 
(a)  Prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall use the E 9-1-1 emergency telephone number system for any purpose other than to report an emergency. 
(2)  No person shall report an emergency knowing that the fact situation which he reports does not exist. 
(3)  No parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a person under the age of 18 years shall permit or by insufficient control allow such person to violate the provisions of this section. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, an "emergency" exists when a reasonable person reasonably believes that immediate response by public safety personnel is essential due to the risk or actual occurrence of: 
a.  Death or great bodily harm. 
b.  Property damage. 
c.  Any other situation which reasonably requires the immediate response of public safety personnel. 
(b)  Penalty. The provisions of section 1-4 shall apply to this section, except that for second and subsequent convictions of violating the provisions of this section within a 12-month period, the maximum forfeiture shall be not more than $1,000.00, together with the cost of prosecution. 
(Code 1997, § 9.27)  
Sec. 34-42. - False alarms. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish regulations, standards, and controls relating to the use of alarm devices which are monitored or relayed to the police and fire departments serving the city to prevent false alarms which intentionally create hazards to the public. For various reasons, false alarms from alarms frequently occur. Each false alarm requires response by public safety personnel, involves unnecessary expense to the city and increases the risk of injury to the persons or damage to property and dilutes the overall public safety protection to the city. Such false alarms constitute a public nuisance and must be abated. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Alarm system means any electrical or mechanical device for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act or both, or for the detection of a fire, and when activated, emits a sound or transmits a signal or message or both. 
False alarms means a signal from an alarm system which results in a call, direct or indirect, to the city police department or fire department resulting in a response by the appropriate municipal organization when an actual emergency does not exist. A false alarm shall be, for all purposes, considered a public nuisance. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity. 
Private alarm means any alarm system not owned or leased by the city. 
(c)  Prohibitions. This section is intended to impose strict liability on the person whose premises is or are protected by an alarm which is received by or relayed to the city police department or fire department. 
(1)  False alarm. No person owning, leasing, using, or possessing a private alarm system shall, by means of the alarm system, give a false alarm as defined herein. 
(2)  Defenses. The fact that the false alarm was accidental, caused by human error or by malfunction shall not be a defense to prosecution for the violation of the terms of this section. 
(d)  Penalties. The following penalties shall apply to false alarms: 
(1)  First false alarm, the person in violation will be issued a warning. 
(2)  Second and third false alarms, $50.00 apiece. 
(3)  Fourth and fifth false alarms, $100.00 apiece. 
(4)  Six or more false alarms, $200.00 apiece. 
(5)  In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city is not precluded from pursuing other remedies, including, but not limited to, temporary and permanent injunctions or any other relief provided by law. All penalties and remedies available under any city ordinance or state statute are cumulative. 
(e)  Intentional false alarms. No person shall intentionally cause the activation of an alarm device knowing that no crime or emergency exists. Any person convicted of violating this section shall forfeit not less than $500.00 or more than $2,000.00 for each violation. 
(Code 1997, § 9.28; Cr. #375)  
Sec. 34-43. - In-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis. 
(a)  Authority. This section is created pursuant to the authority granted in Wis. Stats. § 349.235. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
In-line skates means skates with wheels aligned singly in tandem rather than in pairs. 
(c)  Applicability of state law. Every person using in-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis upon public roadways shall be subject to the provisions of all ordinances and state laws applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except those provisions with reference to equipment of vehicles and except those provisions which by their nature would have no application. 
(d)  Public sidewalks or walkways. Every person using in-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis upon a sidewalk or walkway shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall exercise due care when passing any other person proceeding in the same direction. 
(e)  Riding on roadway. 
(1)  Every person using in-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis on a two-way public street or alley shall keep as close to the right-hand curb as possible and shall proceed with traffic. Every person using in-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis on a one-way public street or alley shall proceed in the direction of the one-way traffic. 
(2)  Every person using in-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis on a two-way public street or alley shall ride single file. 
(3)  Persons using in-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis upon a public roadway shall not impede the normal and reasonable movement of motor vehicles. 
(f)  Clinging to moving vehicles prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person using in-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis to cling to or attach to any bicycle or other moving vehicle upon a public roadway. 
(g)  Observance of traffic regulations. Every person using in-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis upon a public roadway shall stop for all stop signs and traffic signals. 
(h)  Yielding to traffic. The operator of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a user of in-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis in the same manner as for bicyclists and pedestrians under Wis. Stats. §§ 346.23, 346.24, 346.37 and 346.38. When using in-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis, every person shall, upon entering a public roadway, yield the right-of-way to motor vehicles, except that a person using in-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis shall be subject to the same regulations as bicyclists and pedestrians under Wis. Stats §§ 346.23, 346.24, 346.37, and 346.38. 
(i)  Prohibited use. No person shall ride on in-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis upon the following listed premises: 
(1)  Any shelter in any city park. 
(2)  On any city street or alley from one-half hour before sunset to sunrise of the following day. 
(3)  Sidewalks or pedestrian ways within any shopping center in the city. 
(4)  All premises held out to the public for use of their motor vehicles whether such premises are publicly or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for the use thereof. 
(5)  Any street, alley or pedestrian way in the following described area of the city: all central business districts as shown on the official zoning map of the City of Delafield. This area of prohibited operation is described as follows: commencing at the intersection of Genesee Street and Mill Street; thence east along the north right-of-way line of Mill Street to Bleeker Street; thence south on the east right-of-way line of Bleeker Street to Division Street; thence west on the south right-of-way line of Division Street to Butler Drive; thence north on the west right-of-way line of Butler Drive to the Bark River; thence northeasterly along the Bark River to the point of beginning. 
(6)  On the pavement of any of the following streets, subject to the prohibitions of subsection (i)(5) of this section: Milwaukee Street; Main Street, except for the bike lane from North Lapham Peak Road west to Bleeker Street; West Main Street. 
(7)  No person shall use in-line skates, skateboards, roller skates and roller skis in front of any commercial property. 
(Code 1997, § 9.29; Cr. #458)  
Sec. 34-44. - Sex offender residing within 2,000 feet of schools, day care centers, parks and other specified facilities and uses prohibited; child safety zones. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is a regulatory measure intended to protect the health and safety of children in [the] City of Delafield from the risk that convicted sex offenders may reoffend in locations close to their residences. The city finds and declares that sex offenders are a serious threat to public safety. When convicted sex offenders reenter society, they are much more likely than any other type of offender to be re-crested [rearrested] for a new rape or sexual assault. Given the high rate of recidivism for sex offenders and that reducing opportunity and temptation is important to minimizing the risk of reoffense, there is a need to protect children where they congregate or play in public places in addition to the protections afforded by state law near schools, day care centers and other places children frequent. The city finds and declares that in addition to schools and day care centers, children congregate or play at public parks. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Crime against children means any of the following offenses set forth within the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, or the laws of this or any other state or the federal government, having like elements necessary for conviction, respectively: 
(1)  § 940.225(1) First Degree Sexual Assault; 
(2)  § 940.225(2) Second Degree Sexual Assault; 
(3)  § 940.225(3) Third Degree Sexual Assault; 
(4)  § 940.22(2) Sexual Exploitation by Therapist; 
(5)  § 940.30 False Imprisonment-victim was minor and not the offender's child; 
(6)  § 940.31 Kidnapping-victim was minor and not the offender's child; 
(7)  § 944.01 Rape (prior statute); 
(8)  § 944.06 Incest; 
(9)  § 944.10 Sexual Intercourse with a Child (prior statute); 
(10)  § 944.11 Indecent Behavior with a Child (prior statute); 
(11)  § 944.12 Enticing Child for Immoral Purposes (prior statute); 
(12)  § 948.02(1) First Degree Sexual Assault of a Child; 
(13)  § 948.02(2) Second Degree Sexual Assault of a Child; 
(14)  § 948.025 Engaging in Repeated Acts of Sexual Assault of the Same Child; 
(15)  § 948.05 Sexual Exploitation of a Child; 
(16)  § 948.055 Causing a Child to View or Listen to Sexual Activity; 
(17)  § 948.06 Incest with a Child; 
(18)  § 948.07 Child Enticement; 
(19)  § 948.075 Use of a Computer to Facilitate a Child Sex Crime; 
(20)  § 948.08 Soliciting a Child for Prostitution; 
(21)  § 948.095 Sexual Assault of a Student by School Instructional Staff; 
(22)  § 948.11(2)(a) or (am) Exposing Child to Harmful Material-felony sections; 
(23)  § 948.12 Possession of Child Pornography; 
(24)  § 948.13 Convicted Child Sex Offender Working with Children; 
(25)  § 948.30 Abduction of Another's Child; 
(26)  § 971.17 Not Guilty by Reason of Mental Disease of an included offense; and 
(27)  § 975.06 Sex Crimes Law Commitment. 
Person means a person who has been convicted of or has been found delinquent of or has been found not guilty by reason of disease or mental defect of a sexually violent offense and/or a crime against children. 
Residence (reside) means the place where a person sleeps, which may include more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory. 
Sexually violent offense shall have the meaning as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 980.01(6), as amended from time to time. 
(c)  Residency restrictions. A person shall not reside within 2,000 feet of the real property comprising any of the following: 
(1)  Any facility for children, which means a public or private school; a group home, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(7); a residential care center for children and youth, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(15)(d); a shelter care facility, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(17); a foster home, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(6); a treatment foster home, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(17)(q); a day care program established under Wis. Stats. § 120.13(14); a day care provider certified under Wis. Stats. § 48.651; or a youth center, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 961.01(22); and/or 
(2)  Any facility used for: 
a.  A public park, parkway, parkland, park facility; 
b.  A public swimming pool; 
c.  A public library; 
d.  A recreational trail; 
e.  A public playground; 
f.  A school for children; 
g.  Athletic fields used by children; 
h.  A movie theatre; 
i.  A day care center; 
j.  Any specialized school for children, including, but not limited to, a gymnastics academy, dance academy or music school; 
k.  A public or private golf course or range; 
l.  Aquatic facilities open to the public; and 
m.  A private recreational facility designed or operated for the purpose of providing recreational activities primarily for children under 12 years of age. 
The distance shall be measured from the closest boundary line of the real property supporting the residence of a person to the closest real property boundary line of the applicable above enumerated use(s). 
A map depicting the above enumerated uses and the resulting residency restriction distances, as amended from time to time, shall be approved by resolution adopted by the city council, and shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. In determining the residency restriction distances, the city council may include those enumerated uses located outside the city boundaries, but within 2,000 feet of the city boundary. 
(d)  Residency restriction exceptions. A person residing within 2,000 feet of the real property comprising any of the uses enumerated in subsection (c) of this section does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or other correctional institution or facility. 
(2)  The person has established a residence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, which is within 2,000 feet of any of the uses enumerated in subsection (c) of this section, or such enumerated use is newly established after such effective date and it is located within such 2,000 feet of a residence of a person which was established prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(3)  The person is a minor or ward under guardianship. 
(e)  Original domicile restriction. In addition to and notwithstanding the foregoing, but subject to subsection (d) of this section, no person and no individual who has been convicted of a sexually violent offense and/or a crime against children, shall be permitted to reside in the City of Delafield, unless such person was domiciled in the City of Delafield at the time of the offense resulting in the person's most recent conviction for committing the sexually violent offense and/or crime against children. 
(f)  Child safety zones. No person shall enter or be present upon any real property upon which there exists any facility in the city used for or which supports a use of: 
(1)  A public park, parkway, parkland, park facility; 
(2)  A public swimming pool; 
(3)  A public library; 
(4)  A recreational trail; 
(5)  A public playground; 
(6)  A school for children; 
(7)  Athletic fields used by children; 
(8)  A movie theatre; 
(9)  A day care center; 
(10)  Any specialized school for children, including, but not limited to, a gymnastics academy, dance academy or music school; 
(11)  Aquatic facilities open to the public; and 
(12)  A private recreational facility designed or operated for the purpose of providing recreational activities primarily for children under 12 years of age; 
(13)  Any facility for children (which means a public or private school; a group home, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(7); a residential care center for children and youth, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(15)(d); a shelter care facility, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(17); a foster home, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(6); a treatment foster home, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(17)(q); a day care center licensed under Wis. Stats. § 48.65; a day care program established under Wis. Stats. § 120.13(14); a day care provider certified under Wis. Stats. § 48.651; or a youth center, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 961.01(22). 
A map depicting the locations of the real property in the City of Delafield supporting the above enumerated uses, as amended from time to time, shall be approved by resolution adopted by the city council, and shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. 
(g)  Child safety zone exceptions. A person does not commit a violation of subsection (f) of this section and the enumerated uses may allow such person on the property supporting such use if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The property supporting an enumerated use under subsection (f) of this section also supports a church, synagogue, mosque, temple or other house of religious worship (collectively "church"), subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Entrance and presence upon the property occurs only doing hours of worship or other religious program/service as posted to the public; and 
b.  Written advance notice is made from the person to an individual in charge of the church and approval from an individual in charge of the church as designated by the church is made in return, of the attendance by the person; and 
c.  The person shall not participate in any religious education programs which include individuals under the age of 18. 
(2)  The property supporting an enumerated use under subsection (f) of this section also supports a use lawfully attended by a person's natural or adopted child(ren), which child's use reasonably requires the attendance of the person as the child's parent upon the property, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Entrance and presence upon the property occurs only during hours of activity related to the use as posted to the public; and 
b.  Written advance notice is made from the person to an individual in charge of the use upon the property and approval from an individual in charge of the use upon the property as designated by the owner of the use upon the property is made in return, of the attendance by the person. 
(3)  The property supporting an enumerated use under subsection (f) of this section also supports a polling location in a local, state or federal election, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The person is eligible to vote; 
b.  The designated polling place for the person is an enumerated use; and 
c.  The person enters the polling place property, proceeds to cast a ballot with whatever usual and customary assistance is provided to any member of the electorate; and the person vacates the property immediately after voting. 
(4)  The property supporting an enumerated use under subsection (f) of this section also supports an elementary or secondary school lawfully attended by a person as a student, under which circumstances the person who is a student may enter upon that property supporting the school at which the person is enrolled, as is reasonably required for the educational purposes of the school. 
(h)  Violations. If a person violates subsection (c) of this section by establishing a residence or occupying residential premises within 2,000 feet of those premises as described therein, without any exception(s) as also set forth above, the city attorney, upon referral from the chief of police and the written determination by the chief of police that upon all of the facts and circumstances and the purpose of this section, such residence occupancy presents an activity or use of property that interferes substantially with the comfortable enjoyment of life, health, safety of another or others, shall bring an action in the name of the city in the circuit court for Waukesha County to permanently enjoin such residency as a public nuisance. If a person violates subsection (f) of this section, in addition to the aforesaid injunctive relief, such person shall be subject to the general penalty provisions set forth under section 1-4. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the city may undertake all other legal and equitable remedies to prevent or remove a violation of this section. 
(Code 1997, § 9.30; Cr. #644; Am. # 701 )  
Sec. 34-45. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4. In addition to any penalty imposed for violation of Wis. Stats. § 9.943.01(1), any person who shall cause physical damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable for the costs of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property. The parent of any unemancipated minor child who violates Wis. Stats. § 9.943.01(1) may also be held liable for the cost of replacing such damaged or destroyed property in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 895.035. 
(b)  A violation of the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 9.101.123 relating to the prohibition of smoking in various enclosed places shall not exceed $100.00 per day for the "person in charge." 
(Code 1997, § 9.35; Rn. MSC '92; Cr. #636)  
Chapter 36 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Park curfew. 
(a)  Hours restricted. All city-owned parks shall be closed between one-half hour after sunset and 7:00 a.m. each day. 
(b)  Exception. The city council may, upon written application of any group desiring to organize an athletic, recreational or social function, grant a permit waiving the restrictions of subsection (a) of this section for a specified number of days. 
(c)  Ice skating exemption. Ice skating on the city pond on Genesse Street and in the Oakwood Community Park shall be permitted until 10:00 p.m. 
(Code 1997, § 19.01; Am. #238; Rep. & Recr. # 683 )  
Sec. 36-2. - Lake access regulations. 
(a)  Augmenting the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 236.16(3), no plat which includes any parcel of land dedicated or intended for use as either a public or private accessway to any lake or stream, where such way is intended to serve five or more parcels of building lots, and whether such access be created as an easement, license, privilege or concurrent estate, each and every parcel or building lot of such plat, by covenant of the subdivider or subdividers, a charge or assessment payable annually or more frequently to some resident of the city corporate or natural, who shall be designated in such covenant as trustee of such fund for the benefit of the public or private access holders. Such charge or assessment need not be stated in amount, but shall be sufficient in the aggregate to defray the expenses of such trustee in providing the facilities for safety, congestion control, property protection, health and public welfare. 
(b)  Every such trustee shall provide, upon or closely appurtenant to every such accessway, each of the following facilities: 
(1)  A supply of pure drinking water. 
(2)  Adequate sanitary facilities for each sex. 
(3)  Electric lighting sufficient to provide safe and adequate illumination in darkness until 10:00 p.m. and thereafter so long as any person may pass upon or over such accessway. 
(4)  Direct and adequate access for police and emergency vehicles from a dedicated public highway, road or street to a point on such accessway which is not more than 50 feet from the shoreline, which access shall be surfaced for all weather use by such vehicles. 
(5)  Launching and docking facilities sufficient to provide for the safe launching and docking of not less than one 12-foot outboard or rowboat for each parcel or building lot intended to share in such access or, in the case of a public access, for not less than 100 such boats. 
(6)  A regular inspection of the shore area, with provision for removal of debris and correction of hazardous conditions, not less than biweekly. 
(7)  Property liability insurance, with policy limits of not less than $20,000.00—$50,000.00, with a responsible insurer licensed to issue policies in this state, assuring the financial responsibility of such trustee to respond for damages arising out of the use and maintenance of such accessway. 
(c)  Wherever any such accessway is dedicated to the use of the public, and the city accepts the same for public use and agrees to operate, police and maintain the same, the provisions for private plat covenant, for operation by trustee, and for safety, health and welfare facilities may be dispensed with. But such dedication and acceptance must, in each such case, precede or be simultaneous with plat approval; and the approving authority of the city must determine, as a condition of such acceptance, that the accessway is reasonably adapted to public use for such purposes and will not disproportionately burden city revenues. 
(d)  At the present time there are sufficient public, private and quasi-public areas, which afford adequate access to the lake and river, so that there is no necessity for any further such access sites. Therefore, no division of land into separate tracts or parcels of land shall be permitted which creates or uses any site, tract, strip or piece of land lying on any lake or stream, any portion of which is within the city corporate limits for the use of, or access to, such lake or stream for the benefit of any tract, lot or parcel of land which is offshore, whether such use or access is by free title, reservation or easement. 
(Code 1997, § 19.02)  
Sec. 36-3. - Delafield Water Safety Patrol Unit. 
(a)  Designation. Pursuant to the authority granted by Wis. Stats. §§ 30.77(2) and 30.79, the city shall designate a Water Safety Patrol Unit for the purpose of enforcing Wis. Stats. §§ 30.50 to 30.80, and any rule or ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, upon the water of Nagawicka Lake and its tributaries to which the city is riparian. 
(b)  Wisconsin Statutes. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 30.50 through 30.71, so far as applicable, and all acts amendatory thereof, and the rules of the Wisconsin department of natural resources enacted pursuant to such sections, so far as applicable, are hereby adopted and enacted by reference, except that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to require local numbering, registration or licensing of boats. 
(c)  Speed limit. 
(1)  Fixed limit. The fixed speed limit on Nagawicka Lake shall be 45 mph. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
a.  No person shall operate a motorboat at a speed in excess of ten mph from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. 
b.  Because of increased boat traffic, the speed limit on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays between 11:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. shall be 25 mph during the months of June, July and August. 
c.  No person shall operate any motorboat in any restricted area at a speed in excess of three mph nor in excess of a speed which creates a wake, whichever is less. A restricted area within the meaning of this section is defined as any waters lying within 300 feet of a shoreline and includes all channels along and in such shoreline and such other waters as shall from time to time be clearly marked as "SLOW - 3 MPH" by buoy markers or other clearly discernible sign or device by authority of the police department or governing bodies of the enacting municipalities acting for the protection of persons and property on account of hazards which may from time to time arise and exist. 
d.  When the water level of Nagawicka Lake rises to a level of ten inches or more above the maximum permitted water level then the entire lake shall be considered a restricted area designated as "SLOW - NO WAKE" and no person shall operate any watercraft at any location on the lake in excess of three mph nor in excess of a speed which creates a wake, whichever is less. The "SLOW - NO WAKE" designation shall remain in place until the water level recedes to a level that is less than eight inches above the maximum permitted water level. 
e.  The chief of police or any police officer acting in his absence is hereby granted the right and authority to declare certain waters restricted and to mark them as such, upon the happening of any event or circumstances which, in his opinion, constitutes a hazard and renders it advisable so to restrict a water area or areas. 
f.  The speed limitation contained in this section shall not apply in case of emergency to patrol or rescue craft. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Distance required from bathers, swimmers, channels or "kettle." Except for normal and otherwise lawful ingress to and egress from the shore and except for tournaments, expositions or instructions conducted pursuant to specific permit previously granted by the police department or governing body of either of the enacting municipalities, no person engaged in water skiing, aquaplaning or similar activities and no operator of a motorboat towing such person shall pass within 150 feet of any bather or swimmer nor within the limits of any of the channels or "kettle" of Nagawicka Lake. 
(f)  Jumps restricted. No person shall place upon the waters of Nagawicka Lake a water ski jump or any other apparatus designed for the purpose of creating a jump for water skiers; provided, however, that with the explicit permission of the city council of the city, upon recommendation of the lake welfare committee and approval of the village board of the Village of Nashotah, a jump may be placed on the lake under the following criteria: 
(1)  Liability insurance of $100,000.00 or more is obtained by the applicant for such jump and a certificate of this insurance is filed with the city and the Village of Nashotah and the Village of Nashotah shall be named as additional insured on such liability insurance policy. 
(2)  Proper safety markings appropriately visible, appropriate for both night and daytime safety will be placed on such jump. 
(3)  The jump shall be so constructed as to restrict its use only to the applicant, its agents, servants and employees. Use of the jump by the general public shall not be permitted. 
(4)  The lake welfare committee of the city, in cooperation with the party requesting such jump, will establish a location for such jump that is to be permanent for the boating season (except during times when the jump is needed in a different location for special shows or events. Such location shall be subject to the approval of the Village of Nashotah.) 
(5)  After the boating season, the permit for such jump will terminate. However, upon application made, such permit may be extended by the city council and the village board of the Village of Nashotah for each subsequent boating season upon the aforesaid conditions and such new conditions as the city and Village of Nashotah shall deem necessary. 
(6)  The applicant shall agree to and shall subsequently execute a hold harmless agreement whereby he agrees to indemnify and hold the city and Village of Nashotah harmless from any loss, damages or expenses arising out of the operation of the jump or the placing of same upon Lake Nagawicka pursuant to this section. 
(g)  Distance required from shoreline. A person operating a motorboat having in tow a person on water skis, aquaplane or similar device shall not operate in waters within 300 feet of any shoreline which is hereby ordained to be the distance from shore under which a motorboat towing a person on water skis, aquaplane or similar device cannot operate without endangering the life and property of persons on or about the shoreline of Nagawicka Lake, unless such person is in the process of egress directly away from the shoreline at an angle of 90 degrees to the shoreline as nearly as practicable in view of the circumstances then and there existing. 
(h)  Refuse. No person shall deposit, place or throw into any of the waters within the jurisdiction of the enacting municipalities, upon any of the shores thereof, upon any rafts or piers located on such waters or their shores or upon the ice of such waters any cans, bottles, debris, refuse or other waste material. 
(i)  Violation of rules and regulations prohibited. No operator, owner or person in charge of any motorboat shall permit any person in such boat to violate any of the rules and regulations pertaining to boat operation as contained in Wis. Stats. §§ 30.65, 30.66, 30.68 and 30.69, or as contained in this Municipal Code. 
(j)  Applicability. All of the provisions of this section, including those provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes enacted by reference, shall apply to the waters of Nagawicka Lake, its tributaries, bays and channels. 
(k)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 30.50 through 30.71, which are herein enacted by reference, for which a penalty is not provided, and any person violating any other provisions of this section shall forfeit a sum not to exceed $50.00 plus the costs of prosecution or, in default of such payment, shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not to exceed 30 days. 
(2)  Any person found guilty of violating the same provision of the sections of the Wisconsin Statutes enacted by reference or of the section for which a penalty is provided a second or subsequent time within one year of the first violation thereof shall forfeit a sum not to exceed $100.00 plus the costs of prosecution or, in default of such payment, shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not to exceed 90 days. 
(3)  Any person found guilty of violating Wis. Stats. § 30.67(1) or 30.68(1), by this section adopted by reference, shall forfeit a sum not to exceed $200.00 plus the costs of prosecution or, in default of such payment, shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not to exceed six months. Any person convicted of violating Wis. Stats. § 30.68, shall be required to obtain a certificate of satisfactory completion of a safety course under Wis. Stats. § 30.74(1). 
(l)  Citations. Citations for violations of any provision of this section and the deposits, stipulations and municipal court procedures that result therefrom shall be governed by the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 23.50 through 23.85. 
(m)  Violation of subsection (f) of this section. Any violation of subsection (f) of this section shall be penalized as provided under subsection (k) of this section. However, each separate day that the violation occurs shall constitute a distinct separate offense. The city and the Village of Nashotah shall, in addition, have the right to remove such ski jump apparatus from the waters of Nagawicka Lake upon giving ten days' notice to the owner or owners of such apparatus of their intention to do so. 
(Code 1997, § 19.04; Rnbd. #718 ) 
( Ord. No. 749 , § 1, 9-17-2018)  
Sec. 36-4. - Prohibiting motor vehicles on Nagawicka Lake when icebound. 
(a)  No person shall operate, permit, or authorize, direct or control operation of any motor vehicle required to be registered by or under the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 341, upon or over the bed or waters of Nagawicka Lake, unless such operation shall first have been authorized by permit as provided below. 
(b)  The chief of police, or either enacting municipality, upon application and payment of a license fee of $0.50, may issue a written permit upon being satisfied that ice conditions do and will permit operation of one or more motor vehicles upon a designated portion of the lake without material risk or hazard, authorizing operation of one or more such vehicles on the lake for particular purposes to be specified in such permit. Such permit shall expire 24 hours after issuance, unless sooner revoked by notice by the issuing authority of a hazardous change in the condition of the ice. No such permit shall authorize any motor vehicle speed or acrobatic contest, exhibition or performance; nor shall any such permit authorize joyriding, sightseeing or other activity not ancillary to the ordinary utilization of icebound lakes. 
(c)  No person shall ride as a passenger in any motor vehicle being operated in violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1997, § 19.05)  
Sec. 36-5. - Dogs prohibited in city parks. 
Excluding special events that may impose additional restrictions, any person who owns, harbors or keeps a dog, is allowed to bring the dog into City of Delafield parks provided the dog is under their physical control on a leash not to exceed six feet in length. Dogs are allowed off leash and under verbal control in Lois Jensen Nature Preserve on Vettelson Road. It shall be unlawful, unless otherwise authorized by the common council, to bring any dog into any parks or pathways/trails which is not properly licensed with all required vaccinations. Furthermore, the owner or person having immediate control of the dog shall promptly remove and dispose of in a sanitary manner, any excrement left or deposited by the animal upon public property. 
(Code 1997, § 19.06; Rep. & Recr. # 688 )  
Sec. 36-6. - Horses prohibited in parks and other public areas. 
No person shall ride, lead, graze, tie up or drive a horse within any public park or parking lot within the city except while performing in authorized civic affairs or events. 
(Code 1997, § 19.07; Cr. #140)  
Sec. 36-7. - Regulation of water traffic on Upper Nashotah Lake. 
(a)  Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to the waters of Upper Nashotah Lake, within the jurisdiction of the Town of Summit and the City of Delafield, and shall be enforced by the officers of the Water Safety Patrol Unit and police of the jurisdiction of the Town of Summit. 
(b)  State boating and water safety laws adopted. 
(1)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, the current and future statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to water traffic, boats, boating and relating water activities in Wis. Stats. §§ 30.50 up to and including 30.71, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any current or future statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any further additions, amendments, revisions or modifications of the statute incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform state-wide regulation of the waterways of the state. 
(2)  All rules and orders created by the Wisconsin department of natural resources modifying or supplementing the foregoing provisions of state law or which may be adopted or made in the future are hereby incorporated in and made a part of this section by deferring to the same as if they are or were to be set out herein verbatim. 
(c)  Operation of motorboats. No motorboat shall be operated on Upper Nashotah Lake from sunset until sunrise at a speed in excess of slow no wake. 
(d)  Swimming regulations. No person, unless engaging in activities and subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 30.70, entitled "Skin Diving," shall: 
(1)  Swim from any unmanned boat, unless such boat is anchored. 
(2)  Swim more than 150 feet from the shoreline unless it is a designated swimming zone or unless accompanied by a competent person in a boat. 
(3)  Swim more than 150 feet from the shoreline between sunset and sunrise. 
(e)  Local regulation on icebound inland waters. 
(1)  No person shall operate or park or permit, authorize, direct or control the operation or parking of, or ride as a passenger on any motorized vehicle or motor-driven vehicle, including but not limited to motor vehicles, snowmobiles or all-terrain vehicles, on the ice on any portion of Upper Nashotah Lake. 
(2)  The chief of police of the Town of Summit, upon application to him and payment of a license fee established by the town board, being satisfied that ice conditions do and will permit operation of a motorized vehicle or motor-driven vehicle upon a designated portion of the lake without material risk or hazard, may issue a written permit expiring within 24 hours after issuance authorizing operation of a motorized vehicle or motor-driven vehicle on the lake for particular purposes to be specified in such permit. Such particular purposes shall be limited to: snowplowing of a portion of the lake for an ice skating rink, transporting of property to an island or conducting official lake studies. No such permit shall authorize speed or acrobatic contests, exhibitions or performances; racing; fishing; nor shall any such permit authorize joy-riding, sightseeing or any other activity not deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
(f)  Penalty. 
(1)  State boating and water safety laws and all other violations. Any forfeiture for violation of a state statute, rule or order adopted by reference in subsection (b) of this section shall conform to the forfeiture permitted to be imposed for violation of such statutes as set forth in the Uniform Wisconsin Deposit and Bail Schedule for Conservation, Boating, Snowmobile and ATV Violations, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses, which schedule is adopted by reference. 
(2)  Local boating laws. 
a.  Any person 16 years or older violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $500.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject the violator to imprisonment in the county jail or loss of license. 
b.  Any person 14 or 15 years of age shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment per each offense or referred to the proper authorities as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject the violator to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 48.17(2). 
c.  Any person under the age of 14 shall be referred to the proper authorities as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. 
(g)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Enforcement procedure. The statutory provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0109, 66.0113, 66.0114, 30.29, and 30.50 to 30.71 and ch. 800 are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future additions, amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform state-wide regulation and enforcement of boating ordinance violations. Further, the Village of Summit and the City of Delafield specifically elect to use the citation method of enforcement. 
(2)  Deposits. 
a.  Schedule of deposits. The schedule of cash deposits shall be as follows: 
1.  Subsection (b) of this section violations. Applicable sections of Uniform Wisconsin Deposit and Bail Schedule for Conservation, Boating, Snowmobile and ATV Violations plus current assessment fees and current court costs, if applicable. 
2.  Subsections (c) through (e) of this section violations. $50.00 plus court costs and assessments plus current assessment fees and current court costs, if applicable. 
b.  Deposit for repeat offenses. Any person found guilty of violating this section or any part thereof who was previously convicted of the same section within the last year shall forfeit twice the deposit delineated above plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
c.  Nonscheduled deposit. If a deposit schedule has not been established for a specific violation, the arresting officer shall require the alleged offender to deposit not less than the maximum forfeiture permitted hereunder. 
d.  Depository. Deposits shall be made in cash, money order or certified check to the clerk of municipal court, who shall issue a receipt therefor as required by the Wisconsin Statutes. If the deposit is mailed, the signed statement required by the Wisconsin Statutes shall be mailed with the deposit. 
(3)  Nonexclusivity. 
a.  Other ordinances. Adoption of this section does not preclude the town board or city council from adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or other matter. 
b.  Other remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the town board or city council or any authorized office from proceedings under any other ordinance of law or by any other enforcement method to enforce any ordinance, regulation or order. 
(Code 1997, § 19.08; Cr. #175; Rep. & Recr. #334; Am. #643; Rep. & Recr. #718 )  
Chapter 37 - PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS 
 
Sec. 37-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter is intended to protect against unlawful activity, including fraud and burglary, to minimize the unwelcome disturbance of citizens and the disruption of privacy and to otherwise preserve the public health, safety and welfare by regulating, controlling and licensing door-to-door solicitors and peddlers as well as other transient merchant trade. 
The regulations contained in this chapter are not intended to regulate speech by any person, but merely regulate the activities of those individuals selling or offering for sale merchandise or requesting contributions for a charitable purpose. 
It shall be unlawful for any direct seller, transient merchant, or charitable solicitor to engage in sales and solicitation within the city without being registered for that purpose as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 37-2. - Definitions. 
Canvasser or solicitor means person who goes from place to place within the city soliciting orders for the future delivery of property or for services to be performed in the future, including any person who occupies any place within the city for the purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
Charitable organization means any patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, cultural, religious or fraternal, person, partnership, association or corporation. 
Contributions means and includes food, clothing, money, property, financial assistance or other thing of value. A contribution, as defined herein, shall also include a sale or offer to sell any book, card, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing in connection with which an appeal is made of any charitable or religious purpose. 
Direct seller means any individual who, for him/herself, or for a partnership, association or corporation, sells goods or services, or takes sales orders for the later delivery of goods or services, at any location other than the permanent business place or residence of the individual, partnership, association or corporation, and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations or contributions, whether direct or indirect, required by the direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer. 
Merchandise means and includes personal property of any kind, and shall include merchandise, goods or materials provided incidental to services offered or sold. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer. 
Peddler means a person who goes from place to place within the city offering for sale property which he carries with him, including a vendor who distributes products to regular customers on an established route. 
Permanent merchant means a direct seller who, for at least one year prior to the date of the application of this chapter to the merchant: 
(1)  Has continuously operated an established place of business in the local trade area which includes the greater metropolitan Milwaukee trade area; 
(2)  Has established residence in the local trade area which includes the greater metropolitan trade area. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, organization or league, or one purporting to be. 
Religious or charitable solicitor means any individual who travels as defined in this section for the purpose of soliciting funds or property for organizations as defined in this chapter. Solicitation shall include contributions, payments or donations, including, but not limited to, those for flowers, books or pamphlets. 
Solicit and solicitation means any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Selling or offering for sale, or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods or services of any kind, character or description; 
(2)  Selling or offering for sale, or taking or attempting to take orders for books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind or publication; 
(3)  Requesting, directly or indirectly, contributions on the plea or representation that such contributions will be used for a charitable or religious purpose. 
Street vendor means any person who publicly displays, exposes for sale or offers for sale any goods or services from, upon or in any vehicle, nonpermanent structure or in the open, upon any property of which he is not the legally permitted occupant, including public property. 
Transient merchant means a person who at a fixed location in the city engages in the temporary business of selling property at such location. The term does not include a person who does not sell from stock but exhibits samples for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only but includes a person who associates temporarily with any local business or conducts business in the name of a local merchant, dealer or auctioneer. 
Transient merchant means any person who engages in the retail sale of merchandise at any place in this city temporarily and who does not intend to become and does not become a permanent merchant of this city. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 37-3. - License required. 
Except as provided by section 37-4, no person shall conduct any of the activities enumerated in section 37-1 without a license therefore as provided by this section. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 37-4. - Regulation of direct sellers and solicitors. 
(a)  Permit required. No direct seller or solicitor shall engage in such business within the city without first receiving a permit. 
(b)  Application for a permit. An applicant for permit under this section shall file with the city clerk, a sworn application, in writing, on a form provided by the city clerk which shall require the necessary information from the applicant as the city clerk police department shall require for the effective enforcement of this section and the safeguarding of the residents of the city from fraud, misconduct or abuse. 
(c)  Permit fee. At the time the application is filed with the clerk's office, the applicant shall pay a fee to cover the cost to the city of processing the application and investigating the facts stated therein. The permit fee shall be nonrefundable and is set from time to time by the common council and is required for each business or organization filing an application shall be collected. Charitable solicitors shall not be required to pay the permit fee; however, proof of tax exempt status must be furnished to the city clerk. 
An additional fee shall be collected from each business or organization filing an application to cover the costs of a records check for each solicitor. This fee will be charged to all solicitors or otherwise, and shall include actual costs associated with the records check. The fee shall be due at the time of application and shall be nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 37-5. - Bond. 
(a)  When required. Every applicant who is not a resident of the county or who represents a firm whose principal place of business is located outside of the state shall file with the clerk-treasurer a surety bond in the amount of $500.00, conditioned that the applicant will comply with all provisions of the city ordinances and the state laws regulating peddlers, canvassers, solicitors and transient merchants, and guaranteeing to any person doing business with the licensee that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the licensee, and further guaranteeing that property purchased for future delivery will be delivered according to the representations of the licensee. 
(b)  Action on bond. Action on such bond may be brought by any person aggrieved. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 37-6. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No license shall be required hereunder of the following: 
(1)  Persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles. 
(2)  Newsboys. 
(3)  Children under 18 years of age who are residents of the city. 
(4)  Merchants or their employees delivering goods in the regular course of business. 
(5)  Farmers or truck gardeners offering to sell the products of the farm or garden occupied and cultivated by them. 
(6)  Any person exempt by Wis. Stats. § 440.51 (statewide peddlers license for veterans); provided that the person must comply with sections 37-7—37-9. 
(7)  Any person soliciting for charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic purposes if the proceeds thereof are devoted solely to the purposes of the organization. 
(8)  Sales required by statute or order of a court. 
(b)  Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth in this chapter, or from the payment of a permit fee, shall cite to the city clerk the statute or other legal authority under which exemption is claimed and shall present the city clerk proof of qualification for such exemption. 
(c)  Any person claiming to be exempt from the regulations and licensing requirements set forth in this chapter, or from any provision of this chapter, including payment of a permit fee or filing of a bond, may notify the city clerk, in writing, of the nature of the exemption and of the rule, regulation, statute or other authority which grants the exemption, and shall present to the city clerk documentation supporting the claimed exemption. The city clerk shall, within three business days following receipt of the written claim of exemption, determine whether the person is exempt from the regulations of this chapter, and if the city clerk determines that the person is exempt from this chapter, or any portion thereof, the city clerk shall refer the application to the chief of police as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 37-7. - Investigation and expiration. 
The clerk shall refer each application for a license required by this chapter to the chief of police, who shall make such investigation of the contents of the application as he deems necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare and shall report the results of the investigation to the clerk-treasurer within 72 hours. The clerk-treasurer shall place the application on the next agenda for action by the common council. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 37-8. - Appeal. 
The application's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form, or at the applicant's last known address. Any person denied a license may appeal the denial through the legislative and licensing committee of the common council. The city clerk must be notified by the person requesting an appeal. If the application is denied, the license fee will not be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 37-9. - Excessive noise prohibited. 
No person licensed hereunder shall in hawking his wares create any noise annoying to a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 37-10. - Use of streets. 
No licensee shall use the public streets or sidewalks for purposes of sales in such manner as to impede or inconvenience the public use in the streets or sidewalks, nor shall such sales activities occur on said public property or rights-of-way without permission of the plan commission. Such requests shall be submitted to the city clerk-treasurer on behalf of the plan commission consistent with the required submittal dates published for the year. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 37-11. - Display of license. 
Any person licensed hereunder shall carry his license with him while engaged in licensed activities and shall upon request display such license to any officer of the city or any person with whom he seeks to do business. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 37-12. - Hours permitted. 
No person shall conduct any of the activities enumerated in section 37-1 except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or dusk, whichever occurs earlier. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 37-13. - Revocation. 
A permit may be revoked by the chief of police if the permittee made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for registration, made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct sales, violated any provisions of this chapter or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in direct selling. The permit may also be revoked if the permittee conducts peddling or solicitation activities contrary to the provisions contained in the permit or in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace or endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
Notice of such revocation and the reason or reasons therefor, in writing, shall be immediately served personally upon the person named in the application, or by mailing the same to the permit holder at the named premises, and by filing a copy of such notice with the city clerk. Appeal from revocation shall be made to the legislative and licensing committee within 30 days of the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 37-14. - Prohibited practices. 
The direct seller, charitable solicitor and permanent merchant shall be prohibited from: 
(1)  Calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of similar meaning; 
(2)  Calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or remaining on premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or any other person having authority over such premises; 
(3)  Making false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of their visit, or identity of the organization being represented; 
(4)  Not more than two individuals shall engage in direct selling or solicitation upon any premises for the same goods or services or for the same religious or charitable purposes; 
(5)  No transient merchant, permanent merchant or charitable organization shall make any loud noises to attract customers that can be heard outside the radius of 1,000 feet; 
(6)  No direct seller or charitable solicitor shall solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles upon a road, street or alley, as defined by Wis. Stats. § 340.01(22); 
(7)  Permits are not valid for use on January 1, the Thursday prior to Easter through Easter, the Thursday of Thanksgiving through the Sunday following, and December 24th, 25th, 26th and 31st. 
(Ord. No. 711 , § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Chapter 38 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 40 - SOLID WASTE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 40-1—40-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 40-19. - Title; purpose. 
This section shall be known as the refuse collection and disposal ordinance of the city. The purpose of this section is to require the removal of garbage and trash from all single-family residences, duplexes, condominiums and multifamily buildings located within the city, referred to in this section as residential units, to require the separation of recyclables in accordance with state law and to provide for the collection thereof. 
(Code 1997, § 11.06(1); Cr. #318)  
Sec. 40-20. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this section relating to collection apply to each owner and occupant of residential units. Section 40-22(h), (i) and (j) shall apply to any person, whether or not receiving garbage and refuse collection service. Section 40-22(c) applies to owners of multifamily units or their assigned agents. 
(Code 1997, § 11.06(2))  
Sec. 40-21. - Supervision. 
The collection of garbage, trash and recyclables as defined herein shall be under the supervision of the city council which shall make such regulations as are necessary regarding the collection thereof. 
(Code 1997, § 11.06(3))  
Sec. 40-22. - Collection. 
(a)  Time and frequency. Garbage, trash and recyclables shall be placed in containers provided by the city and collected from every residential unit served. Service may be performed on three days each week. When the regular collection days fall on one of the following holidays, such regular collections on the holiday may be omitted and collection shall be made on another day during the week of such holiday. The holidays herein referred to are New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(b)  Collectible material. The following garbage, rubbish, trash and recyclables shall be collected: 
(1)  Garbage. Refuse from animal, vegetable or fruit matter. 
(2)  Trash. Waste material resulting from ordinary housekeeping, including boxes, cartons, paper (other than newspaper), ashes, cinders and similar materials. Cardboard and paper shall be a convenient size to be handled by one person in such a manner that the same will not blow or scatter. Should bundles, cardboard boxes or contents, because of weather conditions, become wet and soaked, they will not be collected, but shall be stored by the owner or occupant in an approved container for collection on the next collection day. Cardboard boxes will be considered disposable and will not be emptied and returned to the residential unit. 
(3)  Recyclable materials. Means material waste for which there exists a commercially demonstrated processing and manufacturing technology, which uses the material as a raw material. This term shall include the nature and extent of recyclable materials as that term may be defined in any contract entered into between the city and a private waste hauler. 
(4)  White goods/bulky items. Freezers, refrigerators, dishwashers, washing machines, dryers, water softeners, air conditioners, water heaters, carpet and padding in bundles of four-foot lengths weighing 75 pounds or less, sofas, chairs, tables, mattresses, televisions, stereos, box springs, desks and similar items. 
(c)  Approved garbage/trash containers. Each residence shall provide sufficient containers or plastic bags to hold its weekly quantity of garbage and trash. Containers or bags shall not exceed 33 gallons in size or weigh more than 70 pounds gross weight and shall have well fitted covers or be tightly tied. Containers shall be watertight. Containers shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition at all times. 
(d)  Defective and illegal containers. All containers incapable of continuing to meet the definition of an approved container because of damage, loss of handles or other factors shall be tagged by the collection contractor. The collection contractor will also leave notification of the defects on the premises. Containers not approved consist of metal barrels and drums, wooden or cardboard barrels, wheelbarrows and other such containers not approved by this section. These containers will not be emptied regardless of content or weight. Any defective can or any receptacles having ragged or sharp edges or any defects which might injure or hamper the person collecting the waste shall be replaced immediately by the owner. 
(e)  Placement of containers. Collection of both garbage and recyclables shall be "up-the-driveway" for all single family, duplex and condominium units. Collection for apartment projects shall be at the places provided in those various projects, but the contractor shall generally provide "up the driveway" collection, wherever possible. Residents shall provide sufficient access for the contractor's vehicle to reach the containers and to keep any items not intended to be collected at least ten feet from the garbage containers. All containers shall be placed outside of the garage. 
(f)  Prohibited activities and noncollectibles. 
(1)  Dead animals. No person shall place any dead animal or parts thereof in a container for collection. This subsection shall not apply to animal parts from food preparation for human consumption. 
(2)  Garbage or food waste. No person shall place any garbage or other food waste in a container for collection, unless it is first drained and wrapped. 
(3)  Ashes. No person shall place hot ashes for collection. Cool and dry ashes may be placed for collection but only in noncombustible, disposable containers. Ashes shall not be placed in reusable containers for collection. 
(4)  Noncollectibles. No person shall place for collection yard waste, board lumber, firewood logs, auto parts, tires, landscape timbers, piers, rocks, dirt, concrete, building or demolition materials (drywall, plaster, siding, windows, doors, cabinets, sinks, bathtubs, toilet bowls, basins or similar materials), lead acid batteries, waste oil and hazardous or toxic materials as defined by the DNR. 
(g)  Improper placement. No person shall place any garbage, trash or other collectible matter on any street, public grounds or public place within the city unless the same is de minimis in quantity and is placed in an appropriate designated collection container. No person shall place any noncollectible matter in any quantity on any street, public grounds or public place nor place any garbage, offal, dead animals or other refuse matter upon any private property, whether owned by such person or not, unless the same is enclosed in proper vessels or containers, which shall be watertight and kept so with tightly fitting covers. 
(h)  Transportation of solid waste. 
(1)  No person shall transport or convey into the city any trash or garbage originating in any other political unit for the purpose of placing it upon another person's property or for the purpose of depositing same in any container for collection, regardless of whether such person has permission from the owner or person in charge of such property or of such trash or garbage container to deposit trash or garbage therein. 
(2)  No person shall deposit any trash or garbage in any trash/garbage container or dumpster type container within the city without permission from the owner or other person lawfully in charge of such container. 
(3)  No person shall assist, permit or allow any person to deposit any trash or garbage originating in any other political unit and onto such person's property or into any container for collection by the city's garbage/trash contractor. Recycling at the city's recycling site by city residents or nonresidents is allowed. 
(4)  No person shall deposit any trash or garbage originating on any property within the city upon another person's property in the city. 
(5)  No person shall deposit any yard waste upon any private or public property without permission from the owner or authorized agent. 
(i)  Title to waste. Title to the refuse and solid waste, including recyclables, placed for collection shall vest in the city as soon as it is placed for collection. 
(j)  Scavenging. No person shall scavenge any solid waste. 
(Code 1997, § 11.06(4); Rep. & Recr. #716 )  
Sec. 40-23. - Yard waste. 
No yard waste shall be placed into the waste stream for disposal. Yard wastes must be either retained by the resident or disposed of properly at their expense. In this section, "yard waste" means trees, leaves, grass clippings, garden debris and brush, including woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in diameter. 
(Code 1997, § 11.06(5); Am. #716 )  
Sec. 40-24. - White goods/bulky items. 
White goods or bulky item pickup shall be arranged by the owner/occupant of the property for which collection and disposal service is provided. White goods and bulky items shall include those items specified in section 40-22(b). A special charge shall be made for white goods/bulky item pickup. These items must be placed curbside. 
(Code 1997, § 11.06(6); Am. #716 )  
Sec. 40-25. - Collection by city. 
The city shall collect and dispose of or cause to be collected and disposed of the items set forth in this section. Costs for collection of building material and white goods/bulky items shall be as from time to time established by the city council and contractor. Payment of any special charge shall be by arrangement between the contractor and the generator of such material. 
(Code 1997, § 11.06(7); Am. #716 )  
Sec. 40-26. - Penalties. 
(a)  Call backs. Any person who neglects to place their garbage and refuse for collection in a timely manner and has to call the contractor to make a special pickup shall be charged $10.00 per pickup. There shall be no charge if the garbage and refuse was in the proper location at the time of pickup and the contractor neglected to collect it. 
(b)  Violation of section. Any person who violates section 40-22(g) and (h) relative to recycling shall forfeit not less than $25.00 nor more than $50.00 for each violation, provided that the range of forfeiture for the third and subsequent violations of any provision of this article within a 12-month period shall be not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00 for each violation. 
(Code 1997, § 11.06(8); Am. #716 )  
Chapter 42 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Street and sidewalk grades. 
(a)  Establishment. The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be established and described by the council and shall be recorded by the clerk-treasurer in his office. 
(b)  Required. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade thereof is established. 
(c)  Altering prohibited. No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground, or any part thereof, unless authorized or instructed to do so by the council. 
(Code 1997, § 8.01)  
Sec. 42-2. - Sidewalk construction and repair. 
(a)  Appointment of administrator; duties. 
(1)  The city administrator or his designee shall be designated as the sidewalk administrator. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the sidewalk administrator to administer the provisions of this chapter. He shall determine that new sidewalks are laid where required, that existing sidewalks are repaired or replaced when required and that all sidewalk construction is completed according to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Specification for sidewalks. Reference current city specifications on file with the city engineer's office. 
(c)  Sidewalk repair and replacement; when required. 
(1)  The sidewalk administrator shall order any sidewalk which is unsafe, defective or insufficient to be repaired or replaced so that such sidewalk meets the specifications on file with the city engineer's office. 
(2)  The sidewalk administrator shall periodically perform a comprehensive survey of the structural condition of all sidewalks in the city. 
(3)  Whenever the following sidewalk defects are found to exist by the sidewalk administrator, an appropriate order for the repair or replacement of the sidewalk shall be made: 
a.  When a sidewalk has a three-quarter-inch or greater height difference between blocks, it shall be required that the entire block which is out of align be replaced or realigned. 
b.  When a horizontal alignment variance of one inch per foot or greater exists, the entire block which is out of align shall be required to be replaced or realigned. 
c.  When one or more cracks exist in a block with openings which are of three-quarter-inch or larger, it shall be required that the entire block be replaced. 
d.  When the scaling or cracking of a block makes the block unsafe, the entire block shall be required to be replaced. 
e.  When a block has a corner missing and the size of the missing corner is greater than two inches by two inches, the entire block shall be required to be replaced. 
f.  When the height of a block causes isolated ponding of water, the entire block shall be required to be replaced or adjusted in elevation so that the ponding of water is eliminated. 
g.  When a sidewalk has not been set to the required grade or line, or does not comply with other specification of this chapter, it shall be required to be repaired or replaced. 
(4)  When a portion of an old sidewalk is repaired or replaced and the original width of such sidewalk was less than or greater than five feet, the original width of the sidewalk shall prevail provided that the original width is uniform within the entire block and also that less than all of the sidewalk on the entire block will be replaced. In all other circumstances, the five-foot width regulation shall be applicable. 
(d)  New sidewalk construction; when required. 
(1)  Sidewalk shall be required on all arterial and collector streets unless waived by the common council. 
(2)  Streets classified as local streets with curb and gutter but without sidewalk will not be required to have new sidewalks constructed unless more than 50 percent of the property owners along a given street sign a petition requesting that new sidewalk be installed on their street. 
(3)  Sidewalks may be required on local streets or on streets which fall under one or more of the exceptions of subsections (d)(1) and (2) of this section if it is determined that a severe pedestrian and/or traffic hazard exists. 
(e)  Owner responsibility for the construction of new sidewalk and for the replacement and repair of existing sidewalk noncompliance. 
(1)  Whenever the sidewalk administrator determines that the provision in this chapter required the construction of new sidewalk or the repair or replacement of existing sidewalk, the sidewalk administrator shall prepare an order requiring that new sidewalk be constructed or that existing sidewalk be repaired or replaced. A copy of the order directing such construction, replacement or repairs shall be served upon the owner of each lot or parcel of land. The sidewalk administrator or one under his direction and control shall serve such notice. Service of the notice may be made by personal delivery, by certified or registered mail or by publication in the official city newspaper as a Class I notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985, together with mailing by first class mail if the name and mailing address of the owner can be readily ascertained. 
(2)  Whenever any such property owner who has been notified shall neglect for a period of 45 days after such notification to lay, remove or replace, or repair any such sidewalk, the city may cause such work to be done at the expense of such owner. All work for the construction of new sidewalks shall annually be let by competitive bidding to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(3)  The sidewalk administrator shall serve the order which is discussed in subsection (e)(1) of this section, a "notice of owner's intent" form. Such form shall state the options for the property owner. The property owner shall return the "notice" to the sidewalk administrator within 20 days of receiving the notice and shall indicate on the notice the method of repair or replacement desired. 
(4)  Permits shall be required for sidewalk repair and shall conform to the requirements of section 42-3 relating to street excavation permits so far as applicable. 
(f)  Special assessments for sidewalk construction. 
(1)  Where a new sidewalk is installed, and when old sidewalk is repaired or replaced, the cost of such sidewalk shall be levied against the property owner on a square foot basis. The amount levied for each square foot shall be determined as follows: the total amount of the project, including construction, engineering and all city work, divided by the total number of the square feet of sidewalk on the abutting property owner's land. The levy on all lots shall be 100 percent of the cost on a square foot basis. 
(2)  The cost of the sidewalk construction or repair may be paid by the abutting property owner as follows: 
a.  The abutting property owner may elect to reimburse the city by paying the cost of such repair or construction within 30 days of being billed. No interest will be charged if paid within 30 days of the billing. If the cost of construction or repair is not paid within 30 days, it shall be entered by the clerk-treasurer on the tax roll as a special tax against such lot or parcel of land and the same shall be collected in all respects like taxes upon real estate. The amount so added to the tax roll shall include interest at the prevailing rate plus one percent for administrative costs from the date that the individual was initially billed to December 31 of the year in which it is placed on the tax roll. 
b.  Whenever the amount to be levied is in excess of $1,000.00, the property owner may elect to pay over a five-year period and have the clerk-treasurer enter such costs, together with interest at the prevailing rate plus one percent for administrative costs, on the tax roll as a special assessment against such lot or parcel of land. 
c.  The city shall be responsible for the costs incurred to reconstruct curbs and sidewalks to comply with Wis. Stats. § 66.616, except where the sidewalk involved was determined to be unsafe, defective or insufficient. In that case, the property owner shall be assessed on a square foot basis for the sidewalk replaced which is in the normal construction limits of standard sidewalk, that is, one foot from property line, five feet in width. 
d.  Where there is a replacement of sidewalk and there has been a previous assessment for sidewalk, a credit shall be given for the remaining useful life of the sidewalk. The useful life of the sidewalk for this purpose shall be ten years. 
(g)  Variance procedure. 
(1)  The sidewalk administrator shall have authority to either reduce the width of sidewalk or to deviate from the required location of sidewalk whenever he deems it necessary to avoid destroying or severely damaging desirable trees. 
(2)  When the owners of more than 50 percent of the tax parcels along a given street sign a petition requesting a variance or an exception from the requirement of having sidewalk installed on their street, the sidewalk administrator shall submit such petition to the city council. Petitioners will be required to show just cause why sidewalks are not necessary above and beyond merely not wanting such sidewalk. 
a.  In calculating the percentage of property owners, only one signature shall be counted per tax parcel. Individuals of entities owning more than one tax parcel may sign separately for each tax parcel owned. The signature of all recorded owners of a tax parcel shall be required for the vote of that tax parcel to be counted. 
b.  Those submitting such petition must do so within 20 days after receiving notification that sidewalk is required on their street. 
(3)  Individual property owners, upon receipt of an order from the sidewalk administrator, shall have the right to petition the city council for a variance or an exception from any other requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  All exceptions or variances from this section shall require a majority vote of the council. 
(Code 1997, § 8.02; Rep. & Recr. # 700 )  
Sec. 42-3. - Street openings. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall, without first obtaining a permit from the director of public works, make any opening in any street, alley, or sidewalk within the city. No permit shall be granted when the ground is frozen unless the director determines such opening is necessary. 
(b)  Insurance required. 
(1)  A permit shall be issued only if the applicant submits evidence to the clerk-treasurer that he is covered by public liability insurance in the following minimum amounts and that such insurance protects the city from all claims; personal injury: property: one person, one accident - $1,000,000.00, $1,000,000.00, $500,000.00. The evidence of insurance shall also provide that the city be notified at least ten days prior to cancellation or expiration of the insurance. 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to public utility companies covered under Wis. Stats. § 66.045(6). 
(c)  Information to accompany application. The applicant shall submit to the clerk-treasurer, at the time the permit is applied for, sufficient information on the proposed work to enable the city administrator or his designee to properly evaluate the work to be done. The city administrator or his designee shall determine whether sufficient information has been submitted, such information to include at least the following: 
(1)  Where the proposed opening is less than 20 square feet in area or less than 30 feet in length, the applicant shall state the nature and location of the work, the reason for the work and the proposed method of doing the work. 
(2)  Where the proposed opening exceeds 20 square feet in area or 30 feet in length, the applicant shall submit in triplicate a plan or sketch of the proposed work showing the location, nature, reason and method of doing the work. 
(d)  Deposit. The applicant shall submit to the city clerk at the time the permit is applied for a cash or bond deposit conditioned to guarantee the restoration of the surface of such right-of-way as may be disturbed by the proposed openings, unless the required deposit has been waived by the city council. The applicant shall be responsible for the surface restoration or the cost of such restoration. 
(1)  Deposit. The amount of the required bond/letter of credit or cash deposit shall be as follows: 
a.  $1,000.00 minimum, or $5.00 per square foot (whichever is larger). All invoices by the city and/or engineer that are billed to the applicant must be paid in full before the letter of credit/cash deposit will be released. 
b.  Utility poles: no bond required. 
(2)  Use of deposits. The city may use all of such deposits to pay the cost of any work the city performs to restore or maintain the public place as herein provided. If the applicant fails to perform such work, the amount refunded to the applicant shall be reduced by the amount expended by the city plus 25 percent of such cost for general overhead and administrative expenses. 
(3)  Release of cash deposit or bond. All restoration work shall be guaranteed for a period of one year after completion of same. Upon completion of the work in a satisfactory manner, but not sooner than 12 months thereafter, the deposit shall be refunded, unless sooner released with the approval of the director of public works. 
(4)  Public utility companies. Where openings are made by public utility companies covered under Wis. Stats. § 66.045(6), a permit may be granted without such deposit. It is further provided, however, that the city may, in the future, require such deposit from any such utility if a bill rendered in accordance with subsection (l)(6) of this section remains unpaid 30 days after date of billing. 
(e)  Permit to be displayed. A copy of the permit shall be available at the site at all times. 
(f)  Automatic expiration of permit. If work is not commenced within the time period specified on the permit, the permit shall automatically expire and a new permit shall be obtained and an additional fee charged. The director of public works may extend the time limit for sufficient cause. 
(g)  Notices required. Notice required from the applicant shall be as follows: 
(1)  To affected persons. The applicant shall notify all public and private individual firms and corporations affected by the work at least three working days before such work is to start. 
(2)  To city. The applicant shall notify the city Administrator at least three working days prior to the commencement of work and again at least 24 hours prior to backfilling or restoring the surface. 
(h)  Emergency work. When an immediate openings is necessary for the protection of public or private property, health, or safety, and city offices are closed, the same shall be reported to the police department, which shall grant permission to make the necessary openings upon the condition that an application be made in the manner herein provided within one working day. 
(i)  Removal of new pavement. Whenever it is necessary to remove street or alley pavement for installation of new facilities within five years of the construction of the pavement, the applicant shall pay and forfeit as damages to the city the following charges based upon the unit prices as established by the city council for the year in which the opening is made, such charges to be in addition to the restoration costs incurred by the applicant: 
(1)  First year, 50 percent of the unit price. 
(2)  Second year, 40 percent of the unit price. 
(3)  Third year, 30 percent of the unit price. 
(4)  Fourth year, 20 percent of the unit price. 
(5)  Fifth year, ten percent of the unit price. 
(j)  Maximum street opening. Not more than 450 linear feet of trench shall be opened at one time. 
(k)  Time limit for completion of work. No trench openings shall remain open (without trench backfilled and asphalt repaired) in excess of three calendar days, unless permission is obtained from the director of public works prior to the third day. For each day or fraction thereof the openings remains open in excess of three days, the applicant shall pay the city $1,000.00. 
(l)  Method of doing work. The following procedures shall be observed in all street openings. 
(1)  Personnel allowed to perform work. Pavement patching must be performed by a paving company that is approved by the city. Others may take out the permit, but they must identify which paving company will perform the work at the time they apply for the permit. 
(2)  Safety. Any contractor opening a trench or performing any utility or other work, must provide flag persons and other traffic controls to ensure public safety. 
(3)  Excavating. The trench shall be saw cut and shall be opened to a sufficient width and depth to permit the repair or installation of the utility, using special care to avoid damaging existing conduits or pipes. All work shall be done to conform to all applicable federal, state, and local safety standards. All refuse and excess opened material shall be removed from the street limits as the work progresses and shall not be deposited on the site. 
(4)  Erosion control. Applicable state and city regulations shall apply. A separate city erosion control permit (including plans and bond) will be required, depending on the scope of the project. Any material tracked or deposited on any public roadway must be removed immediately. 
(5)  Maintenance of hard surface opening. 
a.  General. The applicant shall backfill the openings with slurry immediately upon completion of the underground work. After 24 hours, slurry will be removed to the depth of the existing asphalt, and the opening will be topped with not less than four inches of bituminous concrete, in accordance with city street cross section standards. Open gravel trenches are not permitted, unless specifically authorized by the director of public works. 
b.  Asphalt placement procedures. The contractor will replace the asphalt surface in accordance with the following procedures and a sketch provided by the city. The contractor will contact the city engineer's office and the director of public works in writing a minimum of 24 hours prior to backfilling and shall also notify in writing a minimum of 24 hours prior to asphalt patching for on-site inspection to guarantee conformance with city requirements. The contractor will replace the asphalt surface in accordance with the specifications and detailed drawings on file with the city. 
c.  Final restoration. The final restoration shall consist of the following steps in restoring the pavement and impacted area to equal or better than original condition. 
(6)  Restoration of openings in other than hard surface areas. All surfaces or sub-surfaces of areas other than hard surface areas as may be disturbed in any street ROW openings shall be replaced in substantially the same condition as it was prior to such disturbance. All work including restoration must be completed within 30 calendar days of the date of issuance of the permit unless extended in writing by the city. 
(7)  Backfilling. Backfilling shall be done in accordance with city specifications on file with the city engineer. The slurry backfill shall be per state standard specifications. 
(8)  Traffic control devices. The applicant shall provide and maintain proper barricades, signs, and flagmen at all locations where construction and maintenance work interferes with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic use of the street or walkways, etc. All markings and signing provided for traffic control and safety purposes shall conform to the standards and specifications of the current issue of the manual on traffic control devices, as may be applicable. The permittee or contractor must submit a basic traffic control plan for approval by the director of public works. 
(9)  City's right to restore surface. If the applicant should fail to restore the surface of the street or any area within the ROW or construction area to its specified condition within seven calendar days of being notified to do so, without written approval for extension, the director of public works, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all the work and items necessary to restore the construction site. The applicant shall be liable for the actual cost thereof plus 25 percent of such cost for general overhead and administrative expenses. The cost of said work shall be deducted from the cash deposit or bond, where applicable, or billed directly to the public utility company involved. Should the cost of repairs exceed the cash or bond limits held, the additional amount shall be billed to the applicant. No additional permits of any kind shall be issued to the applicant until such invoices are paid in full. 
(10)  Guarantee. It shall be the duty of the applicant to guarantee and maintain the site of the openings for one year after restoring it to its original condition and official acceptance of the project. 
(11)  In connection with issuing the permit, responsible city officials will provide the applicant with the most recent issue of the street opening permit form, a sketch of asphalt repair details, and a copy of "Regulations Governing Street Opening and Right-of-Way, Opening Permits in the City of Delafield," which reflects the above information. 
(m)  For the purpose of administering the provisions of this section, each applicant shall pay to the city treasurer permit fees as determined by resolution by the common council from time to time. 
(Code 1997, § 8.03; Rep. & Recr. 733 )  
Sec. 42-4. - Driveway culverts. 
(a)  The department of public works is authorized to replace any and all driveway culverts in need of replacement within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The entire cost incurred by the city in the replacement of a particular driveway culvert as set forth in subsection (a) of this section should be a lien against the parcel or lot which abuts the particular driveway culvert which has been replaced, except that any additional cost incurred as a result of the installation of a culvert pursuant to the terms of this section of more than a 15-inch arch shall be borne by the city. 
(Code 1997, § 8.035)  
Sec. 42-5. - Driveway concrete surfacing. 
In those areas where curb and gutter is not installed in the street, no concrete surfacing shall be installed on a private driveway closer than five feet from the paved surface of the street. 
(Code 1997, § 8.036; Rep. & Recr. #700 )  
Sec. 42-6. - Obstructions and encroachments. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall encroach upon or obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds or land dedicated to public use or any part thereof or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any public way adjoining the premises of which he is the owner or occupant, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Exceptions. The prohibitions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Awnings which do not extend at any point lower than seven feet above the sidewalk, street or alley. 
(2)  Public utility encroachments authorized by the city. 
(3)  Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded which do not extend more than three feet on a sidewalk, provided such goods, wares, etc., do not remain thereon for more than three hours. 
(4)  Building materials when placed upon the street, alley or sidewalk upon conditions prescribed by the City Administrator or his designee, who may require such materials to be protected by barricades or appropriate lights. 
(5)  Signs permitted under zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1997, § 8.04; Am. #562; Am. #700 )  
Sec. 42-7. - Moving buildings. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall move any building within the city without a permit from the building inspector issued upon approval by the plan commission, notice of application for such permit to be made 30 days in advance and to designate the streets and alleys along which the building is intended to be moved. Such permit shall state the date upon which such work shall commence, a description of the building and its location, the place to which such building is intended to be moved, the name of the owner of such building, the name of the person who shall perform the work and the names of the streets and alleys along which the building may be moved. 
(b)  Notice to utilities. The applicant shall immediately notify any public utility whose lines or poles may be impacted. Such utility shall take any steps necessary to permit the building to be moved without damage to its lines and poles. 
(c)  Deposit required. The applicant shall at the time of application deposit with the city clerk-treasurer $1,000.00 to cover the costs to the utilities of any work necessary to permit the moving of the building and the costs of damages to property resulting from such moving. Upon completion of the moving, the city administrator or his designee shall inspect the route and report to the city clerk-treasurer any damages, and the estimated amount thereof, caused to the streets and any public or private property. Upon payment of the utilities' expenses and settlement of all damage claims, the clerk-treasurer shall release the balance of the deposit remaining. The applicant shall be liable for any costs and damages exceeding the deposit. 
(d)  Insurance required. A permit shall be issued only if the applicant submits evidence to the clerk-treasurer that he is covered by public liability insurance in the following minimum amounts and that such insurance protects the city from all claims; personal injury: property: one person, one accident - $1,000,000.00; $1,000,000.00; $500,000.00. The evidence of insurance shall also provide that the city be notified at least ten days prior to cancellation or expiration of the insurance. 
(Code 1997, § 8.05; Am. #700 )  
Sec. 42-8. - Snow and ice removal. 
(a)  Sidewalks to be kept clear. The owner, occupant or person in charge of each and every building, structure, lot or parcel in the city shall clean or cause to be cleaned all public sidewalk fronting or abutting said building, structure, lot or parcel of snow and ice to the width of said sidewalk within 24 hours after each snowfall or occurrence causing the formation of snow and/or ice on the sidewalk, and shall cause the sidewalk to be kept clear from ice and snow, provided that when ice has formed on any sidewalk so that it cannot be immediately removed, the persons referred to in this subsection shall keep the sidewalk sprinkled with salt, sand or other appropriate ice melting products. 
(b)  Deposit in streets restricted. 
(1)  Snow and ice removed from private property shall not be deposited onto any public property or right-of-way. All such snow and ice shall be stored on private property or removed therefrom by the property owner. 
(2)  Snow and ice removed from public sidewalks, private driveway approaches or other areas located within public street or alley right-of-way shall not be deposited onto the paved roadway, including any curb and gutter section. No person shall be allowed to generate snow mounds in the public right-of-way causing visual obstructions and no person shall deposit snow past the curb line or edge of the roadway pavement nearest their property. 
(3)  Exceptions to subsections (a) and (b) of this section may be allowed with a permit from the director of public works or the director's designee, if it is determined to be necessary and appropriate. As part of the permitting process, the director of public works or the director's designee may require a fee sufficient to reimburse the city for the cost of removing any snow so deposited. 
(c)  If the owner, occupant or person in charge fails to comply with any of the snow and ice removal requirements of this section, the director of public works or the director's designee may cause snow and ice to be removed or treated as required and the cost thereof shall be billed directly to the person listed as the owner of the property involved. If the bill remains unpaid at the end of 30 days, the charges shall be entered on the assessment role of the general city taxes and collected in the same manner as other city taxes pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Code 1997, § 8.06; Rep. and Recr. #525; Am. #700 )  
Sec. 42-9. - Sand, use of city. 
Sand purchased and stockpiled by the city shall be used only by private individuals who are residents of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 8.065)  
Sec. 42-10. - Cemetery sexton (or designee). 
The common council shall appoint a cemetery sexton (or designee). Such sexton (or designee) shall have the duties and responsibilities as follows: 
(1)  Duties. The sexton (or designee) shall provide for general cemetery work, such as removing rubbish, cutting grass, plowing roads, filling in sunken graves and seeding them, supervising construction of foundations and setting of all memorials, markers, monuments, urns, planting and embellishments and keeping the cemetery in good order and appearance. 
(2)  Interments. The sexton (or designee) shall be present at all interments and shall direct and control the conduct of all interments within the cemetery grounds. 
(3)  Records of burials. The sexton (or designee) shall keep records complete and up to date of all burials and interments. 
(4)  Records of sales. The sexton (or designee) shall keep complete records of sale of lots and single graves. 
(5)  Perpetual care. The sexton (or designee) shall receive and record all moneys paid for perpetual care and give proper receipts of the same and deliver such records and receipts to the city clerk-treasurer. 
(6)  Cemetery record book. All necessary records herein mentioned or any others shall be recorded in the cemetery record book which shall be kept in the possession of the sexton (or designee) at all times. 
(7)  Supervision of work. The sexton (or designee) shall supervise all grave digging and work in beautification or improvement of the cemetery. 
(8)  Disbursement of funds. The sexton (or designee) shall receive and direct payment of all money received from perpetual care fund and grave digging and erection of monuments. 
(9)  Cemetery lots. 
a.  Establishing price. 
1.  The common council shall from time to time, by resolution, establish a purchase price of the lots and/or perpetual care and establish the price for charges such as opening and closing graves. 
2.  The full price paid for any lot or burial site shall be in full payment or care of the lot or site so purchased in perpetuity. 
3.  All money received from the sale of any lot or grave site shall be credited by the city clerk-treasurer to the general fund of the city to pay for and to be used against the general operation and maintenance costs of the city cemetery. 
b.  Selling lots. 
1.  Any person desiring to purchase any lot or grave site shall apply to the sexton (or designee) and, upon payment of the purchase price in full, shall be entitled to a deed for such lot or site for burial purposes only and in recordable form. 
2.  All deeds shall be issued by the city clerk-treasurer in the form prescribed by the city attorney and all such deeds shall provide that the conveyance is subject to all ordinances and by laws regulating the cemetery. 
3.  Each such deed shall be signed by the mayor and city clerk-treasurer and shall have affixed thereto the municipal corporate seal. 
c.  Transferring lots. 
1.  All transfers of lots or grave sites previously sold or contracted to be sold shall be registered with the sexton (or designee). 
2.  Such transfer may be made by proper deed of conveyance by the last owner thereof, whether in recordable form or otherwise; assignment by the last owner thereof in recordable form or otherwise by written statement that "I (we) hereby transfer to (name or new owner) lot number _____ (or designated portions thereof)"; or by presentation and delivery of a certified court order or judgment evidencing transfer. 
3.  No transfer shall be made or recognized by the sexton (or designee) without payment of a transfer fee in the amount of $5.00 per grave transferred. 
(10)  Care of cemetery. 
a.  Perpetual care. 
1.  Owners of any lots previously sold without perpetual care may secure perpetual care by paying such amount as may from time to time be fixed by the sexton (or designee). 
b.  Definition of care. 
1.  "Care," either perpetual or annual, shall include only the cutting of grass, the first seeding of new graves and the care and maintenance of the cemetery generally. 
2.  It shall not include the care and maintenance of shrubs, trees, flowers or any other planting on any lot or portion thereof and shall not include the maintenance or repair of any monuments, markers or other structures in the cemetery. 
(11)  Regulations for improving lots. 
a.  Fences. 
1.  No fences or enclosures around or within lots shall be permitted. 
b.  Elevation of graves. 
1.  No graves shall be raised above the level of the lot. 
c.  Monuments. 
1.  Not more than one monument shall be permitted per grave. 
2.  All foundations for monuments and markers shall be of sufficient depth and stability to support the same securely and permanently, all such foundations shall extend five inches around the perimeter of such monument or marker and no such foundation shall be raised above the level of the lot. 
3.  No monument or marker may be erected until the foundation therefor has been approved by the sexton (or designee) or a representative thereof. Each metal grave marker placed as a temporary marker by the funeral home or other person shall be removed as soon as a monument or permanent marker is installed or one year after the date of burial, whichever comes first. 
d.  Improvement by lot owner. 
1.  A lot owner may plant flowers and place decorations upon graves within the owner's lot or upon the owner's grave site, but any such decoration is done at the risk of the owner and the city assumes no responsibility therefor. 
2.  All planting of flowers shall be located on the west side of the monument or marker and shall not exceed the length of the monument or marker foundation. 
3.  The flower bed shall not exceed 12 inches from edge of the monument or marker foundation. 
4.  Planting will also be allowed between individual markers when the individual markers belong to the same family and are on the same lot. 
5.  All weeding of flower beds on the graves shall be done by the owner. 
6.  All decorations and grave coverings of any sort placed upon any lot or grave site by the owner shall be removed by the owner no later than the following April 1. 
7.  Grave blankets shall be allowed at any time. 
8.  No trees or shrubs may be planted without the written permission of the sexton (or designee). 
e.  Entry by the sexton (or designee). 
1.  The sexton (or designee) may at any time, with or without prior notice, enter upon any lot or grave site and remove any tree, shrub, planting, covering or other decoration when in its opinion the same is unsightly, inconvenient or interferes with the orderly maintenance or operation of the cemetery. 
2.  The sexton (or designee) may enter and make any improvement deemed to be of advantage to the cemetery generally. 
(12)  Interment regulations. 
a.  Payment of charges. 
1.  No interment shall be allowed on any lot or grave site which shall not have been fully paid for. 
b.  Burial permit required. 
1.  No interment shall be permitted without a burial permit or removal certificate issued by the proper authority of the place where death occurred, and such permit or certificate shall be retained as part of the permanent record of the sexton (or designee). 
c.  Notice of interment. 
1.  Notice of interment shall be given to the sexton (or designee) or such person designated by it not less than 48 hours in advance of interment. 
2.  The sexton (or designee) shall at all times have full charge of the opening and closing of all graves. 
3.  All payments for the opening and closing fees shall be paid directly to the city clerk-treasurer's office during regular business hours and shall be paid prior to the time of interment, unless other arrangement have been approved by the sexton (or designee). 
4.  All payments for the interment shall be paid for no later than the day of interment to the sexton (or designee) or its designee. 
5.  All opening and closing fees shall be remitted by the funeral home in charge on one of their bank drafts payable to the city. 
d.  Maximum burials per grave. 
1.  No lot owner shall be allowed to have more than two burials in any one grave. 
2.  The only combinations of burials allowed in one grave are as follows: 
(i)  One full-size casket burial and one cremain; 
(ii)  One full-size casket burial and one infant; 
(iii)  Two infants; 
(iv)  Two cremains. 
(Code 1997, § 8.07; Rep. and Recr. #654; Am. #700 )  
Sec. 42-11. - Street names and numbers. 
(a)  Street names. 
(1)  A list shall be compiled by the city clerk of all existing street names in the city and no future street shall be given a name which duplicates or approximates an existing name. Cooperation shall be sought with all municipalities and towns surrounding the city to the end that duplication of street names shall be minimized. 
(2)  The city shall cooperate with neighboring towns, villages and cities to the end that streets which are continuous from one municipality or town to another municipality or town may have but one name when such single name would be desirable. 
(3)  The city council may accept or reject proposed names of new streets and, where there is clearly a conflict or duplication in existing names, may direct the changing of one or more such names so that conflict or duplication may be minimized. 
(b)  Plat book. 
(1)  The clerk shall inform any person inquiring of the numbers and approved street names belonging to any property to the degree records will allow, with the house numbering chairman making the final determination. 
(2)  Within 30 days after the final approval of any new subdivision or other division of land, the house numbering chairman shall assign addresses to each new building site. Records shall be kept of the assignments and a copy shall be provided for the developer at his request. 
(c)  Installation of numbers. 
(1)  When the necessary survey has been completed and each residence and place of business has been assigned its respective number, the owner, occupant or agent shall install or cause to be installed in a conspicuous place upon the premises occupied by each house or place of business controlled by him no more than 75 feet from the middle of the road the number or numbers assigned under the uniform address system provided for by this section. 
(2)  During construction, temporary numbers shall be posted near the construction site entrance or driveway. Permanent numbers shall be installed at the date of initial occupancy. 
(d)  Numbers required. Whenever any residence or place of business shall be erected in the city after adoption of this section, the owner shall at the time of obtaining a building permit procure the correct number and street name from the building inspector and, within 30 days thereafter, install the number on the building or premises as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Violation. If the owner or occupant of any residence or place of business shall neglect for the period of 30 days to attach and maintain the proper number on such premises, the police department shall serve upon him a notice requiring such owner or occupant to do so. After service of such notice and a period of ten days elapses, he shall be deemed to have violated this section. 
(Code 1997, § 8.08; Cr. #288; Am. #700 )  
Sec. 42-12. - Official map to reserve future streets and parkways. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the common council to establish an official map for the purpose of serving and promoting the public health, safety, convenience, economy, orderliness and general welfare to the community; to further the orderly layout and use of land; to stabilize the location of real property boundary lines; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, parks, playgrounds, and stormwater drainage; and to facilitate the further subdivision on larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. 
(b)  Authority. This ordinance is enacted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(6). 
(c)  Official map. The official map shall show the location and extent of all platted and existing streets, highways, parkways, parks, and playgrounds within the corporate and extraterritorial limits of the City of Delafield as heretofore, platted, laid out, adopted, and established by law. There is hereby established, as the official map of the City of Delafield, the map which accompanies and is made a part of the ordinance from which this section is derived, bearing the date of May 15, 2007, via adoption of Ordinance No. 575. This map is hereby designated as the "Official Map of the City of Delafield" and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this section as though the matters and information thereon were fully described herein. 
(d)  Changes and additions. 
(1)  The common council may change or add to the official map as to establish the exterior lines, or widen, narrow, extend, or close any platted, existing, proposed, or planned streets, highways, parkways, parks or playgrounds. 
(2)  The common council shall refer any change or addition to the official map to the city plan commission for review and report their recommendation to the common council within 60 days. 
(3)  A public hearing of parties in interest and citizens before the common council shall be required before any changes or additions to the official map are effective. At least 20 days' notice of said hearing shall be required by publication. 
(4)  Changes and additions made by duly approved subdivision plats shall not require the public hearing if the changes or additions do not affect any land outside the area being platted. 
(e)  Building permits. 
(1)  For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the official map, a building permit shall be required for any structure or part therefore that shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered. No permit shall hereafter be issued for any building in the bend of any existing or proposed street, highway, or parkway shown on the official map. No permit for the erection of any building shall be issued unless a street, highway, or parkway giving access to such proposed structure has been duly placed on this map. 
(2)  The city building inspector may require each applicant for a building permit to submit a plan, prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor, showing accurately the location of any proposed building with reference to any street, highway or parkway shown on the official map. 
(f)  Municipal improvements. No public sewer or other municipal street utility or improvement shall be constructed in any street, highway, or parkway within the corporate limits of the City of Delafield until such street, highway, or parkway is duly placed on the official map. 
(g)  Appeals. The board of zoning appeals shall have the power to review any administration decision of the city building inspector to deny a permit for the erection of a structure under this chapter and to grant relief from the requirements of this chapter under the provision of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(6)(d), (f), and (g). 
(h)  Certification of map. There shall be a certified copy of the official map described in this section. The certified copy shall be kept in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for the inspection by any interested person during regular office hours. The certified copy shall bear on its face a certification that it is a true copy of the official map described in and accompanying this chapter and shall show the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and shall be signed by the mayor and counter-signed by the city clerk. Thereafter, no change or addition to such official map shall become effective until it shall have been indicated by the appropriate convention of the aforesaid certified copy of the official map and a certificate placed thereon or attached thereto, bearing the number and date of adoption of the amending ordinance. The certificate shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the city clerk. 
(i)  Recording of map. The city clerk shall be responsible immediately upon adoption of the official map or any amendment thereto for recording a true copy of the amended official map with the Waukesha County register of deeds. 
(j)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city building inspector to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(k)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than $200.00 and not less than $50.00 and cost of prosecution for each violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment therefor but not exceeding 30 days. 
(2)  No damages shall be allowed for any building erected in violation of this section that is to be used by any governmental agency, for street, highway, and parkway purposes. 
(Code 1997, § 8.085; Cr. #438; Am. #700 )  
Sec. 42-13. - Occupancy of right-of-way. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Purpose and findings. In the exercise of governmental functions the city has priority over all other uses of the public rights-of-way. The city desires to anticipate and minimize the number of obstructions and excavations taking place therein and to regulate the placement of facilities in the rights-of-way to ensure that the rights-of-way remain available for public services and safe for public use. The taxpayers of the city bear the financial burden for the upkeep of the rights-of-way and a primary cause for the early and excessive deterioration of its rights-of-way is the frequent excavation by persons who locate facilities therein. 
a.  The city finds increased use of the public rights-of-way and increased costs to the taxpayers of the city and that these costs are likely to continue into the foreseeable future. 
b.  The city finds that occupancy and excavation of its rights-of-way causes costs to be borne by the city and its taxpayers, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Administrative costs associated with public right-of-way projects, such as registration, permitting, inspection and supervision, supplies and materials. 
2.  Management costs associated with ongoing management activities necessitated by public right-of-way users. 
3.  Repair or restoration costs to the roadway associated with the actual excavation into the public right-of-way. 
4.  Degradation costs defined as depreciation caused to the roadway in terms of decreased useful life, due to excavations into the public rights-of-way. 
c.  In response to the foregoing facts, the city hereby enacts this chapter relating to administration of and permits to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the public rights-of-way. This chapter imposes reasonable regulations on the placement and maintenance of equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. 
d.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide the city a legal framework within which to regulate and manage the public rights-of-way, and to provide for recovery of the costs incurred in doing so. This chapter provides for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city as they use the right-of-way of the city, as well as to ensure the structural integrity of the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Definitions. The following definitions apply in this chapter. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
Applicant means any person requesting permission to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy a right-of-way. 
City means the City of Delafield, Wisconsin, a Wisconsin municipal corporation. 
Degradation means the decrease in the useful life of the paved portion of the right-of-way, excluding the sidewalk right-of-way, caused by an excavation of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation did not occur. 
Department means the department of public works of the city. 
Emergency means a condition that: 
(1)  Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or 
(2)  Requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service to a customer. 
Excavate means to dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way. 
Facilities means all equipment owned, operated, leased or subleased in connection with the operation of a service or utility service, and shall include, but is not limited to, poles, wires, pipes, cables, underground conduits, ducts, manholes, vaults, fiber optic cables, lines and other structures and appurtenances. 
In, when used in conjunction with "right-of-way," means over, above, within, on or under a right-of-way. 
Local representative means a local person or persons, or designee of such person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter. 
Obstruct means to place any object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way. 
Permittee means any person to whom a permit to occupy, excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the city under this chapter. 
Person means a corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, Limited Liability Company, limited liability partnership and individuals and their lessors, transferees and receivers. 
Public utility shall be defined as in Wis. Stats. § 196.01(5). 
Registrant means any person who has registered with the city to have its facilities located in any right-of-way. 
Repair means to perform construction work necessary to make the right-of-way useable for travel according to department specifications, or to restore equipment to an operable condition. 
Restore or restoration means the process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation is reconstructed, per department specifications. 
Right-of-way means the surface and space above and below an improved or unimproved public roadway, highway, street, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes. 
(3)  Administration. The director of public works or his/her designee is responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way, and the permits and ordinances related thereto. 
(b)  Registration for right-of-way occupancy. 
(1)  Each person who has, or seeks to have, facilities located in any right-of-way shall register with the department and pay the fee set forth in subsection (d) of this section. Registration will consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee. This section shall not apply to those persons who have facilities in the right-of-way pursuant to a franchise or other agreement. 
(2)  No person may construct, install, maintain, repair, remove, relocate or perform any other work on, or use any equipment or any part thereof in any right-of-way unless that person is registered with the department. 
(3)  Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of a city ordinance regulating constructing sidewalks or driveways or other similar activities. Persons performing such activities shall not be required to obtain any permits under this chapter. 
(c)  Registration information. The information provided to the department at the time of application shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Each registrant's name, Diggers Hotline registration certificate number, address and email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers. 
(2)  The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of registration. 
(3)  Reason for and a clear description of the proposed work, use, structure, or obstruction, and the exact location of said work, use, structure or obstruction. 
(4)  The requested dates and hours of work or placement of obstruction. 
(5)  Other local, state or federal approvals, if necessary. 
(6)  A certificate of insurance. 
(7)  If the registrant is a corporation, a LLC or LLP, a copy of any certificate required to be filed under Wisconsin Statutes as recorded and certified by the secretary of state. 
(8)  A copy of the registrant's certificate of authority from the Wisconsin Public Service Commission or other applicable state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from said commission or other state or federal agency. 
(9)  Sufficient evidence of the following health, welfare, and safety concerns: 
a.  City infrastructure shall remain fully operational and it shall not be disturbed or altered unless permitted by the city; 
b.  Drainage shall not be affected in the location; and 
c.  The placement of any structure or obstruction shall not present a safety concern, with the construction site being sufficiently lit (if applicable) or fenced and guarded (if applicable). 
(10)  Execution of an indemnification agreement in a form prescribed by the department. 
(11)  The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all times by providing to the department information as to changes within 15 working days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change. 
(d)  Registration fee. The department shall charge an annual registration fee in an amount of $25.00 to recover the costs incurred by the city for processing and updating registration information. 
(e)  Review of an application for right-of-way user registration. 
(1)  Applicant shall have a non-exclusive use of the premise; 
(2)  Granting the request shall not contribute to public expense; 
(3)  Applicant's use of the premise shall be in compliance with all local, state, or federal laws. Applicant shall obtain all permits required by local, state, or federal authorities required for the use of the premises; 
(4)  Applicant shall not install any utility lines, equipment and/or facilities on private property without written consent of the owner, and shall verify parcel boundaries. Easement/access agreements shall be obtained for any city parcels not part of public rights-of-way; 
(5)  A right-of-way user registration shall not be construed as a waiver of the applicant's obligation to comply with other or more restrictive city ordinances; 
(6)  City infrastructure shall not be disturbed or altered unless otherwise permitted, and shall remain visible, accessible and operational. Any city infrastructure damaged shall be immediately reported to the department of public works, be repaired to city standards, and inspected and approved by the public works department at the expense of the applicant; 
(7)  Any construction, reconstruction, improvements or restoration of the public right-of-way after disturbance shall be consistent with city standards and all public rights-of-way shall be restored to their original condition upon completion of the work, activities, or installation, unless otherwise permitted; 
(8)  Drainage shall not be adversely affected due to the installation of any utility lines, structures, equipment or facilities; 
(9)  Placement of obstructions during installation and all work and activities shall: 
a.  Not present a public safety concern; 
b.  Be sufficiently lit at night (if required by permit) so as to be in full view of the public from all directions; 
c.  Be fenced or guarded (if required by permit) in a manner which ensures public safety; and 
d.  Be consistent with any limitations and conditions set forth in the approval. 
(10)  The applicant shall indemnify and hold the city harmless for any loss/liability, claims, or damage to any person or property arising from: 
a.  Applicant's installation, maintenance and/or operation under the approved registration; 
b.  Vandalism; 
c.  Interruption in any service from any cause; and 
d.  Fire, water, rain, snow, steam, sewerage, gas or odors, from any source. 
(f)  Permit to excavate in right-of-way required. 
(1)  Excavation permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or other chapters of the General Ordinances of the City of Delafield, no person shall excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained an excavation permit from the department. A copy of any permit issued under this chapter shall be made available at all times by the permittee at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the department upon request. 
(2)  Excavation permit application. Application for a permit shall be made to the department. Permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions: 
a.  Registration with the department as required by this chapter. 
b.  Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all existing and proposed facilities that are part of applicant's proposed project. 
c.  Payment of all money due to the city for: 
1.  Applicable permit fees and costs as set forth below; 
2.  Unpaid fees or costs due for prior excavations; or 
3.  Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city because of applicant's prior excavations of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city. 
(g)  Excavation permit fee. Excavation permit fee shall be established by the department in an amount sufficient to recover the costs incurred by the city. This fee shall recover administrative and inspection costs, as well as degradation costs should the permittee choose to repair rather than restore the right-of-way. Payment of said fees shall be collected prior to issuance of the permit. However, the director of public works may, with the advice and consent of the city council, establish a fee collection process from governmental agencies and private utilities in order to expedite the permitting system and recognize that certain excavations are deemed emergencies. 
(1)  Waiving of fees. Fees shall not be waived unless the work involved is a direct result of the director of public works' demand that a structure owned by a utility be removed or relocated or unless waived by the city council on appeal. 
(2)  Fee schedule. 
a.  The minimum fee for each excavation permit shall be $30.00, plus an additional $10.00 per 100 square feet for excavation and $0.30 per linear foot for boring. Excavation permits for utility work in new subdivisions and within the limits of public works projects, where the work is undertaken prior to the installation of pavement, shall only be charged the minimum fee. The fee for a permit issued after commencing work, except in cases of emergency as determined by the engineer, shall be double the fees set forth herein. This permit fee shall be in addition to any forfeiture provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
b.  For those permit applications which provide for a substantial undertaking of excavation within the public right-of-way attended by disruption of the general public and traffic, the director of public works is authorized to assess the actual cost of the city employee's time engaged in the review and inspection of the anticipated work multiplied by a factor determined by the respective department to represent the city's cost for statutory expense, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, vacation and similar benefits, overhead and supervision, said factor not to exceed 2.0, plus the cost of mileage reimbursed to city employees which is attributed to the work, plus all consultant fees associated with the work at the invoiced amount plus ten percent for administration. 
(3)  City exemption. The city and its contractors shall not pay degradation fees for excavations due to general government functions. 
(4)  Permit fees paid for a permit that the department has revoked are not refundable. 
(h)  Right-of-way repair/restoration. 
(1)  The permittee shall be required to repair the public right-of-way to department specifications, subject to inspection and acceptance by the department, and to pay a degradation fee, as per this subsection (h), unless the permittee elects to restore the right-of-way pursuant to subsection (h)(5) of this section. In addition to repairing its own work, the permittee must repair the general area of the work, and the surrounding areas, including the paving and its foundations, to the specifications of the department. The department shall inspect the, area of the work and accept the work when it determines that proper repair has been made, per specifications of the department. 
(2)  Guarantees. The permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for 36 months following its completion. During this period it shall, upon notification from the department, correct all work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the department. Said work shall be completed within ten calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the department, not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure. 
(3)  Failure to repair/restore. If the permittee fails to repair/restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the department, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all work required by the department, the department at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of repairing/restoring the right-of-way. 
(4)  Degradation. The general formula for computing the degradation fee shall be the cost per square yard for street overlay and seal coat multiplied by the appropriate depreciation rate for that street multiplied by the area of the patch. The area or the patch shall be calculated by adding one foot to each side of the actual street cut. Degradation fee schedule is available upon request from the director of public works. 
(5)  Restoration in lieu of repair and degradation. The permittee may elect to restore the excavation and surrounding pavement in lieu of repair and a degradation fee. The restoration shall be in accordance with the standard specifications for public works construction and the plans and specifications of the department. The permittee shall then also comply with subsection (h)(2) and (3) of this section. 
(i)  Inspection. 
(1)  Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is begun and completed, the permittee shall notify the department. 
(2)  Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work site available to the department and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work. 
(3)  Authority of department. At the time of inspection the city may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the public. The city may issue an order to the registrant or permittee for any work that does not conform to the applicable city standards, conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after issuance of the order, the registrant or permittee shall present proof to the department that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the department may revoke the permit pursuant to subsection (l) of this section. 
(j)  Ongoing management fees. The cost of trimming trees around facilities is an ongoing cost to the city. The specific cost will be determined and a fee to offset those costs may be assessed in the future. 
(k)  Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a permit to excavate and/or occupy the right-of-way does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by any other city, county, state, or federal rules, laws or regulations. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work. 
(l)  Revocations, suspensions, refusals to issue or extend permits. 
(1)  The department may refuse to issue a permit or may revoke, suspend or refuse to extend an existing permit if it finds any of the following grounds: 
a.  The applicant or permittee is required to be registered and has not done so; 
b.  Issuance of a permit for the requested date would interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival or other event; 
c.  Misrepresentation of any fact by the applicant or permittee; 
d.  Failure of the applicant or permittee to maintain required bonds and/or insurance; 
e.  Failure of the applicant or permittee to complete work in a timely manner; 
f.  The proposed activity is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare; 
g.  The extent to which right-of-way space where the permit is sought is available; 
h.  The competing demands for the particular space in the right-of-way; 
i.  The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other rights-of-way for the facilities of the permittee or applicant; 
j.  The applicability of ordinances or other regulations of the right-of-way that affect location of facilities in the right-of-way. 
(2)  Discretionary issuance. The department may issue a permit where issuance is necessary: 
a.  To prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the permittee or applicant; or 
b.  To allow such customer to materially improve its utility service; or 
c.  To allow the permittee or applicant to comply with state or federal law or city ordinance or an order of a court or administrative agency. 
(3)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the department revoking, suspending, refusing to issue or refusing to extend a permit may file a request for review with the city council. A request for review shall be filed within ten days of the decision being appealed. Following a hearing, the city council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the department. 
(m)  Work done without a permit. 
(1)  Emergency situations. 
a.  Each registrant shall immediately notify the city by verbal notice on an emergency phone number provided by the city of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the occurrence of the emergency the registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and otherwise fully comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
b.  If the city becomes aware of any emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the department may attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary to protect the public safety as a result of the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency. 
(2)  Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and shall in addition to any penalties prescribed by ordinance, pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by this chapter or other chapters of the General Ordinances of the City of Delafield, deposit with the department the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(n)  Location of facilities. 
(1)  Undergrounding. Unless in conflict with state or federal law, except when existing aboveground facilities are used, the installation of new facilities and replacement of old facilities shall be done underground or contained within buildings or other structures in conformity with applicable codes. 
(2)  Limitation of space. The department may prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way if there is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests of persons to occupy and use the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the department shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but may prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities when required to protect the public, health, safety or welfare. 
(o)  Relocation of facilities. A registrant must, promptly and at its own expense, permanently remove and relocate its facilities in the right-of-way whenever the city, acting in its governmental capacity, requests such removal and relocation. If requested, the registrant shall restore the right-of-way. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be required to remove or relocate its facilities from any right-of-way which has been vacated in favor of a non-governmental entity unless and until the reasonable costs thereof are first paid to the person therefor. 
(p)  Interference with other facilities during municipal construction. When the city performs work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, shore, or move a registrant's facilities, the city shall notify the local representative. The registrant shall meet with the city's representative within 24 hours and coordinate the protection, maintenance, supporting and/or shoring of the registrant's facilities. The registrant shall accomplish the needed work within 72 hours, unless the city agrees to a longer period. In the event that the registrant does not proceed to maintain, support, shore or move its facilities, the city may arrange to do the work and bill the registrant, said bill to be paid within 30 days. 
(q)  Abandoned facilities. 
(1)  Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to discontinue its operations in the city must either: 
a.  Provide information satisfactory to the department that the registrant's obligations for its facilities under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by another registrant; or 
b.  Submit to the department a proposal and instruments for dedication of its facilities to the city. If a registrant proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option: 
1.  Accept the dedication for all or a portion of the facilities; or 
2.  Require the registrant, at its own expense, to remove the facilities in the right-of-way at ground or above ground level; or 
3.  Require the registrant to post a bond or provide payment sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. 
However, any registrant who has unusable and abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way within two years, unless the department waives this requirement. 
(2)  Abandoned facilities. Facilities of a registrant who fails to comply with subsection (q)(1) of this section, and which, for two years, remains unused shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. In addition to any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, the city may, at its option: 
a.  Abate the nuisance; 
b.  Take possession of the facilities; or 
c.  Require removal of the facilities by the registrant, or the registrant's successor in interest. 
(3)  Public utilities. This section shall not apply to a public utility, as defined by Wis. Stats. § 196.01(5), that is required to follow the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 196.81. 
(r)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city, by the granting of a permit to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the right-of-way, or by registering a person under this chapter does not surrender or in any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or maybe hereafter granted to the city under the constitution and statutes of the State of Wisconsin to regulate the use of the right-of-way by the permittee; and the permittee by its acceptance of a permit to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the right-of-way or of registration under this chapter agrees that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory powers, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general law, and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. 
(s)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(t)  Penalty. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $120.00 nor more than $600.00. Each day such violation or failure to comply continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1997, § 8.09; Cr. #733 )  
Chapter 44 - SUBDIVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 44-1. - Authority. 
These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. §§ 66.23, 236.45 and 703.27(1). 
(Code 1997, § 18.01; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the development of land, creation of condominium developments, the division of land within the corporate limits of the city, and the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the city in order to promote the public health, safety, morals, aesthetics, and general welfare of the community; and it is deemed in the best interests of the city to adopt a floodplain management program in pursuance with the State Water Resources Act of 1965. 
(Code 1997, § 18.02; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-3. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate the development and division of land so as to: 
(1)  Lessen congestion in and promote the safety and efficiency of the streets and highways. 
(2)  Further the orderly and appropriate layout and use of land. 
(3)  Secure safety from fire, flooding, water pollution, disease, panic and other dangers or hazards. 
(4)  Provide adequate light, air, sanitation and drainage. 
(5)  Avoid the overcrowding of land and undue population concentration. 
(6)  Facilitate the adequate provision of public facilities, utilities, schools, parks and playgrounds. 
(7)  Facilitate the further division of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. 
(8)  Ensure adequate legal description and proper survey monumentation of subdivided land. 
(9)  Implement enforcement of community development standards as are presently, and as may in the future be, set forth in the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinances, building code and official map of the city. 
(10)  Prevent flood damage to persons and properties and minimize expenditures for flood relief and flood control projects. 
(11)  Obtain dedication of floodlands. 
(12)  Restrict building sites on floodlands or in other areas poorly suited for development. 
(13)  Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation, and other pollution of surface and subsurface water. 
(14)  Promote the natural beauty of the city, including preservation of shore growth and cover. 
(b)  It is further intended to provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and to provide penalties for its violation. 
(Code 1997, § 18.03; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. #620)  
Sec. 44-4. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to laws. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1997, § 18.04; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-5. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1997, § 18.05; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-6. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1997, § 18.06; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-7. - Nonliability of city. 
The city does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas designated as floodlands will be subject to periodic inundation and hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the common council, its agencies or employees for any flood damages that may occur as a result of reliance upon and conformance with this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 18.07; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-8. - Repeal. 
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the city inconsistent or conflicting with this chapter to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict only are hereby repealed. 
(Code 1997, § 18.08; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-9. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as, referred to or cited as the "Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, City of Delafield, Wisconsin." 
(Code 1997, § 18.09; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-10. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall be effective August 21, 1998. 
(Code 1997, § 18.10; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-11. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall be used. The words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural; and the plural number includes the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. 
Alley means a special public way affording only secondary access to abutting properties. 
Arterial street means a street used, or intended to be used, primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. Arterial streets shall include freeways and expressways, as well as standard arterial streets, highways and parkways. 
Bicycle trail means a trail used or intended to be used primarily for nonmotorized bicycles. 
Building line means a line parallel to a lot line and at a distance from the lot line to comply with the city zoning code as to yard requirements. 
Collector street means a street used, or intended to be used, to carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets to residential developments. 
Community means a town, municipality, or a group of adjacent towns or municipalities having common social, economic or physical interests. 
Comprehensive plan means the comprehensive plan is the development plan heretofore or hereafter adopted by the plan commission and certified to the common council pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(2), including proposals for future land use, transportation, urban redevelopment and public facilities. Devices and means for the implementation of the comprehensive plan, such as zoning, official map, building line ordinances and the like, shall be considered a part of the comprehensive plan. 
County planning agency means Waukesha County Parks and Land Use. 
Cul-de-sac means a minor street closed at one end with a turnaround provided for motor vehicles. 
Developer means any person, firm or corporation, or any agent thereof, developing land or constructing a structure in the City of Delafield. 
Equestrian trail means a trail used or intended to be used primarily for equestrian traffic. 
Extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction means the unincorporated area within 1½ miles of the city. 
Floodlands means those lands including the floodplains, floodways and channels subject to inundation by the 100-year recurrence interval flood or where such data is not available, the maximum flood of record. 
Frontage street means a minor street auxiliary to and located on the side of an arterial street, for control of access and for service to the abutting development. 
High water elevation means the average annual high water level of a pond, stream, lake, flowage or wetland, or if where such data is not available, the point up to which the presence of the water is so frequent as to leave a distinct mark by erosion, change in or destruction of vegetation or other easily recognized topographic, geologic or vegetative characteristic. 
Land development means any new construction of structures, required improvements on land, or subdivision of land or consolidation of parcels in the City of Delafield. 
Minor street means a street used or intended to be used, primarily for access to abutting property. 
Minor subdivision means the division of land by the owner or subdivider resulting in the creation of four or less parcels or building sites, any one of which is 1½ acres in size or less, or the division of a block, lot or outlot within a recorded subdivision, with not more than four parcels or building sites without changing the exterior boundaries of said block, lot or outlot. 
Municipality means an incorporated city. 
Public way means any public road, street, highway, walkway, drainageway, equestrian trail, bicycle trail or part thereof. 
Registered land surveyor means a surveyor duly registered by the State of Wisconsin. 
Street plat means the changing of the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. 
Subdivider means any person, firm or corporation, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land resulting in a subdivision, minor subdivision, or replat. 
Subdivision means the division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the owners thereof, or their agents, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, where the act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of 1½ acres each, or less in area; or where the act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of 1½ acres each, or less in area, by successive division within a period of five years. 
Wetlands means those lands that are partially or wholly covered by marshland flora and generally covered with shallow standing water or lands that are wet and spongy due to a high water table. 
(Code 1997, § 18.11; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. #620; Am. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-12. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Jurisdiction of this chapter and the regulations therein contained shall include all lands within the corporate limits of the city as well as the unincorporated area within 1½ miles of the corporate limits. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter as it applies to divisions of tracts of land into less than five parcels shall not apply to: 
(1)  Transfers of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order. 
(2)  Leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages or easements. 
(3)  Sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by these regulations, zoning ordinance, or other applicable laws or ordinances. 
(4)  Division of land for agricultural purposes in parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street, easement or access. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter apply to all land developments within the City of Delafield. 
(Code 1997, § 18.12; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-13. - Compliance. 
No person, firm or corporation shall develop land or divide any land located within the jurisdictional limits of these regulations which results in a subdivision, minor subdivision, or a replat as defined herein, no such division shall be entitled to be recorded, no street shall be laid out or improvements made to land without compliance with: 
(1)  All requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 62 and 236. 
(3)  Rules of the Wisconsin division of environmental protection, as applicable to the city, setting water quality standards, preventing and abating pollution, and regulating septic systems. 
(4)  Applicable rules of the Wisconsin department of transportation if the land divided abuts a state trunk highway or a street connecting therewith. 
(5)  City comprehensive plan. 
(6)  Zoning ordinances, official map and all other applicable local and county ordinances. 
(Code 1997, § 18.13; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. #620)  
Sec. 44-14. - Applicability to condominiums. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 703.27(1), this chapter applies to condominiums. 
(b)  In the event land is developed and improved under condominium ownership, which includes the construction of public or private roads and streets to serve buildings, such roads and streets shall conform to the provisions of this code, whether or not the land is laid out in lots or blocks. 
(c)  All the required improvements set forth in article VII of this chapter shall be applicable, whether or not the land is laid out in lots or blocks. 
(d)  All other provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the condominium development to the extent applicable. 
(e)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply whether the condominium development is a new development or a conversion to or from condominiums. 
(Code 1997, § 18.14; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-15. - Dedication and reservation of lands. 
(a)  Whenever a tract of land to be developed or subdivided embraces all or any part of an arterial street, drainageway or other public way that has been designated in the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan component, or on the official map of the city, such public way shall be made a part of the plat and dedicated or reserved by the subdivider or developer at the locations and in the dimensions indicated on said plan or such map and as set forth in article VI of this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever a proposed playground, park or other public land (other than streets or drainageways), designated in the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan component, or on the official map of the city, is embraced all or in part in a tract of land to be subdivided or developed, such proposed public lands shall be made a part of the plat or site plan and shall be dedicated at no charge to the public by the subdivider or developer at the rate of 1/20 acre for each proposed dwelling unit, but such dedicated lands shall not include floodlands. 
(c)  Any such proposed public lands, other than streets or drainageways, in excess of the rate established herein, shall be reserved for a period not to exceed two years unless extended by mutual agreement for purchase by the city or public agency having jurisdiction. Such lands so reserved for future purchase as herein provided shall be expressly defined and described by the plan commission prior to preliminary plat or site plan approval as hereinafter provided. 
(d)  In the event of the purchase of such land so reserved within the time herein limited, the subdivider or developer shall be paid for such excess lands as so reserved as follows: 
(1)  If he purchased such land within one year prior to filing of his application for plat approval, a sum equal to the cost to him of such land, with the cost to be computed as follows: 
a.  A certified public accountant selected by the subdivider or developer shall compute the cost of the land and the fair allocation of the cost of all improvements which have been installed by the subdivider or developer and which benefit such land. 
b.  The computations shall show in detail the principles upon which the costs were allocated; provided, that if the purchasing authority shall disagree with the cost figures as so submitted, the matter may at the option of the purchasing authority be referred to a board of three arbitrators, one of whom shall be selected by the subdivider or developer, one by the city clerk, and the third, who shall be a certified public accountant, to be selected by the first two arbitrators. 
c.  The decision of the arbitrators shall be final as to the cost of the land to be acquired, and the expense of such arbitration shall be shared equally by the subdivider or developer and the purchasing authority. 
(2)  If the subdivider or developer shall not have purchased the land within one year prior to filing the application for plat approval, he shall be paid for such excess land so reserved a sum equal to the market value thereof, and such market value shall be determined by the city or purchasing authority after appraisal of such land by a qualified real estate appraiser. 
(3)  Whether the value of the land is determined on the basis of cost or market value, the subdivider or developer shall in addition to the amount so determined, be paid a sum equal to five percent of such amount to accrue from the time of recording of the plat or issuance of a building permit to the time of payment to the subdivider or developer. 
(e)  In the event the subdivider or developer shall not be required to dedicate or reserve lands under the terms of this subsection, a public site fee shall be levied against the subdivider or developer at the rate and according to the procedures established in section 44-271. 
(f)  Proposed public lands lying outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the jurisdictional area of this chapter, shall be reserved for acquisition by the town or county at undeveloped land cost, and such reservation shall be for a period not to exceed two years unless extended by mutual agreement between the subdivider or developer and the town or county. 
(g)  Land dedicated to the city under the provisions of this section shall be graded and seeded to the specifications of the city engineer. Unless otherwise specified by the city engineer all land dedicated for park purposes shall be seeded to a mixture containing a minimum of 50 percent bluegrasses and 50 percent fescues and ryegrasses. 
(Code 1997, § 18.15; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. #620)  
Sec. 44-16. - Improvements, improvement bond, approval of contractors. 
(a)  Before final approval of any plat or land development located within the corporate limits of the city, the subdivider or developer shall install street and utility improvements, other required improvements, and survey monuments as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  If such improvements and monuments are not installed as required at the time that the final plat is submitted for approval, the subdivider or developer shall before the recording of the plat enter into a contract with the city agreeing to install the required improvements and monuments and shall file with such contract a bond meeting the approval of the city attorney or a certified check. 
(c)  Such bond or certified check shall equal 110 percent of the city engineer's estimate of the cost of such improvements and monuments. 
(d)  Such bond or certified check shall guarantee that such improvements and monuments will be installed by the subdivider or developer not later than one year from the date of recording of the plat and further to guarantee that all obligations to subcontractors for work on the development are satisfied. 
(e)  No occupancy permits shall be issued for any structure in the proposed subdivision until the improvements required by this chapter have been installed and accepted by the city. 
(f)  The owner may not sell any lot prior to the acceptance of the public improvement by the city, unless he gives a promise in writing to each purchaser, that he will complete the improvements in accordance with city specifications. 
(g)  Contractors and subcontractors who are to be engaged in the construction of street and utility improvements on dedicated street rights-of-way shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(h)  Governmental units to which such bond and contract provisions apply may file, in lieu of such contract bond and check, a letter from officers authorized to act on their behalf agreeing to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(i)  As to plats outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the plat approval jurisdiction of the city, the subdivider shall give evidence that he has complied with all street and utility improvement requirements of the town in which the land being platted is located. 
(Code 1997, § 18.16; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-17. - Bond and waiver requirements. 
(a)  The subdivider or developer shall tender a cash bond in a sum sufficient to guarantee that any and all engineering, legal, administrative or fiscal work incurred by the city in processing any plat, plan, specification, application, petition or in processing any other work incurred pursuant to the terms of this chapter will be paid in full, but in no event shall said cash bond be less than $500.00. 
(b)  This provision may be waived or reduced, upon written application, by the common council where the anticipated expense to the city is so minimal as to render the bond requirements set forth herein an unnecessary hardship upon the subdivider or developer. 
(Code 1997, § 18.17; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-18. - Modifications. 
(a)  Where in the judgment of the plan commission it would be inappropriate literally to apply the provisions of articles VI and VII of this chapter because of the proposed subdivision being located outside of the corporate limits, or because exceptional or undue hardship would result, the plan commission may waive or modify any requirement to the extent deemed justified and proper. 
(b)  Such waiver or modification shall require a three-fourths vote of the entire membership of the plan commission, and the reasons for such waiver or modification shall be entered on the minutes of the plan commission. 
(c)  In determining whether such waiver or modification is to be granted, consideration shall be given to whether such action will result in any detriment to the public good or the desirable general development of the city in accordance with the comprehensive plan, and whether such relief would impair the intent and general purpose of this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 18.18; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. #620)  
Sec. 44-19. - Land suitability. 
No land shall be subdivided or developed which is held unsuitable by the plan commission by reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, characteristics inadequate for sewage disposal system or by reason of any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future users of the proposed subdivision. 
(1)  Lands made, altered or filled with within the last ten years shall not be divided into building sites which are to be served by a soil absorption waste disposal system. 
(2)  Existing residential land abutting Lake Nagawicka, Upper Nashotah Lake, Bark River, or wetland shall not hereafter be divided so as to give water access to more than one residential lot. 
(3)  Lands shall not be divided into building sites to be served by soil absorption sewage disposal systems without first obtaining required permits from the Waukesha Environmental Health Division. 
(Code 1997, § 18.19; Rep. & Recr. #441; Rep. & Recr. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-20. - Lake access by off-lots. 
No subdivision or development shall be approved which creates or uses any site, tract, strip or piece of land lying on any lake or stream, any portion of which is within the city corporate limits, for use of, or access to, such lake or stream, for the benefit of any lots or outlots in a subdivision which are off-shore, whether such use or access is by fee title, reservation or easement. 
(Code 1997, § 18.20; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-21. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to build upon, divide, convey, record, or monument any land in violation of this chapter or of the Wisconsin Statutes. No person, firm or corporation shall be issued a building permit by the city authorizing the building on, or improvements of, any subdivision, minor subdivision, replat or land split within the jurisdiction of this chapter until the provisions and requirements of this chapter have been fully met. The city may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin violations of this chapter or the applicable Wisconsin Statutes. 
(b)  Every structure, fill or development placed or maintained on floodlands in violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 18.21; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-22. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 and the costs of prosecution for each violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding 30 days. 
(b)  Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties herein provided, the penalties provided in Wis. Stats. § 236.30, relating to improper recordation, the penalty provided for in Wis. Stats. § 236.31, relating to conveyance of lots and unrecorded plats, and the penalties provided for in Wis. Stats. § 236.32, relating to disturbance of monuments shall apply. 
(d)  Floodland structures, fills, and development shall have penalties as specified in Wis. Stats. § 87.30(2). 
(Code 1997, § 18.22; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-23. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or a failure to approve a plat may appeal therefrom as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.13(5) and 62.23(7)(e)10—15, within 30 days after notification of the rejection of the plat. 
(b)  Where failure to approve the plat is based on an unsatisfied objection, the agency making the objection shall be made a party to the action. The court shall direct that the plat be approved if it finds that the action of the approving or objection agency is arbitrary, unreasonable or discriminatory. 
(Code 1997, § 18.23; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Secs. 44-24—44-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 44-50. - Initial consultation. 
It is recommended that prior to the filing of any application for plat approval, the subdivider consult the plan commission or its staff in order to obtain advice and assistance. This consultation is neither formal nor mandatory. 
(Code 1997, § 18.24; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-51. - Preliminary plat review within the city. 
(a)  Before submitting the final plat for approval, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat and a letter of application. The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter, and the subdivider shall file an adequate number of copies of the preliminary plat and the application with the city clerk at least 25 days prior to the meeting of the plan commission at which action is desired. 
(b)  The city clerk shall within two days after filing thereof, transmit: 
(1)  Four copies to the county planning agency. 
(2)  One copy to Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission in the case of areas to be sewered. 
(3)  Two copies to the department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection, with two additional copies for the state department of transportation if the subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway or a connecting street and two copies for the department of health and social services if the subdivision is not served by public sewer and provision for such service has not been made. 
(4)  An adequate number of copies to the plan commission. 
(c)  The plan commission is hereby designated as the approving authority for all preliminary plats, and it shall transmit a copy of the preliminary plat to all affected city boards, commissions or departments, and all affected local utility companies and school districts for their review and recommendations. Such recommendations shall be transmitted to the plan commission within 15 days from the date the plat is filed. The preliminary plat shall then be reviewed by the plan commission for conformance with this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations, comprehensive plans and comprehensive plan components in effect when the subdivider submits a preliminary plat or a final plat if no preliminary plat is submitted. 
(Code 1997, § 18.25; Rep. & Recr. #441; Rep. & Recr. #646)  
Sec. 44-52. - Preliminary plat approval within the city. 
(a)  The following are objecting agencies: The county planning agency, Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission in the case of areas to be sewered, department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection, Wisconsin department of transportation, the department of health and social services, and the Wisconsin department of administration. 
(1)  The objecting agencies shall, within 20 days of the date of receiving their copies of the preliminary plat, notify the subdivider and all other approving and objecting agencies of any objections. If there are no objections, they shall so certify on the face of the copy of the plat and return that copy to the plan commission. 
(2)  If an objecting agency fails to act within 20 days it shall be deemed to have no objection to the plat. 
(b)  The plan commission shall within 90 days of the date of filing the preliminary plat approve, approve conditionally, or reject such plat. 
(1)  One copy of the plat shall thereupon be returned to the subdivider with the date and action endorsed thereon; and if approved conditionally or rejected, a letter setting forth the conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection shall accompany the plat. 
(2)  One copy each of the plat and such letter shall be placed in the plan commission's permanent file. 
(c)  Failure of the plan commission to act within 90 days shall constitute an approval. 
(d)  Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the final plat, except that if the final plat is submitted within 36 months of preliminary plat approval and conforms substantially to the preliminary plat layout as indicated in Wis. Stats. § 236.11(1)(b), the final plat shall be entitled to approval with respect to such layout. 
(Code 1997, § 18.26; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. #486; Rep. & Recr. #646; Am. # 720 ; )  
Sec. 44-53. - Final plat review within the city. 
(a)  The subdivider shall prepare a final plat and a letter of application in accordance with this chapter and shall file an adequate number of copies of the plat and the application with the city clerk at least 25 days prior to the meeting of the plan commission at which action is desired. Additionally, all plans shall be provided to both the city clerk and city engineer in digital (i.e., PDF) format. 
(b)  Within two days after filing, the city clerk shall transmit the same number of copies to the same agencies as required of the preliminary plat and as referred to in section 44-52. 
(c)  The plan commission shall examine the final plat as to its conformance with the approved preliminary plat, all conditions of approval of the preliminary plat, if any, and this chapter as well as all ordinances, rules, regulations, comprehensive plan and comprehensive plan components which may affect the final plat. It shall then, based on a recommendation from the city planner, recommend approval, conditional approval or rejection of the plat to the common council. 
(d)  The final plat, may, if so permitted by the plan commission, constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record at that time. 
(Code 1997, § 18.27; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. #588; Rep. & Recr. #646)  
Sec. 44-54. - Final plat approval within the city. 
(a)  The objecting agencies shall, within 20 days of the date of receiving their copies of the final plat, notify the subdivider and all other approving and objecting agencies of any objections. 
(1)  If there are no objections, they shall so certify on the face of the copy of the plat and shall return that copy to the plan commission. 
(2)  If an objecting agency fails to act within 20 days, it shall be deemed to have no objection to the plat. 
(b)  If the final plat is not submitted within 36 months of the last required approval of the preliminary plat, the common council may refuse to approve the final plat. The common council may extend the time for submission of the final plat beyond 36 months, if requested by the subdivider. 
(c)  The plan commission shall, within 30 days of the date of filing of the final plat with the city clerk, recommend approval, conditional approval or rejection of the plat and shall transmit the final plat and application along with its recommendations to the common council. 
(d)  The plan commission, when it determines to recommend approval of a plat, shall give at least ten days prior written notice of its intention to the clerk of any municipality within 1,000 feet of the plat. 
(e)  The common council shall, within 60 days after the date of filing the original final plat with the city clerk, approve or reject such plat unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. 
(1)  If the plat is rejected, the reasons shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement of the reasons forwarded to the subdivider. 
(2)  The common council shall not inscribe its approval on the final plat until the city clerk certifies on the face of the plat: 
a.  That the copies were forwarded to objecting agencies as herein required. 
b.  The date of such forwarding. 
c.  That no objections have been filed within 20 days, or if filed, have been met. 
(f)  Upon failure of the common council to act within 60 days, the time having not been extended and no unsatisfied objections having been filed, the plat shall be deemed approved. 
(g)  After the final plat has been approved by the common council and required improvements have been installed or a contract and sureties insuring their installation have been filed, the city clerk shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the plat attesting to such approval to be duly executed and record the final plat with the Waukesha County register of deeds, but the plat shall not be recorded unless it is offered for recording within 12 months from the date of the last approval and not more than 36 months after the first approval. 
(h)  The subdivider shall file ten copies of the final plat with the city clerk for distribution to the city engineer, building inspector, assessor, and other affected departments for their files. Additionally, all plans shall be provided to both the city clerk and city engineer in digital (i.e., PDF) format. 
(i)  AutoCAD drawing files of all final plats shall be submitted to the city engineer as required. 
(j)  The subdivider may develop a subdivision in conformance with a phasing plan approved by the plan commission and common council. 
(1)  Financial surety for a phased final plat shall be commensurate with the extent of infrastructure improvements unique to the active phase of development. 
(2)  Each subsequent phase of a phased final plat shall be permitted as an independent development with financial surety applicable to infrastructure improvements unique to the approved phase. 
(3)  Upon completion of a phase of development the financial surety applicable to that phase shall refunded to the subdivider as recommended by the city engineer and approved by the common council. 
(Code 1997, § 18.28; Rep. & Recr. #441; Rep. & Recr. #588; Cr. #588; Cr. #646; Am. #646; Am. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-55. - Plats within extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction. 
When the land to be subdivided lies within 1½ miles of the corporate limits of the city, the city may not deny approval of a plat based on land use. The city shall review the plat for compliance with applicable zoning and subdivision regulations as prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7a). The subdivider shall proceed as specified in sections 44-50 through 44-54, except: 
(1)  Transmittal responsibility lies with the city clerk, town clerk or county planning agency, to whomever the plat is first submitted, and the subdivider shall indicate which one is charged with such responsibility in his application. 
(2)  Approval agencies include the city plan commission, the common council, the town board and county planning agency, and the subdivider must comply with the subdivision control or land division ordinances of those agencies. 
(3)  The subdivider may proceed with the installation of such improvements and under such regulations as the town board of the town within whose limits the plat lies may require. Wherever connection to any city utility is desired, approval by the common council for such connection shall be required. 
(4)  All improvement requirements specified by the town board or any special improvement district in matters over which they have jurisdiction, shall be met before filing of the final plat. 
(Code 1997, § 18.29; Rep. & Recr. #441; Rep. & Recr. #646)  
Sec. 44-56. - Replat. 
(a)  When it is proposed to replat a recorded subdivision, or a part thereof, so as to change the boundaries of such recorded subdivision, or part thereof, the subdivider or person wishing to replat shall vacate or alter the recorded plat as provided by the Wisconsin Statutes, and the subdivider or person wishing to replat shall then proceed as specified in sections 44-50 through 44-54. 
(b)  The city clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the plan commission when a preliminary plat of a replat of lands within the city is filed and shall cause notices of the proposed replat and public hearing to be mailed to the owners of all properties within the limits of the exterior boundaries of the proposed replat and to the owners of all properties within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed replat. 
(Code 1997, § 18.30; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-57. - Minor subdivision. 
(a)  When it is proposed to divide land into four or less parcels or building sites, any one of which is less than 1½ acres in size, or when it is proposed to divide a block, lot or outlot into not more than four parcels or building sites within a recorded subdivision without changing the boundaries of such block, lot or outlot, the subdivider may subdivide by use of a certified survey map. 
(b)  The subdivider shall prepare the certified survey map in accordance with this chapter and shall file an adequate number of copies of the map and a completed application form with the city clerk at least 25 days prior to the meeting of the plan commission at which action is desired. 
(c)  The city clerk shall within two days after filing thereof, transmit the copies of the certified survey map and application form to the plan commission, which shall transmit a copy of such map to all affected city boards, commissions or departments for their review and recommendations concerning matters within their jurisdiction. 
(d)  Their recommendations shall be transmitted to the plan commission within ten days from the date the map is filed. Thereupon the map shall be reviewed by the plan commission for conformity with this chapter and all ordinances, rules, regulations, comprehensive plans and comprehensive plan components which affect it. 
(e)  The plan commission shall, within 60 days from the date of filing of the map recommend approval, conditional approval or rejection and shall transmit the map along with its recommendations to the common council. 
(f)  The common council shall approve, approve conditionally, or reject such map within 60 days from the date of filing of the map unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If the map is rejected, the reason shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement forwarded to the subdivider. If the map is approved, the common council shall cause the city clerk so to certify on the face of the original map and return a copy of the map to the subdivider. 
(g)  The city clerk shall record the original map with the county register of deeds within 30 days of its approval by the common council, and shall distribute copies of the certified survey map to the city engineer, building inspector, assessor and other affected departments for their files, retaining a copy for the clerk's files. (See section 44-277 regarding recording fees.) Additionally, all plans shall be provided to both the city clerk and city engineer in digital (i.e., PDF) format. 
(h)  AutoCAD drawing files of minor subdivisions shall be submitted to the city engineer as required. 
(Code 1997, § 18.31; Rep. & Recr. #441; Cr. #588; Rep. & Recr. #588; Am. #620; Rep. # 689 ) 
( Ord. No. 745 , § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 44-58. - Other land splits. 
(a)  When it is proposed to divide any parcel of land resulting in a division of land other than a subdivision or minor subdivision, an application therefor shall be made by petition, accompanied by a certified survey map, to the plan commission, and no such division shall be permitted unless the same be approved by the city council. It shall be recorded as in section 44-57. 
(b)  Dedication fees will be required of all land splits under this section where additional parcels of land are created except that dedication fees are not to be required where the land split creates parcels no one of which are less than ten acres in size. 
(Code 1997, § 18.32; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Secs. 44-59—44-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 
 
Sec. 44-90. - General. 
A preliminary plat shall be required for all subdivisions, and shall comply with all aspects of article II of this chapter. The plat shall be shall be based upon a survey by a registered land surveyor, and the plat prepared on tracing cloth or paper of a good quality at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch and shall show correctly on its face: 
(1)  Date, scale, and north point. 
(2)  The proposed subdivision name, which shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded in Waukesha County. 
(3)  Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider and land surveyor preparing the plat. 
(4)  Location of proposed subdivision by government lot, quarter section, section, township, range, and county. 
(5)  A small scale drawing of the section or government subdivision of the section in which the subdivision lies, with location of the subdivision indicated thereon. 
(6)  The entire area owned or controlled by the subdivider contiguous to the proposed plat shall be included on the preliminary plat even though only a portion of such area is proposed for immediately development. The plan commission may waive this requirement where it is unnecessary to fulfill the purposes and intent of this chapter, and undue hardship would result from strict application of this section. 
(Code 1997, § 18.33; Rep. & Recr. #441; Rep. & Recr. #646)  
Sec. 44-91. - Plat data. 
All preliminary plats shall show the following: 
(1)  Title of development. 
(2)  Location map. 
(3)  Name and address of the owner, subdivider and surveyor. 
(4)  Sheet number and total numbered sheets. 
(5)  North arrow and graphic scale. 
(6)  Soil types. 
(7)  Wetlands and source of delineation. 
(8)  Existing structures on the property and within 50 feet of the property. 
(9)  Wells on the property and within 100 feet of the property. 
(10)  Storm water management facilities. 
(11)  All drain tiles on the property. 
(12)  The quarter-quarter section where the property is located, exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision referenced to a corner established in U.S. Public Land Survey, and the total acreage encompassed thereby. 
(13)  Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet, with reference to U.S.G.S. datum, or at more frequent intervals if required by the plan commission for land of unusual topography. 
(14)  Water elevations of adjoining lakes and streams at the date of the survey and the ordinary high water mark of such lakes or streams, all referred to U.S.G.S. datum. In the case of floodlands, floodland boundaries and the contour line lying a vertical distance of two feet above the elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood. 
(15)  If the subdivision borders a lake or stream, the distances and bearing of a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the ordinary high water mark of the lake or stream. 
(16)  Location, widths, and names of all existing streets, alleys or other public ways and easements; railroad and utility rights-of-way; parks; cemeteries; water courses; drainage ditches; permanent buildings; bridges; and other pertinent data as determined by the plan commission within the exterior boundaries of the plat, and within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision, and on all property adjacent to the proposed subdivision that is owned or controlled by the subdivider. 
(17)  Location and names of any adjacent subdivisions and owners of record of adjoining parcels of unplatted lands. 
(18)  Type, width, and elevation of any existing streets and rights-of-way, including easements for sewers, water mains, and other public utilities within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto. 
(19)  Location, size and invert elevation of any existing or proposed sanitary or storm sewers, culverts and drain pipes, telephone poles, and the location and size of any existing or proposed water and gas mains within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto. If there are no sewers or water mains located on or immediately adjacent to the plat, the nearest of such sewers or water mains shall be indicated by their direction and distance from the plat with their invert elevations. 
(20)  Locations of all existing property boundary lines, streams and water courses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas and other similar significant features within the tract being subdivided or immediately adjacent thereto. 
(21)  Location, width, and names of all proposed streets and public rights-of-way such as alleys and easements. 
(22)  Approximate dimensions of all lots together with the proposed lot and block numbers. 
(23)  Location and approximate area of any sites to be reserved or dedicated, and the conditions, if any, of such reservation or dedication, for parks, playgrounds, drainageways, or other public use, or which are to be used for group housing, shopping centers, church sites, or other nonpublic uses not requiring designation by lot number. 
(24)  Proposed building lines. 
(25)  Approximate radii of all curves and length of tangents. 
(26)  Existing zoning within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
(Code 1997, § 18.34; Rep. & Recr. #441; Rep. & Recr. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-92. - Street plans and profiles. 
(a)  The city engineer may require that the subdivider provide street plans and profiles showing existing ground surface, proposed and established street grades, including extension for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision when requested. 
(b)  All elevations shall be based upon U.S.G.S. datum, and plans and profiles shall meet the approval of the city engineer. 
(Code 1997, § 18.35; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-93. - Testing. 
(a)  The city engineer may require that borings and soundings be made in specified areas to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and water conditions, including depth to bedrock and depth to ground water table. 
(b)  Where the subdivision will not be served by public sanitary sewer service, the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. H65 shall be complied with; and the appropriate data submitted with the preliminary plat. 
(Code 1997, § 18.36; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-94. - Covenants. 
The plan commission may require submission of a draft of protective covenants whereby the subdivider intends to regulate land use in the proposed subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development. 
(Code 1997, § 18.37; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-95. - Affidavit by surveyor. 
The surveyor preparing the preliminary plat shall certify on the face of the plat that it is a correct representation of all existing land divisions and features, and that he has fully complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 18.38; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Secs. 44-96—44-118. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINAL PLAT 
 
Sec. 44-119. - General. 
A final plat prepared by a registered land surveyor, shall be required for all subdivisions. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.20, which section is incorporated in this chapter by reference and article II of this chapter. All elevations referred to in such section shall be referred to U.S.G.S. datum and bearings referenced to the Wisconsin state plane coordinate system. 
(Code 1997, § 18.39; Rep. & Recr. #441; Rep. & Recr. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-120. - Additional information. 
The plat shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by said Wis. Stats. § 236.20, the following: 
(1)  Exact length and bearing of the centerline of all streets. 
(2)  Railroad rights-of-way within and abutting the plat. 
(3)  Setbacks or building lines required by the plan commission. 
(4)  All lands reserved for future public acquisition or reserved for the common use of property owners within the plat. 
(5)  Special restrictions required by the plan commission relating to access control along public ways or to the provision of planting strips. 
(Code 1997, § 18.40; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-121. - Deed restrictions. 
The plan commission may require the deed restrictions be filed with the final plat. 
(Code 1997, § 18.41; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-122. - Surveying and monuments. 
All final plats shall meet all the surveying and monumenting requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.15. The city engineer shall examine all final plats and make field checks and generally review the plat, to determine whether the final plat meets all of the requirements of this chapter and the appropriate sections of the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1997, § 18.42; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-123. - Certificates. 
All final plats shall provide all of the certificates required by Wis. Stats. § 236.21; and in addition, the surveyor shall certify that he has fully complied with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 18.43; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Secs. 44-124—44-144. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP 
 
Sec. 44-145. - General. 
A certified survey map prepared by a registered land surveyor shall be required for all minor subdivisions. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34, and article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 18.44; Rep. & Recr. #441; Rep. & Recr. #646)  
Sec. 44-146. - Additional information. 
The certified survey map shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by said Wis. Stats. § 236.34, the following: 
(1)  All existing buildings, water courses, drainage ditches and other features pertinent to proper division. 
(2)  Setbacks or building lines required by the plan commission. 
(3)  All lands reserved for future acquisition. 
(4)  Date of map, graphic scale, and names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, and surveyor. 
(5)  Bearings must be referenced to the Wisconsin state plane coordinate system. 
(Code 1997, § 18.45; Rep. & Recr. #441; Rep. & Recr. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-147. - Certificates. 
(a)  The surveyor shall certify on the face of the certified survey map that he has fully complied with all of the provisions of this chapter and with the appropriate sections of the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(b)  After a recommendation by the city engineer and other reviewing agencies, the common council shall certify its approval on the face of the map. 
(c)  Dedication of streets and other public areas shall require the owner's certificate and the mortgagee's certificate in substantially the form as required by Wis. Stats. § 236.21(2)(a). 
(Code 1997, § 18.46; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-148. - Recording. 
The certified survey map shall be recorded by the city clerk with the county register of deeds only after the certificates of the common council and the surveyor are placed on the face of the map. 
(Code 1997, § 18.47; Rep. & Recr. #441; Rep. & Recr. # 720 )  
Secs. 44-149—44-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 44-180. - Streets to be public. 
A public street shall be provided for convenient access to all property within the subdivision, and no private street or thoroughfare shall be permitted. 
(Code 1997, § 18.48; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-181. - Street and trail arrangements. 
(a)  In any new subdivision, the street layout and location of pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian trails shall conform to the arrangement, width and location indicated on the official map, comprehensive plan or comprehensive plan components of the city. The streets shall be developed and located in proper relation to: 
(1)  Existing and proposed streets. 
(2)  Topography. 
(3)  Natural features such as streams and tree growth. 
(4)  Public convenience and safety. 
(5)  Proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. 
(6)  The most advantageous development of adjoining areas. 
(b)  Arterial streets, as hereafter defined, shall provide: 
(1)  Ready access to centers of employment and governmental activity, community shopping areas, recreation, and points beyond the boundaries of the community. 
(2)  They shall be properly integrated with, and related to, the existing and proposed system of major streets and highways, and shall be, insofar as practicable, continuous and in alignment with existing or planned streets with which they are to connect. 
(c)  Collector streets, as hereafter defined, shall provide: 
(1)  Ready collection of traffic from residential areas and conveyance of this traffic to the major street and highway system. 
(2)  Shall be properly related to: 
a.  The mass transportation system. 
b.  Special traffic generators, such as schools, churches and shopping centers, and other concentrations of population. 
c.  The major streets into which they feed. 
(d)  Minor streets, as hereafter defined, shall be laid out to: 
(1)  Conform to topography. 
(2)  Discourage use by through traffic. 
(3)  Permit the design of efficient storm and sanitary sewage systems. 
(4)  Require the minimum street area necessary to provide safe and convenient access to abutting property. 
(e)  Optional minor streets, as hereafter defined, are intended to: 
(1)  Provide for a narrower pavement than the standard 27-foot minor street pavement width. 
(2)  This cross section shall be permitted only with plan commission approval and may be used only where one or more of the following specific site conditions exist: 
a.  Extensive tree coverage that can be preserved. 
b.  Difficult topography for construction of the standard minor street. 
c.  Residential density of one or more acres per dwelling unit. 
d.  Provision for sidewalk or other pedestrian walkway facilities within the subdivision. 
e.  Preservation of a historical building or structure. 
(f)  Proposed streets. 
(1)  Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract being subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless, in the opinion of the plan commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. 
(2)  Where the new subdivision connects with an existing subdivision, which has cul-de-sac streets which will connect to the streets in the proposed subdivision, the developer will enter the existing subdivision, remove the cul-de-sac, regrade, seed the ditches and extend the existing street to connect with the proposed streets. The removal of the cul-de-sac and the extension of the existing street will conform to city street requirements. 
(g)  Alleys. 
(1)  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts for off-street loading and service access. 
(2)  The plan commission may waive this requirement where other provision for such loading and access shall be assured. 
(3)  Alleys shall not be approved in residential areas unless necessary because of topography or other exceptional circumstances. 
(4)  Dead-end alleys are prohibited. 
(5)  Alleys shall not connect to a major thoroughfare. 
(h)  Arterial street and highway protection. Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a major street or highway, adequate protection of residential properties, limitation of access, and separation of through and local traffic shall be provided by reversed frontage, with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, or by the use of frontage streets. 
(i)  Reserve strips shall not be provided on any plat to control access to streets or alleys, except where control of such strips is placed with the city under conditions approved by the plan commission. 
(j)  Street names shall not duplicate or be similar to existing street names, and existing street names shall be protected wherever possible. 
(Code 1997, § 18.49; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. #620)  
Sec. 44-182. - Limited access highway and railroad right-of-way treatment. 
Whenever the proposed subdivision contains, or is adjacent to, a limited access highway or railroad right-of-way, the design shall provide the following treatment: 
(1)  When lots back upon the right-of-way of an existing or proposed limited access highway or railroad, a planting strip at least 30 feet in depth shall be provided adjacent to the highway or railroad, in addition to the normal lot depth. 
(2)  This strip shall be a part of the platted lot but shall have the following restriction lettered on the face of the plat: "This strip reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs, the building of structures hereon prohibited." 
(3)  Commercial and industrial districts shall have provided, on each side of the limited access highway or railroad, streets approximately parallel to, and at a suitable distance from, such highway or railroad but not less than 150 feet. 
(Code 1997, § 18.50; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-183. - Street design standards. 
The minimum right-of-way and pavement width of all proposed streets, alleys, and trails shall be as specified on the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan component, official map or neighborhood development study, or if no width is specified therein, the minimum widths shall be determined by the public works committee and approved by the city council, as follows: 
Facility 	ROW 
Width 	Pavement 
Width 
Arterial boulevard streets 	120' 	(2)-22' 
Arterial streets 	90' 	48' 
Standard collector streets 	66' 	36' 
Rural collector streets 	66' 	27' 
Minor streets 	60' 	27' 
Optional minor streets 	60' 	24' 
Alleys 	25' 	20' 
Equestrian trails 	12' 	n.a. 
Combined pedestrian and bicycle trails 	20' 	10' 
Pedestrian ways 	10' 	5' 
 
(1)  Arterial boulevard streets shall have two 22-foot pavements separated by a 20-foot median strip, and a pavement consisting of five inches of compacted and watered three-quarter-inch crushed gravel and four inches of 1½-inch traffic bound crushed limestone base course and 4½ inches of bituminous concrete surface. 
(2)  Arterial streets shall have a pavement width of 48 feet and a pavement consisting of five inches of compacted and watered three-quarter-inch crushed gravel and four inches of 1½-inch traffic bound crushed limestone base course and 4½ inches of bituminous concrete surface. 
(3)  Standard collector streets shall have a pavement width of 36 feet and a pavement consisting of five inches of compacted and watered three-quarter-inch crushed gravel and four inches of 1½-inch traffic bound crushed limestone base course and four inches of bituminous concrete surface. In areas where the projected average daily traffic (ADT) is less than 3,500 vehicles per day and the projected vehicle trip rates in the peak hour are less than 600, the city may designate rural collector streets which may have a pavement width of 27 feet instead of 36 feet. 
In areas where the projected average daily traffic (ADT) is less than 3,500 vehicles per day and the projected vehicle trip rates in the peak hour are less than 600, the city may designate rural collector streets which may have a pavement width of 27 feet instead of 36 feet. 
(4)  Minor streets shall have a pavement width of 27 feet and a pavement consisting of five inches of compacted and watered three-quarter-inch crushed gravel and four inches of 1½-inch traffic bound crushed limestone base course and four inches of bituminous concrete surface. 
(5)  Optional minor streets shall have a pavement width of 24 feet and a pavement consisting of five inches of compacted and watered three-quarter-inch crushed gravel and four inches of 1½-inch traffic bound crushed limestone base course and four inches of bituminous concrete surface. 
(6)  Cul-de-sacs shall meet all of the requirements for a minor street and shall terminate in a circular turn-around having a minimum right-of-way diameter of 120 feet. 
a.  A circle with a minimum diameter of 80 feet shall be paved. 
b.  When it is desired to leave a planting area in the center of the cul-de-sac, a minimum right-of-way diameter of 150 feet, and a minimum pavement width of 18 feet with a minimum centerline diameter of 90 feet shall be provided. 
c.  A cul-de-sac must be provided for any street designed to have one end permanently closed. Such street shall not exceed 400 feet in length. Any such street in excess of 400 feet shall require plan commission approval. 
(7)  Alleys provided to serve business, commercial, or industrial uses shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications for collector streets, provided that the surface shall be 20 feet. 
(8)  Equestrian trails. The surface shall be of such construction as may be approved by the city engineer. 
(9)  Combined bicycle and pedestrian paths shall have a minimum eight-foot pavement width, except where state or federal funding requires a higher standard. 
(10)  Pedestrian ways shall have a minimum pavement width of five feet. 
(11)  Minimum radius of 20 feet must be provided at all points where edges of various pavements as described above join and meet other newly constructed or existing pavements, including all intersections and points where cul-de-sac turn-around circles meet the entrance pavement. 
(12)  Bituminous construction standard. The bituminous concrete surface material described as a part of each pavement type shall be constructed in two lifts: 
a.  The first or binder course lift shall consist of 2½ inches of binder course. The city engineer shall provide asphalt specifications. 
b.  The second or surface lift shall consist of 1½ inches of surface course and installed no sooner than eight months following installation of the binder course and no later than October 1 of the year following installation of the binder course, or as specified in the developer's agreement. 
c.  The surface course shall be installed only after the binder course is thoroughly cleaned and swept, and a tack coat for bonding purposes applied. 
d.  Prior to installation of the surface course, the binder course shall be inspected by the city engineer and any distressed areas noted by the engineer shall be repaired in accordance with City of Delafield specifications. 
(13)  Typical street cross sections. Typical street cross sections on the pages A through F attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived shall govern the construction of the subdivision streets and trails under this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 18.51; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. #562; Am. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-184. - Street grades. 
(a)  Unless necessitated by exceptional topography, and always subject to the approval of the plan commission, the maximum centerline grade of any street or public way shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Arterial and collector streets: six percent. 
(2)  All other streets, alleys and pedestrian ways: eight percent. 
(3)  In no event shall the grade of any street, alley or pedestrian way be less than one-half of one percent. 
(b)  Street, alley and pedestrian way grades shall be established wherever practicable so as to avoid excessive grading, promiscuous removal of ground cover and tree growth and general leveling of the topography. 
(Code 1997, § 18.52; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-185. - Horizontal curves. 
A minimum sight distance with clear visibility, measured along the centerline, shall be provided of at least 300 feet on arterial streets, 200 feet on collector streets, and 120 feet on all other streets. 
(Code 1997, § 18.53; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-186. - Vertical curves. 
All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to 30 times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade for arterial and collector streets, and 20 times this minimum for all other streets. 
(Code 1997, § 18.54; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-187. - Tangents. 
A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(Code 1997, § 18.55; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-188. - Half-streets. 
(a)  Where an existing dedicated or platted half-street is adjacent to the tract being subdivided, the other half of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. 
(b)  The platting of half-streets shall be avoided where possible. 
(Code 1997, § 18.56; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-189. - Street intersections. 
(a)  Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly right angles as topography and other limiting factors of good design permit. 
(b)  Number of streets converging at one intersection shall be reduced to a minimum, preferably not more than two. 
(c)  Number of intersections along major streets and highways shall be held to a minimum and, wherever practicable, the distance between such intersections shall not be less than 1,200 feet. 
(d)  Property lines at street intersections when required by the plan commission shall be rounded with a minimum radius of 30 feet or of a greater radius when required by the plan commission. 
(e)  Minor streets need not necessarily continue across arterial or collector streets, but if the centerline of such minor streets approach the major streets from opposite sides within 125 feet of each other, measured along the centerline of the arterial or collector street, the location shall be so adjusted that the alignment across the major or collector street is continuous. 
(Code 1997, § 18.57; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-190. - Blocks. 
(a)  The widths, lengths and shapes of blocks shall be suited to the planned use of the land and the type of development contemplated, but the length of any block in residential areas shall not exceed 1,500 feet, nor have less than sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth between street lines. 
(b)  Pedestrian ways may be required by the plan commission near the center and entirely across any block over 900 feet in length to provide adequate pedestrian circulation or access to schools, shopping centers, churches, transportation or other community facilities. 
(c)  Lots or parcels reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial use shall have a width and length adequate to provide for off-street service and parking required by the use contemplated and the area zoning restrictions for such use. 
(Code 1997, § 18.58; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-191. - Lots. 
(a)  The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. The lots shall be designed to provide an appropriate building site and a proper architectural setting for the buildings contemplated. Proposed building elevations for each site shall be submitted with street cross-sections, drainage, erosion control and grading plans. 
(b)  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines on which the lots face. 
(c)  Lot lines shall follow municipal boundary lines wherever possible, rather than cross them. 
(d)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited except where necessary to provide separation of residential developments from through traffic or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(e)  Access. Every lot shall front or abut for a distance of at least 30 feet on a public street. Lots with an access only to existing private drives or streets shall be permitted only with the approval of the plan commission, and only when permitted by the zoning code. The 30-foot limitation set forth above shall not apply to flag lots. Flag lots shall have frontage on a public street not less than the lot width requirement for the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(f)  Lots at right angles to each other shall be avoided whenever possible, particularly in residential areas. 
(g)  Flag lots shall be avoided whenever possible, particularly in residential areas. Flag lots shall be prohibited unless the staff of the flag lot has street frontage not less than the lot width required in the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(h)  Area and dimensions of lots shall conform to the requirements of the zoning code. 
(1)  Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided, and a proportion of 2½ to one shall normally be considered as a desirable maximum for lot widths of 100 feet or more. 
(2)  Where a lot has a narrow strip of land as part of the lot (not as an approved easement), extending from the public road to the main part of the lot where the principal structure could lawfully be placed (flag lot), such a narrow portion (staff of the flag lot) shall not constitute frontage unless the narrow portion is as wide as the required lot width for the district in which such lot is located, unless otherwise approved by the plan commission. 
(i)  Subdivision into large parcels. Whenever a tract is subdivided into large parcels, such parcels shall be arranged and dimensioned as to allow resubdivision of any such parcels into normal lots in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(j)  Depth of lots or parcels reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for off-street service and parking required by the use contemplated, and by the area zoning restrictions for such use. 
(k)  Corner lots for residential use shall have increased minimum corner side yard setback as required by applicable provisions of the zoning code. 
(l)  Lands lying between the meander line and the water's edge and any otherwise unplattable lands which lie between a proposed subdivision and the water's edge shall be included as part of lots, outlots, or public dedications in any plat abutting a stream or lake. All lands under option to the subdivider or to which he holds any interest that abut the proposed subdivision and a stream, lake, flowage or wetland shall also be included. 
(m)  Water level. In determining the minimum lot areas under this code, 90 percent of the minimum lot area shall be at least two feet and 80 percent of the minimum lot area shall be at least three feet above the elevation of the 100-year floodplain boundary. 
(Code 1997, § 18.59; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-192. - Building setback lines. 
All building setback lines shall be controlled by the zoning code. 
(Code 1997, § 18.60; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-193. - Easements. 
(a)  Utility easements shall be provided at the rear of all lot lines and on side lot lines or cross lots, where necessary or advisable. Such utility easements shall be at least ten feet wide, and evidence shall be furnished the common council that easements to be incorporated on the plat or in deeds have been reviewed by the individual utility companies or the organization responsible for furnishing the service involved. 
(b)  Drainage easements. 
(1)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, an adequate drainageway or easement shall be provided as may be required by the plan commission. The location, width, alignment and improvement of such drainageway or easement shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(2)  Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection with such drainageway or easement. 
(3)  The watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream may be relocated so that adequate drainage will be assured. 
(4)  Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
(5)  In all cases such watercourse shall be of a minimum width of the established two-foot high water mark, or in the absence of such specification, not less than 30 feet. 
(Code 1997, § 18.61; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-194. - Waterway openings. 
(a)  Waterway openings of all new bridges and culverts carrying arterial streets over perennial streams shall be adequate to accommodate the 50-year recurrence interval flood flow with the upstream high water elevation not to exceed a level of two feet below the roadway elevation and the hydraulic head loss through the structure not to exceed 0.01 feet. 
(b)  Waterway openings of all new bridges and culverts carrying minor streets over perennial streams shall be adequate to accommodate the ten-year recurrence interval flood flow with the upstream headwater elevation not to exceed a level of two feet below the roadway elevation and the hydraulic head loss through the structure not to exceed 0.01 feet. 
(c)  The combination of the waterway opening and the approach road elevations on the floodlands shall not increase the flood stages more than 0.01 feet upon the occurrence of the 100-year recurrence interval flood. 
(d)  Such bridges and culverts shall be so designed and constructed as to facilitate the passage of ice floes and other debris. 
(e)  Any stream designed as navigable shall meet all applicable federal, state and county requirements and regulations. 
(Code 1997, § 18.62; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-195. - Public sites and open spaces. 
(a)  In the design of the plat, proper consideration shall be given to the reservation of suitable sites of adequate area for future schools, parks, playgrounds, drainageways and other public purposes. 
(b)  If such sites are not designated on the comprehensive plan as referred to in section 44-15, consideration shall be given in the location of such sites to the preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands of fine trees, marshes, lakes and ponds, watercourses, watersheds and ravines. 
(Code 1997, § 18.63; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. #620)  
Sec. 44-196. - Acceptance of dedications and improvements. 
(a)  The approval of the final plat by the mayor and common council shall constitute acceptance of the dedication of the right-of-way for any public street, open space or other public area, but the developer shall remain liable for any accidents on any such street, open space or other public area, prior to the time of final acceptance by the city of the street improvement. 
(b)  The acceptance of the improvements constructed shall be deemed to be made after successful completion of the guaranteed period covered by the guaranty bond, and by formal resolution of the mayor and common council. 
(c)  The normal operating cost of the operation of such improvement shall be assumed by the city when put in operation and pending the final acceptance thereof. 
(Code 1997, § 18.64; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Secs. 44-197—44-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 44-216. - Survey monuments. 
The subdivider or developer shall install survey monuments placed in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 236.15, and as may be required by the city engineer. 
(Code 1997, § 18.65; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-217. - Procedure. 
(a)  After filing the preliminary plat, or sooner if the subdivider or developer prefers, two copies of construction plans and specifications, prepared by a professional engineer registered in Wisconsin, shall be furnished for the following improvements where such improvements are required by this chapter, or are to be installed voluntarily by the developer: 
(1)  Streets and sidewalks. 
(2)  Sanitary sewage system. 
(3)  Storm drainage and storm sewers. 
(4)  Water supply and distribution. 
(5)  Public utility installations. 
(6)  Street lights, street signs, street trees, and the like. 
(7)  Additional special plans or information as required by the plan commission and public works committee. 
(b)  The city engineer shall review, or cause to be reviewed, the construction plans and specifications for conformity with all applicable requirements, and shall approve, conditionally approve, or reject in writing the proposed improvements before such improvements are commenced. 
(c)  Upon such decision and recommendation by the city engineer, the common council shall within 90 days after such recommendation grant approval, conditionally approve, or reject the proposed improvements, and the subdivider or developer shall be notified in writing of the approval, any conditions imposed, or the reason for rejection. 
(Code 1997, § 18.66; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-218. - Construction and inspection. 
(a)  Construction of each phase shall not commence without 24-hour notice to the city engineer. This approval shall be conditioned upon the receipt of all necessary permits and the compliance with all construction methods, specifications and design, as required by this article. 
(b)  All construction of improvements required of the subdivider or developer must be completed within two years of the date of the approval of the preliminary plat by the plan commission, unless good cause can be shown for granting of an extension of time by both the mayor and the common council. 
(c)  Inspections shall be made at the start and during the course of construction as the city engineer deem necessary in order to ensure compliance with the plans and specifications as approved. 
(d)  The final plat shall not be approved, or sureties or money deposits released, until final inspection and approval by the city engineer of all completed work. 
(Code 1997, § 18.67; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. #562)  
Sec. 44-219. - Grading. 
After the installation of temporary block corner monuments by the subdivider or developer, and the establishment of street grades by the city public works committee, the subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of all streets and alleys proposed to be dedicated, in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. The subdivider or developer shall grade the roadbeds in the street rights-of-way to subgrade. 
(Code 1997, § 18.68)  
Sec. 44-220. - Surfacing. 
(a)  After the installation of all underground improvements as may be required, the subdivider shall surface all roadways in streets and alleys in accordance with the provisions set forth in article VI of this chapter, and in accordance with any other applicable rule, regulation, design or specification of this or any other ordinance. Any construction in existing surfaced roadways will require slurry backfill. 
(b)  No street pavement construction shall commence until after the backfill has settled where any underground installations have been made in the roadway. The settlement may be accomplished by either mechanical compaction, or by the combination of mechanical compaction and jetting, or by using granular backfill. 
(Code 1997, § 18.69; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. # 720. )  
Sec. 44-221. - Curb and gutter. 
(a)  After the installation of all underground improvements, the subdivider or developer shall construct concrete curbs and gutters if recommended by the public works committee and plan commission in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  Where curb and gutter installation is not required and is waived by the city council, the subdivider or developer shall finish grade all shoulders and road ditches, install all necessary culverts at intersections and, if required, surface ditch inverts to prevent erosion and sedimentation in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1997, § 18.70; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-222. - Sidewalks. 
Where required by the plan commission, the subdivider or developer shall construct a sidewalk on one side of all frontage streets and both sides of all other streets within the subdivision and the construction of all sidewalks shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1997, § 18.71; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-223. - Sanitary sewers and sewer design. 
(a)  If public sewer facilities are not available, the plan commission may require that the subdivider or developer make provisions for an adequate private sewage disposal system, which shall be constructed according to all applicable laws, rules and regulations and shall be made available to all lots in the subdivision. 
(b)  If public sewer facilities are available or the city engineer shall certify that they will, within reasonable probability, be available within five years from the date of filing the application for preliminary plat approval, the subdivider or developer shall install sanitary sewers and laterals to the street lot line and shall cap and mark all laterals in the manner specified herein. In all of the events covered by this subsection, the following specifications for sanitary sewers shall be applicable: 
(1)  Sanitary sewers shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in Wisconsin, latest edition, hereinafter referred to as "Standard Specifications" and in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 110. 
(2)  Manholes shall be as specified in "Standard Specifications," except that brick manholes shall not be allowed. 
(3)  Manhole frames shall be Neenah R1660 or equal. Covers shall have machined bearing surfaces and a nonrocking lid with concealed pick holes and no vent holes. Gasketed covers may be required in certain areas at the direction of the city engineer. 
(4)  Sanitary sewers shall be located in the center of the street right-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(5)  Sanitary sewer laterals shall be installed to the lot line or street right-of-way line. The ends of the sanitary laterals at the right-of-way or lot lines shall be properly marked with a six feet long by two inches by six inches plank, a six-foot-long by one-inch diameter steel reinforcing rod or some other method approved by the city engineer. Four-inch or six-inch sanitary sewer laterals may be installed. The materials and construction shall conform to "Standard Specifications" and Wis. Admin. Code ch. H62. 
(6)  If larger diameter sanitary sewers are required to service areas outside the proposed development, the cost of such oversizing shall be prorated in proportion to the ratio which the total area of the proposed development is to the total service area to be served by such larger sewer and the excess cost shall be borne either by the city or assessed against the total tributary service area, excluding the proposed development. (Public sanitary sewers shall be a minimum of eight-inch diameter, per state code.) 
(7)  When small diameter pressure systems are required to provide service, the developer shall provide adequate plans and specifications for the proposed system and equipment to the city engineer for approval. This shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Plans and specifications of piping system showing proposed locations and elevations of the pumping units and discharge points. 
b.  Operation and maintenance manuals, including: 
1.  Manufacturer's name and performance data of the proposed pumping units. 
2.  Information on availability of repair parts and maintenance service for the proposed pumping units. 
(c)  The systems shall be designed for outdoor installation of the pumps. All alarms and controls associated with the pumping units shall be mounted in close proximity to the units and be readily accessible to maintenance personnel. 
(d)  The complete pumping unit, including motor, must be designed to operate in a submerged condition. The units shall be capable of reducing all solids normally found in sewage and then pumping the resulting slurry through the pressure service pipe to the pressure or gravity sewer system. 
(e)  All curb stops on a pressure line shall have curb stop extension rods in place a minimum of 18 inches from the top of the cover. The stationary rod shall be pinned onto the operating end of the curb stop. 
(f)  All new sanitary sewers, shall be cleaned and videotaped, with true copy of tape given to city, prior to final acceptance. 
(Code 1997, § 18.72; Rep. & Recr. #441; Cr. #515)  
Sec. 44-224. - Stormwater drainage facilities. 
(a)  Stormwater sewering or surface drainage systems shall be provided adequately serve the area being platted, considering, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The design of the drainage system shall consider and show the following: 
a.  Storm drainage area of which the subdivision is a part. 
b.  Detailed calculations as to volume of stormwater generated and method of storage and conveyance. 
c.  A stormwater system sufficient in size to eliminate flooding or ponding of water, consisting of culverts, ditches, storm sewers, retention basins, etc. 
(2)  Where storm sewers can practically be installed and where the city engineer concludes that storm sewers will be necessary to control erosion or ponding, such storm sewers shall be designed in accordance with the following minimum specifications: 
a.  General. All stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to restrict post-development flow rates to meet the following multiple storm conditions: A ten-year post-development conditions flow rate to discharge at no more than a two-year pre-developed flow rate. A 100-year post-developed conditions flow rate to discharge at no more than a ten-year pre-developed flow rate. 
All stormwater detention basins will be required to serve as temporary sedimentation facilities during the construction phase of the development. The sediment basin shall be designed per the "State of Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook" to include a minimum of two feet of sediment storage below the dewatering hole(s) and a riser pipe(s) with trash guard(s). All riser pipes and initial stone layer shall be wrapped with filter fabric and protected with six inches of clean stone rip-rap. At the end of construction when the area has been fully restored, the riser pipe(s) shall be removed and the sedimentation storage area filled and restored to the detention basin final grades. 
1.  Dry detention basins. All dry detention basins shall be designed with maximum 4:1 sideslopes. All basins require emergency overflow spillways that can accommodate the 100-year developed conditions storm. The spillway shall be set at an elevation that provides a minimum of one foot of freeboard above the peak state elevation of the 100-year post-developed conditions storm. 
2.  Wet detention basins. All wet detention basins shall be designed with a maximum 4:1 sideslope leading to the water's edge. The wet basin shall then include a safety shelf at a maximum 10:1 slope, for a minimum of six feet in width. The wet basin may then drop at a maximum 3:1 sideslope until a maximum normal water depth of eight feet. All wet detention basins must include an emergency spillway, as outlined above. 
b.  Storm sewers shall be designed in such way as to insure a minimum velocity of flow of two feet per second. 
c.  Manholes shall be provided at all changes in direction of pipe and pipe size and shall be of the type specified in "Standard Specifications" or the standard specifications of the city. Inlets shall be located not more than 500 feet apart and shall be the type specified in "Standard Specifications" or the standard specifications of the city. 
d.  All new storm sewers shall be cleaned and videotaped, with true copy of tape given to the city, prior to final acceptance. 
(3)  Where ditches are utilized for storm drainage, they shall meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  Culverts at all street or driveway intersections, sized to eliminate flooding or ponding of water. 
b.  Driveway culverts shall be arch pipe no less than 15 inches in diameter equivalent with metal flared end sections. 
(b)  All storm drainage facilities shall be so designed as to present no hazard to life or property and shall be designed with due consideration to aesthetic values. 
(c)  If storm sewers of greater than 36-inch diameter are required to handle the contemplated flows, the cost of such larger sewers shall be prorated in proportion to the ratio which the total area of the proposed plat is to the total drainage area to be served by such larger sewer and the excess cost shall be borne either by the city or assessed against the total tributary drainage area. 
(d)  All work must be in compliance with section 42-13 relating to erosion control. 
(Code 1997, § 18.73; Rep. & Recr. #441; Cr. #515; Am. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-225. - Water supply and water distribution. 
(a)  Water supply. 
(1)  Water supply and water distribution systems shall be designed to furnish water in the quantity required by the State of Wisconsin requirements for domestic water supply, and also in accordance with the National Board of Underwriters for fire demand. 
(2)  Sufficient storage shall be designed and constructed to provide a reserve supply in accordance with the requirements of the State of Wisconsin and National Board of Underwriters. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to furnish water meters of the design specified by the city engineer. 
(4)  If the city operates or supervises the operation of any water supply system, it shall have the right to make an appropriate service charge therefore, and the right to make such charge shall be stated both in the recorded plat and in all deeds to property embraced in such plat. 
(b)  Water distribution. 
(1)  All work shall be done in accordance with the provisions Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in Wisconsin, latest edition, and State of Wisconsin department of transportation division of highways and transportation services, Standard Specifications for Highway and Structure Construction, latest edition, including all supplemental specifications and other revisions to date, unless otherwise specified herein or on the plans. Both documents are referred to herein as Standard Specifications. 
(2)  No public water main shall be installed of less than eight inches in diameter, but if greater than such diameter water mains are required, the excess cost of such mains over and above the cost of an eight-inch main shall be borne by the subdivider or developer. 
(3)  Water mains shall be Class 52 Ductile Iron conforming to AWWA C151, cement lined in accordance with AWWA C104 with polyethylene wrap. Class 150 PVC pressure pipe per AWWA C900 may be used subject to city approval. 
(4)  Fittings shall be ductile iron conforming to the requirements of AWWA C110. All fittings should have a minimum working pressure rating of 250 psi. 
(5)  Fire hydrants, with auxiliary valves, shall be provided in accordance with the recommendations of the National Board of Underwriters, but in no case shall the spacing of said fire hydrants be greater than 500 feet. Fire hydrants shall be AWWA traffic-type with breakoff couplings Waterous-Pacer WB67 with six-inch inlet and 5¼-inch valve opening, one 4½-inch pumper nozzle and two 2½-inch hose nozzles. All hydrants shall have a red barrel and bonnet with white caps. The paint shall be reflective type paint. A fiberglass marker wand, approved by the city, shall be installed on the breakaway flange of each hydrant. 
(6)  Fire hydrants shall be vandal-proofed. A vandal-proof device shall be installed on all fire hydrants by the City of Delafield water department. The cost of installation of the vandal-proof device, including parts and labor, shall be billed to the developer. The vandal-proof device shall be approved by the City of Delafield fire chief and the City of Delafield water department. The device shall be attached to the fire hydrant housing or opening mechanism per manufacturer's specifications. All materials used shall be strong enough to withstand acts of vandalism and weather extremes and still provide smooth hydrant operation. An inner-barrel construction of high tensile manganese bronze shall be designed to fit over the fire hydrant operating nut. An outer housing constructed of stainless steel shall be installed over the inner barrel so as to swivel freely until a special key wrench is used. Attachment of the outer housing shall be by a special snap ring groove designed to withstand repeated blows by sledge hammers without shearing. A mating collar shall be installed between the outer housing hydrant top for a weather seal and to prevent removal of the swivel housing. The mating collar shall extend up the sides of the swivel housing to a height sufficient to provide added protection for the hydrant operating nut and to resist repeated blows by sledge hammers. A special key wrench shall be constructed of an aluminum magnesium alloy with handles extending from both sides for easy operation. The wrench shall incorporate a unique permanent magnet which will engage an activator located inside the outer housing. The special key wrench will be the only means of opening or closing the hydrant. The opposite side of the key wrench shall contain a conventional pentagon recess that will work on standard hydrants. Performance of the vandal-proof system must not be affected by local environmental temperature ranges or weather conditions. 
(7)  Valves shall be provided in such locations to allow the shutting down of not more than 1,000-foot linear pipe. Gate valves shall conform to AWWA C500. Valves eight inches and smaller shall have a Clow 3-piece valve Box F-2450 complete with F-2494 cover. Valves 12 inches and larger require a five-foot diameter manhole complete with Neenah cover R-1900-D lettered "Water." Any substitution of an approved equal will require city approval. 
(8)  Water service lines to be extended to lot line and to be one-inch diameter minimum continuous, from main to lot line, Type K, ASTM B88. Corporation stops to be Mueller H-1500 for three-quarter-inch to 1¼-inch lines and Ford FB-600 for 1½-inch to two-inch lines. Curb stops to be Mueller H-15154. Curb boxes to be Mueller H-10302. Curb stops shall have a stationary rod in place which is a minimum of 18 inches from the top cover. The stationary rod shall be pinned onto the operating end of the curb stop. Valve boxes shall have a valve box extension stem in place which is a minimum of 18 inches from the top of the cover. The valve box extension stem shall be fastened to the operating end of the valve equals subject to approval by city. 
(9)  All water mains shall be installed with a blue, three-inch-wide warning tape located over the main and 12-inches below finished grade. Said tape shall read "Caution - Water Line Buried Below." 
(10)  All water main and facilities shall be installed with a detector wire consisting of an insulated AWS #12 copper wire taped to the main. In addition: 
a.  Wrap four feet of extra wire around beginning and end of main; 
b.  Wrap each valve, including hydrant valves to below operating nut flange; and 
c.  Wrap each valve box to within two inches of top ending in a loop. 
A satisfactory conductivity test shall be performed prior to acceptance of system. 
(c)  Miscellaneous. Where a water supply system is not available, or is not required under the terms of this chapter, individual sources of water supply shall be permitted, provided that all requirements of the city and the State of Wisconsin are fully complied with, but in all such cases restrictions shall be filed with the final plat and incorporated in each deed to parcels in the subdivision, which shall provide that each private owner of such parcel shall bear his fair proportionate share of the cost of any future public water main as determined by agreement or special assessment proceeding, or other means authorized by law to finance construction of water systems. 
(Code 1997, § 18.74; Rep. & Recr. #441; Cr. #457; Am. #505; Am. #515)  
Sec. 44-226. - Other utilities. 
(a)  The subdivider or developer shall cause gas, electric, and telephone facilities to be installed in such manner as to make adequate service available to each lot in the subdivision. 
(b)  All electric and telephone cables shall be buried underground in accordance with the specifications of the state electrical code, and this shall include feeder cables and individual service connections. 
(c)  Plans indicating the proposed location of all gas, electric and telephone distribution and transmission lines required to service the plat shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1997, § 18.75; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-227. - Street lamps. 
(a)  If requested by the public works committee and required by council, the subdivider or developer shall install or cause to be installed street lamps along all streets proposed to be dedicated, of a design compatible with neighborhood and the type of development proposed, such design to be approved by the plan commission. 
(b)  Such lamps shall be placed or caused to be placed at each street intersection and at such interior block spacing as may be required by the public works committee. 
(Code 1997, § 18.76; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-228. - Street signs. 
The department of public works shall install a street sign of a design approved by the plan commission at the intersection of all streets proposed to be dedicated, and such signs shall, where possible, conform to the design of signs elsewhere in the city. Costs shall be paid by the developer. 
(Code 1997, § 18.77; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-229. - Guard rails. 
Guard rails shall be placed along the shoulder of any street where street construction has resulted in an embankment higher than six inches measured vertically. 
(Code 1997, § 18.78; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-230. - Street trees, sodding clean-up, and the like. 
(a)  The subdivider or developer shall pay to the city the sum of $100.00 per lot of the proposed subdivision to be used for tree plantings or planting screens in the city. (See subsection (b) of this section for definition of planting screens.) Payment under this subsection shall be made prior to final plat approval. 
(b)  Planting screens. In some circumstances the plan commission may require a planting screen "buffer" between conflicting or contrasting land uses, and/or to provide visual and sound screening along highways and major roads. Such planting shall be placed within a designated planting easement of adequate width, and shall conform to plans required as part of the preliminary plat submittal, and in accuracy and detail sufficient for review by the plan commission. The following general guidelines shall apply: 
(1)  Planting screens shall consist of compatible naturalistic groupings of hardy native plant material. 
(2)  A diverse mixture of deciduous and evergreen tree and shrub varieties shall be used. 
(3)  Monotonous straight-row plantings of identical or similar material will not be accepted. 
(4)  Sizes shall be adequate for reasonable immediate effect. 
(5)  Short-lived, softwood tree varieties are not acceptable, i.e., silver maple, Lombardy poplar, box elder, Chinese elm. 
(c)  Wherever possible, existing trees shall be preserved in the installation of subdivision improvements. All street right-of-way which is not paved shall be seeded or sodded. Provisions shall be made to assure the growth of all landscaping. 
(d)  All stripped areas shall be seeded, and all destroyed trees, brush, debris and rubbish removed. All cut and filled sections throughout the subdivision are to be developed, and returfed in a manner satisfactory to the city engineer. 
(1)  Developer shall comply with requirements of chapter 52 of this Code relating to erosion control. 
(2)  Bond requirements for other improvements in the subdivision shall apply to this section. 
(Code 1997, § 18.79; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-231. - Erosion controls. 
Erosion controls approved by the city engineer must be in place, inspected, and approved prior to issuance of any building permits or granting a permit for preliminary grading or site preparation. 
(Code 1997, § 18.80; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-232. - Fire protection water supply. 
In areas not served by a municipal water supply and distribution system, subdividers or developers shall provide on-site storage tanks of sufficient size to provide an adequate supply of water for the purpose of controlling fires. The size of the on-site water storage tank shall be determined by the fire chief based on the guidelines of the State of Wisconsin and the National Fire Protection Association. 
Where in the opinion of the plan commission, the fire protection needs of the subdivision can be better met by use of a tanker vehicle, the subdivider or developer may be allowed to pay a fee equivalent to the cost of an installed on-site water storage tank to the city in lieu of providing on-site water storage. Any funds received by the city under the provision of this section shall be used exclusively for the purchase and maintenance of a water tanker vehicle. 
(Code 1997, § 18.81; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-233. - Final construction plans. 
Final construction plans shall be prepared on 22-inch by 36-inch paper or Mylar film, and shall contain at least the following information in the following order: 
(1)  Title page. 
(2)  Plat of subdivision. 
(3)  General layout drawings of the proposed streets. 
(4)  General layout drawings of the proposed water system, if any. 
(5)  General layout drawings of the proposed sanitary sewers, if any. 
(6)  General layout drawings of the proposed storm drainage. 
(7)  Plans and profiles of streets and sewers, with a scale of not less than one inch to 50 feet horizontal, and one inch to five feet vertical. 
(8)  Details of structures and other improvements required to be installed in the subdivision. 
(Code 1997, § 18.82; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-234. - Material standards—General. 
(a)  All construction of improvements covered by this chapter, shall be in accordance with, and materials used shall be in compliance with, the methods and materials required in the appropriate sections of "Standard Specifications" as amended, published by the division of highways, State of Wisconsin. 
(b)  The following construction materials shall conform to the public works industry improvement program minimum indicated: 
(1)  Standard strength clay sewer pipe: ASTM C-13-50T, as revised. 
(2)  Extra strength clay pipe: ASTM C-200-50T, as revised. 
(3)  Concrete sewer pipe: ASTM C-76, ASTM C-14. 
(4)  Corrugated metal pipe: AASHTO Designation M36. 
(5)  Concrete masonry: ASTM C-139, as revised. 
(6)  Building brick: ASTM C-62 grade SW, as revised. 
(7)  Concrete building brick: ASTM C-55 grade A, as revised. 
(8)  Cast iron water pipe: ASTM Class 150. 
(9)  Cast iron sewer pipe: ASTM Class 100. 
(10)  Frames and grates: city standards. 
(11)  PVC: ASTM D-3034 and F-679. 
(12)  Other materials: city standards and other materials as detailed in "Standard Specifications" and/or approved by the city. 
(Code 1997, § 18.83; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-235. - Material standards—Asphalt pavements. 
(a)  Asphalt roadway surface. The developer and contractor shall install a minimum of four inches of hot mix asphalt (HMA) in two lifts, with compaction per the latest version of the Wisconsin department of transportation standard specifications for highway and structure construction. Tack coat will be installed between lifts of asphalt. The city engineer may require a thicker asphalt section for collector or nonresidential applications. Traffic controls and barricades must be installed and maintained per the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). The city will require submittal of asphalt mix designs prior to paving. The city engineer will require the contractor to submit load tickets for asphalt yield computations and submit nuclear density test results for asphalt density verification. 
(b)  Slopes and ditches; planting; grass cover. Side slopes and ditches along roads or in easements shall be covered with topsoil, prepared seeded or sodded, fertilized and maintained for a sufficient period to provide adequate grass cover prior to acceptance by the city council. The city may require erosion control matting or turf reinforcement matting to stabilize slopes as necessary. The developer's engineer shall provide the seed mix for approval. 
(c)  Signs; posts and guardrails. Street signs, roadway striping, culvert posts, and guardrails, as required by the city council, shall be obtained and placed by the city, the cost of which shall be paid by the developer or owner. 
(d)  Acceptance by the city. Roads will not be accepted by the city before May 1 or after November 1. Acceptance of the roads does not relieve the developer of responsibility relative to adequate grass cover on the side slopes or in ditches. 
(Code 1997, § 18.84; Rep. & Recr. #441; Rep. & Recr. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-236. - Completion of improvements. 
All of the improvements required under this chapter shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter and with all other standards, rules and regulations which are now or may hereafter be adopted by the city council. All improvements shall be completed prior to the final approval of the plat by the city council, except that in lieu of the completion of construction, a certified check, surety bond or letter of credit approved by the city attorney may be furnished as provided in section 44-16. 
(Code 1997, § 18.85; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-237. - Guarantee of material and workmanship. 
(a)  The subdivider or developer shall provide a guarantee bond running to the city in the amount of 20 percent of the cost of improvements, either actual or estimated, such bond to be for a period of one year after final completion of construction. 
(b)  The city engineer shall certify to the city council the correctness of the amount of the bond and the date for final completion of all work guaranteed by such bond. 
(Code 1997, § 18.86; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-238. - "As built" plans. 
(a)  After completion of all public improvements and prior to final acceptance of such improvements, the subdivider or developer shall make or cause to be made a map showing the actual location of all valves, manholes, tubs, sewer and water mains and such other facilities as the engineer shall require. 
(b)  This map shall be in black ink and shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer registered in Wisconsin. Additionally the same shall be submitted to the city clerk-treasurer digital (i.e. PDF) format. 
(c)  The presentation of this map shall be a condition of final acceptance of the improvements and release of the surety bond assuring their completion. 
(Code 1997, § 18.87; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. # 720 )  
Secs. 44-239—44-269. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FEES 
 
Sec. 44-270. - General. 
The subdivider or developer shall pay the city all fees as hereinafter required and at the times specified. The city shall be under no obligation to process any part or portion of any application for subdivision unless and until the appropriate fees as herein provided shall have been paid. 
(Code 1997, § 18.90; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-271. - Preliminary plat review fee. 
(a)  At the time of first application for approval of any preliminary plat and in order to assist in defraying the cost of review, the subdivider shall pay a fee according to the following schedule, which fee shall be paid to the city treasurer: 
Up to and including 20 acres 	$250.00 
Over 20 acres 	$250.00 plus 
$2.00 per acre 
 
(b)  A reapplication fee amounting to $15.00 shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time of a reapplication for approval of any preliminary plat which has previously been reviewed. 
(Code 1997, § 18.91; Rep. & Recr. #441; Rep. & Recr. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-272. - Improvement review fee. 
(a)  The subdivider or developer shall pay a fee equal to one percent of the cost of the required public improvements as estimated by the city engineer at the time of submission of improvement plans and specifications, partially to cover the cost to the city of checking and reviewing such plans and specifications. 
(b)  A reapplication fee equal to the initial application fee shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time of a reapplication for approval of any preliminary plat which has previously been reviewed. 
(Code 1997, § 18.92; Rep. & Recr. #441; Am. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-273. - Inspection fee. 
The subdivider or developer shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the city for such inspection as the city engineer deems necessary to assure that the construction of the required improvements is in compliance with the plans, specifications and ordinances of the city and any other governmental authority. 
(Code 1997, § 18.93; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-274. - Final plat review fee. 
(a)  The subdivider shall pay a fee to the city treasurer at the time of first application for approval of such plat, in order to assist in defraying the cost of review. Such fee shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Up to and including 20 acres: $190.00. 
(2)  Over 20 acres: $190.00 plus $2.00 per acre. 
(b)  A reapplication fee equal to the initial application fee assessed in subsection (a) of this section, shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time of a reapplication for approval of any final plat which has previously been reviewed. 
(Code 1997, § 18.94; Rep. & Recr. #441; Rec. & Recr. # 720 )  
Sec. 44-275. - Engineering fees. 
(a)  The subdivider or developer shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the city for all engineering work incurred by the city in connection with the plat. Engineering work shall include the preparation of construction plans and standard specifications. Fees for engineering work as herein referred to shall be in addition to those fees for inspection, checking and reviewing, as provided in sections 44-272 and 44-273. 
(b)  See section 44-17 for bonding requirements. 
(Code 1997, § 18.96; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-276. - Administrative and legal fee. 
The subdivider or developer shall pay a fee equal to the cost of any legal, administrative, or fiscal work which may be undertaken by the city in connection with the plat, and legal work shall include, among other things, the drafting of contracts between the city and the subdivider or developer. 
(Code 1997, § 18.97; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Sec. 44-277. - Recording fees. 
The subdivider or developer shall pay any and all recording fees required by this chapter in advance of recording. 
(Code 1997, § 18.98; Rep. & Recr. #441)  
Chapter 46 - TAXATION 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Preparation of tax roll and tax collection. 
(a)  Preparation. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.65(2), the clerk-treasurer and finance officer/budget analyst shall prepare the tax roll and transfer it to the county treasurer on or before the third Monday in December. The clerk-treasurer and finance officer/budget analyst shall furnish a tax roll certificate for taxes levied to the county treasurer, per Wis. Stats. § 70.65(3) on or before the third Monday in December. 
(b)  Treasurers responsible for collection. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 74.07, the county treasurer shall collect the general property taxes, special assessments, special taxes and special charges shown in the tax roll. 
(c)  Dates for payment of taxes, special assessments and special charges. 
(1)  All real estate and personal property taxes, special assessments, special charges and other taxes shall be paid as provided in Wis. Stats. § 74.11. 
a.  All taxes on real property and on improvements on leased land shall be paid in one of the following ways: 
1.  In full on or before January 31. 
2.  In two equal installments, unless subject to subsection (c)(1)d of this section, with the first installment payable on or before January 31 and the second installment payable on or before July 31. 
b.  All special assessments, special charges and special taxes that are placed in the tax roll shall be paid in full on or before January 31. 
c.  All taxes on personal property, except those on improvements on leased land, shall be paid in full on or five working days after January 31. 
d.  If the total real property tax levied on a parcel of property is less than $100.00, or if the total property tax levied on an improvement on leased land is less than $100.00, it shall be paid in full on or before January 31. 
e.  Payments. 
1.  Payments made on or before January 31 shall be made to the county treasurer. 
2.  Personal property payments shall be made to the city clerk-treasurer after January 31. 
3.  All other payments shall be made to the county treasurer. 
(Code 1997, § 3.01; Am. #373; Rep. & Recr. # 696 )  
Sec. 46-2. - Special assessments. 
(a)  Payment in installments. 
(1)  Whenever any special assessments shall be levied to defray the cost of any public improvement, such special assessments may be paid in annual installments of not more than ten in number as determined by the city council. 
(2)  The first installment shall include a proportionate part of the principal of the special assessment determined by the number of installments, together with interest at the rate determined by the city council. Such interest rate shall be computed for a period of one year from the date of the notice hereinafter provided for, and each subsequent installment shall include a like proportion of the principal and one year's interest upon the unpaid portion of such assessment. 
(3)  The first installment shall be entered in the first tax roll prepared after the installments shall have been determined as a special tax on the property upon which the special assessment was levied, and thereafter this tax shall be treated in all respects as any other city tax. One of the subsequent installments shall be entered in a like manner and with like effect in each of the annual tax rolls thereafter until all are levied. 
(4)  If any installment so entered in the tax roll shall not be paid to the city treasurer with the other taxes, it shall be returned to the county as delinquent and accepted and collected by the county in the same manner as delinquent general taxes on real estate. 
(b)  Deferred assessments. 
(1)  The city council has made the following finding: In the interest of the public health, welfare and safety, it is often necessary to construct certain public improvements in areas which are undeveloped or outside the territorial limits of the city. 
(2)  The city council may defer the due date of any special assessment levied against property abutting or benefited by a public improvement, which abutting property is undeveloped or outside the territorial limits of the city. Such special assessment must be paid, however, within ten years of the date of the resolution making the levy, unless the city council permits additional time by allowing payment of the assessment in installments, in which case the assessments shall be paid within the time prescribed by the resolution permitting installment payments. 
(3)  If the city council defers the due date of special assessments under this section, it shall make an annual interest charge, the rate thereof to be set by the city council, which charge shall be added to the total assessment for each full year of deferment. 
(4)  Owners of property for which a special assessment has been deferred under this section shall not have use of the improvement until: 
a.  The amount of the deferred assessment, including interest due thereon, is paid in full to the city; or 
b.  Such an owner desiring to make use of the improvement shall enter into an agreement with the city to pay the assessment plus accrued interest, plus future interest over a stipulated period of time in equal installments of principal plus variable installments of interest as determined by the city council, except that, where approved by the city council, only that portion of the total amount of deferred assessment shall be collected as it applies to the portion of the land being developed. 
(5)  Any special assessment deferred under this section shall be a lien against the property assessed from the date of the resolution making the levy. 
(6)  Whenever the due date of a special assessment shall be deferred under this section, a notice shall be published in the official paper substantially as follows: 
DEFERRED ASSESSMENT NOTICE 
Notice is hereby given that the special assessments for improvement of (describe the improvement) have been determined as to each parcel of real estate affected thereby, and a statement of the same is on file with the City Clerk-Treasurer. It is proposed to defer payment of the same with interest thereon (here insert the percent per annum). 
(c)  Wis. Stats. ch. 66 adopted. The provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes relating to street improvements, laying of sanitary sewers, water mains, stormwater sewers, paving and any other public improvement, and providing for the costs of installing and constructing the same and the manner of levying special assessments against the property benefited thereby, are hereby adopted for the city and shall be in force and effect as ordinances of the city as if fully set forth herein, except that wherever such statute provides for the giving of notice in addition to the posting and publication of notice, as provided in the statutes, personal notice shall be given by mailing such notice to each interested person whose post office address is known or can, with reasonable diligence, be ascertained at least ten days before the hearing or proceeding specified in the notice. 
(d)  Alternate procedure. 
(1)  In addition to other methods provided by law, special assessments for any public work or improvement, or any current service, may be levied in accordance with the provisions of this subsection (d). 
(2)  Whenever the city council shall determine that any public work or improvement, or any current service, shall be financed in whole or in part by special assessments levied under this section, it shall adopt a resolution specifying this intention and the time, either before or after completion of the work or improvement, when the amount of the assessments will be determined and levied, the number of annual installments, if any, in which assessments may be paid, the rate of interest to be charged on the unpaid balance and the terms on which any of the assessments may be deferred while no use of the improvement is made in connection with the property. 
(3)  The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0703 shall apply to special assessments levied under this section except that, when the city council determines by resolution that the hearing on the assessments be held subsequent to the completion of the work or improvement or the rendering of the service, the report required by Wis. Stats. § 66.0703(4) shall contain a statement of the final cost of the work, service or improvement in lieu of an estimate of the cost. 
(4)  Notice of the time and place of the public hearing on any special assessment proposed to be levied and notice of the final assessment and terms of payment thereof shall be given in the manner prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 66.0703(10), and subsection (c) of this section. 
(5)  Any special assessment levied under this section shall be a lien against the property assessed from the date of the final resolution of the city council determining the amount of the levy. 
(6)  Any person against whose property a special assessment is levied under this section may appeal therefrom in the manner prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 66.0703(12), within 40 days of the date of the final determination of the city council. 
(Code 1997, § 3.10; Cr. #126; Cr. #178; Rep. & Recr. #696 )  
Sec. 46-3. - Room tax rates; commission created. 
(a)  Purpose. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.06015, for the privilege of furnishing at retail rooms or lodging to transients by hotel keepers, motel operators and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required for use of the accommodations, a room tax is hereby imposed upon retailers at the rate of eight percent of the gross receipts for the lease or rental of such accommodations, rooms or lodging within the city, effective January 1, 1998. 
(b)  City promotion and tourism commission created. A city promotion and tourism commission ("commission") is hereby created. The commission shall consist of six voting members and one city council representative serving in an ex officio capacity. Each member shall be appointed by the mayor and shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the common council who are present for the vote. In addition, the mayor shall appoint one alternate member of the commission, who shall act with full power only when a member of the board refuses to vote because of interest or when a regular member is absent. Such alternate members shall be designated alternate. Any vacancy occurring on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member involved by appointment and confirmation as provided above. Commission members shall serve one-year terms and may be reappointed. Members shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The commission shall include a representative from the state hotel and motel industry. The commission shall meet regularly, and, from among its members, it shall elect a chairperson, a vice chairperson and a secretary. 
(c)  Definitions. In this section, "transient," "hotel," and "motel" have the meanings in Wis. Stats. § 77.52(2)(a)1. 
(d)  Exempt from selective sales tax. The room tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by Wis. Stats. § 77.52(2)(a)1. 
(e)  Reports. Each retailer engaged in furnishing such accommodations, rooms or lodging as defined in this section shall submit a quarterly report to the treasurer's office showing the gross receipts from furnishing such accommodations, rooms, or lodging and a copy of his/her state sales tax report for such business, along with the effective percentage tax for the gross receipts as reported, but not later than 30 days from the end of each calendar quarter for the receipts of that past calendar quarter. 
(f)  Distribution and use of room tax. Room tax shall be collected by the city in accordance with this section and Wis. Stats. § 66.0615. The city shall retain the maximum amount of room tax allowed by state statute for general purposes and the remainder of the room tax shall be forwarded to the city promotion and tourism commission ("commission"). The commission shall use such funds for the purpose of tourism, promotion and development. As used herein, the term "tourism, promotion and development" means any of the following that are significantly used by transient tourists and reasonably likely to generate paid overnight stays at any establishment required to collect and remit to the city the room tax established by this section: 
(1)  Marketing projects, including advertising media buys, creation and distribution of printed or electronic promotional tourist materials, or efforts to recruit conventions, sporting events, or motor coach groups. 
(2)  Transient tourist informational services. 
(3)  Tangible municipal development, including a convention center. 
The commission shall submit to the city council annually a detailed report of the amount of room tax revenues received by the commission and the purpose or purposes for which the revenues were spent. The report shall include such information as may be required by the city, from time to time, so as to allow the city to submit all reports and information necessary to complete and submit timely filings required by the department of revenue or any other state agency charged with the responsibility of administering and regulating the collection and use of room tax revenues. 
(g)  Unpaid taxes. All unpaid taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 1½ percent per month from the due date of the return. Failure to pay the tax or delinquent payment of such taxes shall be subject to a $50.00 late filing penalty in addition to the interest imposed by this section. 
(h)  Liability. If any person liable for any amount of tax under this section sells his/her business or stock of goods or goods or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall be responsible for unpaid tax due under this section. 
(i)  False or fraudulent return. If a false or fraudulent return is filed with the intent in either case to defeat or evade the tax imposed by this section, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be paid in addition to the tax interest and late filing penalty. 
(Code 1997, § 3.12; Cr. #195; Recr. #424; Am. #572; #609; Rep. & Recr. #696 ; Rep. & Rec. 735 ) 
( Ord. No. 747 , §§ 3, 4, 8-20-2018) 
Note— Subsection (a) of this section was amended by Ord. #347; subsection (e) of this section was amended by MCC 1995.  
Sec. 46-4. - Impact fees; imposition and effective date of fees; effective February 25, 2000. 
(a)  Fees generally. The following fees shall be paid prior to issuance of a zoning or building permit for any single family residential structure, any residential structure having in excess of one dwelling, and any principal structure intended or capable of human occupancy for non-residential purposes. The amount of fee and the categories of public facilities for which the fee is created shall be adopted from time to time by the council and kept on file by the city clerk-treasurer. 
(b)  Adjustments. 
(1)  Impact fees shall be reviewed annually to determine adjustments deemed necessary by the common council to reflect changes in the net capital value of facilities and changes in the municipal debt and any other relevant change of circumstances. The date for review shall be correlated to the issuance of the annual "statement of values" as part of the State of Wisconsin Local Government Property Insurance Fund Program. All changes in impact fees shall be in effect as adopted by ordinance. 
(2)  In response to specific applications, the common council may provide an exception from or the reduction in the amount of impact fees on land development that provides low-cost housing, provided that the impact fee reduction or exemption does not result in increasing fees to other properties that are subject to the fees. 
(c)  Treatment of impact fee revenues. 
(1)  Impact fees collected pursuant to this section shall be accounted for separately from other funds of the city. Impact fee revenues and interest earned on impact fee revenues may be expended only for the capital facilities for which the impact fees were collected. 
(2)  Impact fees that are collected pursuant to this section but are not used within a reasonable length of time after they are collected to fund the capital facility costs for which they are collected shall be refunded to the then-current owner of the property with respect to which the impact fees were collected. 
The time periods indicated below are deemed by the city to constitute reasonable periods of time within which the fees that are collected may be retained by the city and used for the purposes for which they are collected: 
Capital Facility 	Time Period from Date of Collection Within Which Funds Will be Available for the Specified Use by the City 
Library facilities 	10 years 
Law enforcement facilities 	10 years 
Fire protection facilities 	10 years 
Recreation facilities 	10 years 
Recycling facilities 	10 years 
 
(d)  Appeals. Property owners or other parties who are aggrieved by the imposition of an impact fee or fees pursuant to this section may file an appeal of the amount of the impact fee, the collection, or use of the impact fee. The form of appeal shall be a written narrative stating the nature and reasons for the appeal and filed with the city clerk-treasurer. The appeal shall be noticed on the agenda of the next meeting of the common council and referred to those boards, committees, commissions, departments and advisors deemed necessary by the common council. Following receipt of reports from said committees, the common council shall provide an opportunity for the appellant to address the council. Following this, the council shall determine whether or not to sustain the appeal, in whole or in part, and shall grant relief appropriate to the circumstances. 
(Code 1997, § 3.13; Cr. #466; Am. #645; #672; Rep. & Recr. #696 )  
Chapter 48 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 48-1. - State traffic laws adopted. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the statutory provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 340 to 348 and § 941.01, describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of the state. 
(Code 1997, § 7.01; Rep. & Recr. # 699 )  
Sec. 48-2. - State standards for motor vehicle equipment adopted. 
(a)  Administrative regulations adopted. The administrative rules and regulations of Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 305, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this Code as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Limitation. A law enforcement officer may not stop or inspect a vehicle solely to determine compliance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 305. A law enforcement officer may issue a citation for a violation of Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 305, observed in the course of a stop or inspection made for other purposes, except that a law enforcement officer may not take a person into physical custody solely for a violation of Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 305. 
(c)  Noncompliance prohibited. No person shall operate or allow to be operated on any highway, street or alley within the city a vehicle that is not in conformity with the requirements of subsection (1) of the equipment provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 347, or Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 305. 
(d)  Owner's liability. Any owner of a vehicle not equipped as required by this section who knowingly causes or permits such vehicle to be operated on a highway is guilty of the violation the same as if he had operated the vehicle. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 347.04, relating to nonapplicability of demerit points shall apply to owners convicted of violation of this section. 
(e)  Penalty. Penalty for violation of any provision of this section, including the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 305, incorporated herein by reference, shall be as provided in section 1-4 together with the costs of prosecution and applicable penalty assessment. 
(Code 1997, § 7.015; Cr. #441-A)  
Sec. 48-3. - No through truck streets. 
All local streets within the city limits shall be "no through truck" streets. Through trucks having an empty weight limit of over six tons shall be permitted only on county and state highways, but trucks having an empty weight limit of six tons or less shall be exempt from restrictions on using city streets. 
(Code 1997, § 7.02)  
Sec. 48-4. - Speed limits. 
(a)  Speed limits established. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.11, the speed limits set forth in Wis. Stats. §§ 346.57 and 356.58 in fixed miles per hour are established as follows: 
(1)  Special speed restrictions for certain vehicles. In addition to complying with other speed restrictions imposed by law, no person may drive any vehicle equipped with metal tires or sold rubber tires at a speed in excess of 15 mph. This subsection does not apply to bicycles. 
(2)  Speed restrictions for special locations. 
a.  School zones: 15 miles per hour, when children are present. 
b.  Public alleys: 15 miles per hour. 
(3)  Vehicular travel on all streets, or portions of streets, within the City of Delafield shall be restricted to 25 miles per hour, unless otherwise posted and identified on the official traffic control map, or as identified in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(4)  Excepting vehicles described in Wis. Stats. § 346.58(1), 25 mph: 
a.  Hillside Dr., west of Austin Circle. 
b.  Hillside Ct., entire length of street. 
c.  Huntington Rd., entire length of street. 
d.  Evelyn Ave., entire length of street. 
e.  Johns St., entire length of street. 
f.  Glen Oak Ct., entire length of street. 
g.  Bahr Rd., entire length of street. 
h.  Main St., from Milwaukee Street westerly to its intersection with Wells Street. 
i.  Genesee St., from I-94 north to Exeter Street. 
j.  Genesee St., south from Church Street to I-94. 
k.  Campbell Trace, entire length of street. 
l.  S. Lapham Peak Rd., entire length of street within city limits. 
m.  Vettelson Rd., from Capitol Drive westerly to the east Chenequa Village limits. 
n.  Kettle Drive, entire length of street. 
o.  Kettle Court East, entire length of street. 
p.  Oakwood Dr., from Spanjer Street extended east to Genesee Street. 
q.  Golf Rd., from STH 83 to Milwaukee Street. 
r.  Milwaukee St., entire length of street. 
s.  Cushing Park Rd., north of Main Street. 
t.  West Shore Dr., the east-west segment only, from CTH C to the curve turning north. 
u.  North Shore Dr., entire length of street. 
(5)  Excepting vehicles described in Wis. Stats. § 346.58(1), 30 mph: 
a.  Golf Rd., entire length of street within city limits, east of STH 83. 
b.  Nagawicka Rd., entire length of street. 
c.  Nagawicka Rd. E., entire length of street. 
d.  Oakwood Rd., entire length of street (located between STH 83 and Keypoint Ln.). 
e.  Oakwood Dr., between Spanjer Street extended and the city limits. 
(6)  Excepting vehicles described in Wis. Stats. § 346.58(1), 35 mph: 
a.  Cushing Park Rd., south of Main Street. 
b.  Genesee St., as to northbound traffic only, between Exeter Street and the north city limits. 
c.  Genesee St., as to southbound traffic only, between the north city limits and Church Street. 
d.  Hillside Dr., for both eastbound and westbound traffic between County E and Austin Circle. 
e.  Indian Spring Dr., the entire length of street. 
f.  Main St., from its intersection with Wells St. to the west city limits. 
g.  Mill Rd., entire length of street. 
h.  Mission Ave., entire length of street within the city limits. 
i.  Mission Rd., entire length of street. 
j.  Nashotah Rd., entire length within the city limits. 
k.  STH 83, from north of Golf Road to the southern city limits. 
(7)  Excepting vehicles described in Wis. Stats. § 346.58(1), 45 mph: 
a.  STH 83, from the bridge over Vettelson Road to north of Golf Road. 
b.  Vettelson Rd., from the Chenequa Village limits on the east to the west city limits. 
c.  CTH C, south of I-94. 
(8)  Excepting vehicles described in Wis. Stats. § 346.58(1), 15 mph: 
a.  Heritage Dr., entire length of street. 
b.  West Shore Dr., the north-south segment only, inclusive of the curves on the north and south ends. 
(b)  School zones. The following named streets on and about the grounds of St. John's Military Academy are hereby designated school zones: 
(1)  Farrand Lane, Church Street, Exeter Street, Smythe Lane, St. John's Road, Spanjer Street and that portion of Genesee Street between Exeter Street and Anderson Drive. 
(2)  Whenever children are present on or about any of such streets, or on or about the sidewalk, play, camp or recreation areas adjacent thereto, no person shall operate a motor vehicle on any of such streets at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(3)  Church Street is hereby designated as a two-way street, with traffic flow going both east and west. 
(4)  That portion of Farrand Lane between St. John's Road and Church Street is hereby designated as a two-way street, with traffic flow going both north and south. Parallel parking, as much as is practicable, shall be permitted on the east side of Farrand Lane. 
(5)  The department of public works of the city shall erect and maintain sufficient appropriate signs to inform the public of the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Stop signs. Stop signs shall be placed on Nagawicka Street midway between Milwaukee Street and Main Street. 
(d)  Yield signs. At the intersection of Indian Spring Drive and South Lapham Peak Road. 
(e)  Dead end signs. At the intersection of Indian Springs Drive and South Genesee Street. 
(Code 1997, § 7.03; Rep. & Recr. #662; Am. #699 )  
Sec. 48-5. - Parking regulations. 
(a)  Exemptions. Exempted from these provisions shall be authorized emergency vehicles, delivery vehicles while their operators are actually and temporarily engaged in making deliveries to abutting premises and temporarily and accidentally disabled vehicles during the time actually and reasonably required to repair and remove the same. The burden of proving such exempting circumstances shall be upon the owner or operator. 
(b)  Definitions. Whenever "intersection" is used herein, it shall refer to the intersection of the centerlines of the intersecting streets concerned, and distances specified from such intersection shall be measured along the centerline of the appropriate street. Whenever parking is prohibited, limited or regulated herein by reference to any such distances, the area limited shall be determined by lines running through such measured points at right angles to the centerline to the side of the street or highway concerned. 
(c)  Parking on or about city hall. 
(1)  No person shall, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day, park any motor vehicle, trailer, wagon, or other conveyance upon, or in the roadside, curb, or shoulder area immediately in front of the tract of land occupied by the city hall for any period of time exceeding three hours consecutively. 
(2)  Persons actually and necessarily engaged in business with, consulting with, or in attendance upon any city officer, board, council, or public meeting, at the city hall shall, during the period of such consultation, attendance or meeting, be exempt from the provisions hereof; but such fact shall be deemed to constitute matter of affirmative defense to any charge of violation hereof, and the burden of providing the same shall be on the defendant. 
(3)  There shall be erected and maintained, at not less than two appropriate places upon such area of traffic limitation, proper signs warning of the general parking limitation at such place. 
(4)  Any vehicle parked or left standing upon a highway, street or alley or other public grounds in violation of any of these provisions is declared to be a hazard to traffic and public safety. Such vehicle shall be removed by the operator, upon request of any police officer, to a position where parking, stopping or standing is not prohibited. Any police officer after issuing a citation for illegal parking, stopping or standing of an unattended vehicle in violation of this Code is authorized to remove such vehicle to a position where parking is not prohibited. The officer may order a motor carrier holding a permit to perform vehicle towing services, a licensed motor vehicle salvage dealer or a licensed motor vehicle dealer who performs vehicle towing services to remove and store such vehicle in any storage garage or rental parking grounds or any facility of the person providing the towing services. In addition, the owner or operator of a vehicle so removed shall pay the cost of towing and storage. 
(d)  Overnight parking. 
(1)  Between November 1 and May 1 following, no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, trailer, wagon or piece of machinery upon any street, municipal parking lot or any other generally available public parking area of the city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  Physicians on emergency call shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection (d). 
(3)  Whenever any snowfall shall accumulate to the extent of four inches or more in any 24-hour period, and within a period of 12 hours after such snowfall terminates, no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, trailer, wagon, or piece of machinery upon any street, municipal parking lot or any other generally available public parking area of the city for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m., and between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
Vehicles parked in violation of this subsection are subject to being removed from the street, municipal parking lot, or public parking area by a towing service as provided in subsection (c)(4) of this section. 
(4)  The registered owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for violation and the fact that the owner was not the driver shall not be a defense. 
(5)  No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, trailer, wagon or piece of machinery upon any municipal parking lot of the city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless specifically permitted by signage posted by the chief of police, with the assistance of the department of public works. 
(6)  No vehicles in excess of 8,000-pound GVW shall be allowed upon any municipal parking lot. 
(7)  Perpendicular parking on the east side of Canal Street, for the distance north of the point of 75 feet north of Milwaukee Street, is exempt from the provisions of this section except that between November 1 and May 1 following, no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, trailer, wagon or piece of machinery upon this designated parking area between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(8)  Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to being removed by a towing service as provided in subsection (c)(4) of this section. 
(e)  Parking prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall at any time park or leave standing any automobile or other vehicle, wagon, trailer or other conveyance whatever, either wholly or partly, upon or within the limits of any of the "no parking" zones on streets, roads or ways as identified on the official traffic map. 
(2)  No vehicles in excess of 8,000-pound gross vehicle weight shall be allowed upon any municipal parking lot. 
(3)  Exempted from these provisions shall be authorized emergency vehicles, delivery vehicles while their operators are actually and temporarily engaged in making deliveries to abutting premises and temporarily and accidentally disabled vehicles during the time actually and reasonably required to repair and remove the same. The burden of proving such exempting circumstances shall be upon the owner or operator. 
(4)  No person shall, at any time, park any vehicle in a loading zone on the south side of Milwaukee Street within 90 feet east of its intersection with Genesee Street; nor upon the north side of Milwaukee Street within 70 feet of such intersection. 
(5)  Whenever "intersection" is used herein, it shall refer to the intersection of the centerlines of the intersecting streets concerned, and distances specified from such intersection shall be measured along the centerline of the appropriate street. Whenever parking is prohibited, limited or regulated herein by reference to any such distances, the area limited shall be determined by lines running through such measured points at right angles to the centerline to the side of the street or highway concerned. 
(f)  Angled and perpendicular parking required. On all streets where parking is permitted, no person shall park any vehicle except in the manner described in Wis. Stats. § 346.54, as lawful parallel parking except, however, the following streets and portions of streets where angle parking as defined in such section shall be permitted: 
(1)  The south side of Milwaukee Street from a point 90 feet east of its intersection with Genesee Street east to its intersection with Onedia Street. The angle parking for the first two parking spaces immediately west of Onedia Street on the south side of Milwaukee Street shall be restricted to no sport utility vehicle (SUV), truck or van parking. Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to being removed by a towing service as provided in subsection (c)(4) of this section. 
(2)  Canal Street: The entire east side of the street, between Milwaukee Street and Mill Street, shall be perpendicular parking. 
(3)  Canal Street: The west side of the street, from Mill Street to a point 120 feet south, shall be perpendicular parking. 
(4)  Mill Street: The south side of the street, from Canal Street to a point 100 feet west, shall be angled parking. 
(5)  Oneida Street: Both sides of the street, from Main Street to a point 90 feet north, shall be perpendicular parking. 
(6)  Oneida Street: The entire east side of the street, between Wells Street and Main Street, shall be perpendicular parking. 
(7)  Wells Street: The north side of the street, from a point 60 feet east of Oneida Street to a point 150 feet further east, shall be perpendicular parking. 
(8)  Main Street: North side of the street, between Genesee Street and Oneida Streets, shall be angled parking. 
(9)  Main Street: South side of the street, from Oneida Street to a point 130 feet east, shall be perpendicular parking. 
(10)  Division Street: North and south sides of the street, between Lake Street and Bleeker Street, shall be angled parking. 
(11)  Pamelia Street: North and south sides of the street, for the entire length of the street, shall be perpendicular parking. 
(12)  Wells Street: The north side of the street, between Dopkins Street and Butler Street, shall be perpendicular parking. 
(13)  Wells Street: North side of the street, from Dopkins Street to a point 200 feet east, shall be perpendicular parking. 
(14)  Dopkins Street: East side of the street, from Wells Street to a point 160 feet north, shall be perpendicular parking. 
(15)  Exeter Street: The south side of the street, from Williams Street to a point 220 feet west, shall be perpendicular parking. 
(16)  St. John's Road: South side of the street, from Farrand Street to a point 200 feet west, shall be angled parking. 
(17)  Farrand Lane: The entire west side of street, between St. John's Road and Church Street; and on the east side from St. John's Road to a point 120 feet south shall be angled parking. 
(g)  No parking, standing or stopping. 
(1)  No parking, standing or stopping between east and west boundaries of Firemen's Park on the north side of Main Street. 
(2)  No parking, standing or stopping between signs on the south side of Main Street from Lapham Peak Road to Nagawicka Street. 
(3)  No parking, standing or stopping on either side of the entire length of Heritage Drive. 
(h)  Parking against traffic prohibited. 
(1)  Upon a street in the city where traffic is permitted to move in both directions simultaneously and where angle parking is not clearly designated by official traffic signs or markers, a vehicle must be parked parallel to the edge of the street, heading in the direction of traffic on the right side of the street. 
(2)  The registered owner of the vehicle violating the terms of this subsection (h) shall be responsible for the violation. The fact that such owner was not the driver of the vehicle shall not be a defense. 
(i)  Bleeker Street parking lot regulated. 
(1)  Nor person not a resident of the City of Delafield or the Village of Nashotah, and who does not display a window sticker issued in accordance with subsection (i)(2) of this section, may park any motor vehicle, trailer, wagon, or other conveyance upon or in the Bleeker Street parking lot. 
(2)  No resident of the City of Delafield or the Village of Nashotah shall park in the Bleeker Street parking lot without first having obtained an annual parking permit from the city clerk. The annual parking permit shall be a window sticker which shall be affixed to the inside lower left-hand corner of the windshield of any motor vehicle parked in such lot. The city clerk may issue up to three window stickers for each residence or household for which an annual parking permit is issued. Before approving any annual parking permit and issuing any window sticker, the applicant requesting issuance of an annual parking permit, and the owner of each motor vehicle for which a window sticker is being requested must provide proof that the applicant and/or owner of the motor vehicle is a resident of the City of Delafield or the Village of Nashotah. Proof of residency may be established by providing a driver's license, tax bill, rental agreement or motor vehicle registration certificate. If the applicant or owner of the motor vehicle is unable to provide documentation establishing proof of residency, as provided in this subsection, the applicant and/or owner of the motor vehicle may request the lake welfare committee to determine that he/she is a resident of the City of Delafield or the Village of Nashotah. The fee for each window sticker shall be determined by resolution as adopted by the common council from time to time. 
(3)  Prohibited practices. No person, firm, partnership or corporation or any officer, member, agent, servant, or employee of any firm, partnership or corporation shall park any vehicle of any kind or description in the Bleeker Street parking lot when such vehicle is displaying a forged, counterfeited or duplicated City of Delafield Bleeker Street parking lot permit, any object mimicking the appearance of such a permit, or any such permit which has been issued for a vehicle other than the one upon which it is displayed. 
(4)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subsection (l) shall forfeit to the city the sum of $70.00 for each such violation, provided such forfeiture is paid within 72 hours, or the sum of $100.00 if payment of forfeiture is not made within 72 hours, plus the cost of prosecution. 
(j)  Parking of heavy vehicles, trucks and heavy equipment in residential districts. No operator, owner or person having control of any of the following described vehicles: motor truck as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(34), which is 24 feet or more in length, truck tractor as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(73), motor bus as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(31), school bus as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(56), semitrailer as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(57), road machinery as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(52), or any vehicle of a type that is registered as a commercial vehicle under the quarterly or consecutive monthly registration systems per Wis. Stats. §§ 341.30(1)(a), (c), (d), (e) to 341.305(2)(a), (b), (c), shall park any such vehicle on any public street, alley or parking lot in a residential district, except when loading, unloading or rendering service to a property on said public street or alley, or any adjacent street or alley. Residential districts include all areas zoned for residential use on the official zoning map of the City of Delafield. 
(k)  Parking trailers prohibited. 
(1)  Parking of trailers, whether attached or detached, from motor vehicles is prohibited on all city streets and public areas, unless in an area designated for trailer parking. This subsection shall not apply to temporary parking for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading or in receiving or discharging passengers and while attended so it can be moved in case of emergency or to avoid obstruction of traffic. 
(2)  Exception. Subsection (k)(1) of this section shall not apply to temporary parking of trailers and other equipment/vehicles being utilized by city police department personnel for public safety purposes, department of public works personnel in the performance or maintenance of public facilities or municipal service functions and lake country fire and rescue department personnel for fire, rescue and EMS services. 
(3)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this subsection (k) shall forfeit to the city the sum of $70.00 for each such violation, provided such forfeiture is paid within 72 hours, or the sum of $100.00 if payment of forfeiture is not made within 72 hours, plus the cost of prosecution. 
(l)  Overnight parking in city parks. 
(1)  Restricted. No person shall, from one-half hour after sunset until 7:00 a.m. on any day, park or leave standing any vehicle, trailer, wagon or piece of machinery upon any city park or parking lot designated for use of any city park. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
a.  The city council may, upon written application of any group desiring to organize an athletic, recreational or social function, grant a permit waiving the restrictions of subsection (l)(1) of this section for a specified number of days. 
b.  Repealed. 
(3)  Signs. There shall be erected and maintained at each such area of traffic limitation proper signs warning of the parking limitation at such place. 
(4)  Towaway. 
a.  Any vehicle parked or left standing within the boundaries of any city park or parking lot designated for use of any city park in violation of any of the provisions of this subsection (l) is declared to be a hazard to traffic and public safety. Such vehicle shall be removed by the operator, upon request of any police officer, to a position where parking is not prohibited. 
b.  Any police officer, after issuing a citation for illegal parking of an unattended vehicle in violation of this subsection (l), is authorized to remove such vehicle to a position where parking is not prohibited. The officer may order a motor carrier holding a permit to perform vehicle towing services, a licensed motor vehicle salvage dealer or a licensed motor vehicle dealer who performs vehicle towing services to remove and store such vehicle in any storage garage, rental parking grounds or any facility of the person providing the towing services. In addition, the owner or operator of a vehicle, trailer, wagon or piece of machinery so removed shall pay the cost of towing and storage. 
(m)  Temporary parking prohibition. 
(1)  Notwithstanding the lack of specific parking prohibition, the chief of police has the authority to erect temporary no parking signs on any city street or part thereof whenever it is necessary to prohibit parking on any city street or part thereof in order to maintain adequate available roadway width. 
(2)  The chief of police, with the assistance of the department of public works, shall post such streets or parts thereof with signs bearing the words "No Parking-Temporary." 
(3)  No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle upon any city street or part thereof in violation of such signs. 
(Code 1997, § 7.04; Cr. #281; Cr. #298; Renum. #461; Am. #490; #502; #549; Rep. & Recr. #699 ; Rep. & Recr. # 739 )  
Sec. 48-6. - Snowmobiles. 
(a)  State snowmobile laws adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles in the following enumerated sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Acts required to be performed or prohibited by such statutes are required or prohibited by this section. 
(1)  350.01 (Definitions). 
(2)  350.02 (Operation of Snowmobiles on or in Vicinity of Highway). 
(3)  350.03 (Right-of-Way). 
(4)  350.04 (Snowmobile Races, Derbies and Routes). 
(5)  350.045 (Public Utility Exemption). 
(6)  350.047 (Local Ordinance to be Filed). 
(7)  350.05 (Operation by Youthful Operators Restricted). 
(8)  350.055 (Safety Certification Program Established). 
(9)  350.07 (Driving Animals). 
(10)  350.08 (Owner Permitting Operation). 
(11)  350.09 (Head Lamps, Tail Lamps and Brakes). 
(12)  350.10 (Miscellaneous Provisions for Snowmobile Operation). 
(13)  350.12 (Registration of Snowmobiles). 
(14)  350.13 (Uniform Trail Signs and Standards). 
(15)  350.15 (Accidents and Accident Reports). 
(16)  350.17 (Enforcement). 
(17)  350.18 (Local Ordinances). 
(18)  350.19 (Liability of Land Owners). 
(b)  Applicability of rules of the road to snowmobiles. The operator of a snowmobile upon a roadway shall, in addition to the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 350, be subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 346.04, 346.11, 346.14(1), 346.18, 346.19, 346.20, 346.21, 346.26, 346.27, 346.33, 346.35, 346.37, 346.39, 346.40, 346.44, 346.46, 346.47, 346.48, 346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52, 346.53, 346.54, 346.55, 346.87, 346.88, 346.89, 346.90, 346.91, 346.92(1) and 346.94(1), (6), (6m) and (9). 
(c)  Permitting operation by improper persons prohibited. No owner or person having charge or control of a snowmobile shall knowingly authorize or permit any person to operate such snowmobile who is incapable by reason of age, physical or mental disability, or is under the influence of an intoxicating liquor, fermented malt beverage or a controlled substance. 
(d)  Intoxicated snowmobiling. Wis. Stats. §§ 350.101 through 35.101 shall apply to the operation of a snowmobile anywhere within the city. 
(e)  Written consent of owner required. The consent required under Wis. Stats. § 350.10(6), (11), (12) and (13) shall be written consent dated and limited to the year in which the consent is given. If the property is owned or leased by more than one person, the consent of each shall be obtained. 
(f)  Special local regulations. 
(1)  Hours of operation. No person shall operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday through Friday night, or between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on any Saturday and Sunday night. Snowmobile operation on holidays shall be during those hours permitted on weekends when such holiday is a weekday. 
(2)  Lake operation. In addition to compliance with provisions of Wis. Stats. § 350.10(9), adopted by reference under subsection (a) of this section, operation of snowmobiles on ice of Lake Nagawicka shall also be governed by the following regulations: 
a.  Except for the purpose of entering or leaving the lake, snowmobile operation is prohibited within 200 feet of the shores of Lake Nagawicka after 9:00 p.m. 
b.  No snowmobile shall be operated anywhere on Lake Nagawicka between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday or between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Saturdays and Sundays. 
(3)  Snowmobile trails. The following routes are designated as approved snowmobile trails within the city: 
a.  Mariner Drive, from its beginning at State Trunk Highway 83 to the Waukesha County Park lagoon where it connects to the Wales Trail. 
b.  The south side of Vettelson Road starting on the east side of Nagawicka Road and proceeding easterly to a point at which Vettelson Road crosses the railroad tracks; and in the event that there is not sufficient city-owned right-of-way on the south side of the pavement of Vettelson Road that such trail be established on the north side of Vettelson Road; and that permission shall be granted from year to year. 
c.  That a snowmobile trail presently established running from the Nagawicka Road along Vettelson Road westerly from Nagawicka Road and on the south side of Vettelson Road to the Village of Nashotah boundary shall be approved each year by the council with the understanding that the snowmobile club responsible shall make every effort to straighten the trail, going over private property and get the permission of the property owner to cross his property with their trail. 
d.  Snowmobiles shall be operated on all trails in single file. 
(Code 1997, § 7.05; Am. #699 )  
Sec. 48-7. - Official traffic signs and signals. 
(a)  Chief of police responsible. The director of public works shall procure, erect and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices giving notice of the provisions of this chapter as required by state law. Signs shall be erected in such locations and in such manner as the chief of police determines shall best effect the purposes of this chapter and give adequate warning to users of the streets and highways. 
(b)  Removal of unofficial signs and signals. The director of public works shall have the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 349.09 and shall order the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this chapter or Wis. Stats. § 346.41. Any charge imposed on any premises for removal of an illegal sign, signal or device shall be reported to the chief of police for his review and certification. 
(Code 1997, § 7.06; Am. # 699 )  
Sec. 48-8. - Unnecessary noise prohibited. 
No person shall make unnecessary and annoying noise with a motor vehicle by squealing tires, excessive acceleration of engine or by emitting unnecessary and loud muffler noises. 
(Code 1997, § 7.07)  
Sec. 48-9. - School bus warning lights regulated. 
School bus operators shall use flashing red warning lights in a business or residence district when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at a location at which there are no traffic signals, and such persons shall cross the street or highway before being loaded or after being unloaded. 
(Code 1997, § 7.08; Cr. #271)  
Sec. 48-10. - Operating vehicle within 50 feet of snowplow prohibited. 
No driver shall operate a motor vehicle within 50 feet of the rear of a municipal truck while the truck is engaged in snowplowing activity. 
(Code 1997, § 7.09; Cr. #312)  
Sec. 48-11. - Weight limits. 
(a)  Special and seasonal weight limits. Wis. Stats. § 349.16 is hereby adopted by reference and as referenced on the special and seasonal weight limit map on file with the city clerk. 
(b)  Exemption of vehicles carrying certain commodities. Under Wis. Stats. § 349.16(3), vehicles carrying the following commodities are exempt from the special weight limits imposed by this section: 
(1)  Milk from dairy farms. 
(2)  Pupils and students to and from schools. 
(3)  Garbage, rubbish or other refuse. 
(4)  Persons and property for the purpose of protection of person and property. 
(5)  Personal property owned by the city or carrying persons acting as agents of the city within the scope of their duties. 
(6)  Personal property owned by public utilities or carrying persons acting as agents of the public utilities within the scope of their duties in an emergency only. 
(7)  Farm tractors and farm implements carrying persons or commodities directly related to farming activities. 
(8)  The Bridges Library System delivery truck shall also be exempt from the special and seasonal weight limits. 
(c)  Increased weight limits for vehicles carrying certain commodities. Vehicles carrying the following commodities in an emergency shall carry no more than one-half load: 
(1)  Vehicles carrying material loaded on the vehicle directly from a septic tank or holding tank. 
(2)  Vehicles carrying fuel. 
(3)  Vehicles carrying livestock feed. 
(d)  Penalty and enforcement. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 348.21(3) shall apply to this section. 
(Code 1997, § 7.10; Cr. #338; Am. # 699 ) 
( Ord. No. 752 , §§ 1, 2, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 48-12. - Operation of motor vehicles on premises held out to the public. 
(a)  This section shall apply to all premises held out to the public for use of their motor vehicles, whether such premises are publicly or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for the use thereof. This section shall not apply to any street or highway. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on such premises: 
(1)  Across parking stalls indicated by painted lines. This section shall not prohibit entering and occupying a parking stall nor exiting the same, if the operator properly remains within the painted lines. 
(2)  In a manner commonly known as "spinning doughnuts," wherein the vehicle is driven rapidly in a tight radius. 
(3)  At a rapid or sudden acceleration. The squealing of tires or leaving of tire marks shall be evidence of rapid or sudden acceleration. 
(4)  The wrong way in a driving lane where such wrong way is indicated by painted arrow or by the entry angle of adjoining parking stalls or left of a marked centerline in a driving lane. 
(5)  Without stopping for a stop sign posted on such premises. The stop required hereunder shall be complete and of sufficient duration to allow adequate observation of the possible approach of other vehicles or pedestrians before proceeding with safety. A rolling stop or a momentary stop shall not comply with the provisions hereof. 
(6)  At a speed in excess of posted limits. 
(7)  At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard for the actual and potential hazards then existing. The speed of a vehicle shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any object, person, vehicle or other conveyance on such premises and in compliance with legal requirements and using due care. 
(8)  By backing, turning or otherwise maneuvering in an unsafe manner or without regard for the actual or potential hazards then existing. 
(c)  No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, temporarily or otherwise, upon the following designated areas of the premises: 
(1)  Any portion of such premises where and at the time when stopping or standing is prohibited by appropriate signs indicating the prohibition of any stopping or standing. 
(2)  Any portion of such premises marked as a fire lane. 
(3)  Except for a motor vehicle used by a physically disabled person as defined under Wis. Stats. § 346.503(1), any portion of such premises reserved by official traffic signs indicating the restriction for vehicles displaying special registration plates which designates the vehicle as a vehicle used by a physically disabled person. 
(Code 1997, § 7.11; Cr. #350)  
Sec. 48-13. - Motor vehicles; operation on public and private land. 
(a)  Application of section. This section is intended to regulate the operation of motor vehicles in areas where the state traffic laws and this chapter do not apply. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motor driven vehicle means any conveyance which is propelled by a mechanical power source whether or not capable of being licensed to be driven upon the public highways, except snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles which are regulated by other ordinances, and vehicles operated as maintenance vehicles. 
Owner means all persons or entities which possess any ownership or leasehold interest in a particular private parcel of land upon which motor driven vehicles as herein defined are presently being operated or are proposed to be operated. 
Written consent means any dated, written document which is limited to the calendar year in which it is given and which is signed by all persons or entities which possess any ownership or leasehold interest in a particular private parcel of land upon which motor driven vehicles as herein defined are presently being operated or are proposed to be operated. 
(c)  Excessive speed. No motor driven vehicle shall be operated on public or private land at a speed in excess of 25 miles per hour or in excess of a speed which creates a hazard to the person of the operator or to the peace, tranquility, person and property of others, whichever is less. 
(d)  Age of operation. No minor person under the age of 12 years shall operate any motor driven vehicle except on the premises upon which he resides unless he is under the direct supervision of an adult person over the age of 18 years who shall in all respects be responsible for the activities of said minor person. 
(e)  Operator to wear helmet. No person shall operate any motor driven vehicle on public or private land unless the operator's compartment is fully enclosed by a metal roof or roll cage or unless the operator is wearing a helmet which is designed to furnish adequate protection against head injury. A helmet shall be viewed as furnishing adequate protection within the terms of this section only for operators of motor driven vehicles with two wheels or those motor driven vehicles with more than two wheels which have a gross weight of 500 pounds or less. 
(f)  Trespass—Private. 
(1)  No person shall operate any motor driven vehicle upon private property upon which he does not reside or which he does not own, unless he has first received the specific written consent of all owners of said property. Any person apprehended operating any motor driven vehicle upon private property upon which he does not reside or which is not owned by him shall be presumed to be in violation of this section and such presumption shall be rebutted only by the prompt subsequent display of a written owner's consent which conforms to this provision. 
(2)  In the event a citation is issued and the recipient displays written consent by the private property owner before or in court, which complies with this section, then the case shall be dismissed without costs by the city. 
(3)  Any private property owner who wishes to give prior written consent to an operator of a motor driven vehicle to use his property may do so by filing a copy of same with the police department. In the event that such prior written consent is filed with the police department, then in that event only, any operation of motor driven vehicles upon property owned by the person who has filed such consent shall be treated within the terms of this chapter as being with the said owner's consent. 
(g)  Operation near buildings. No person shall operate any motor driven vehicle within 500 feet of any building or structure which is on public land or which is on private property upon which he does not reside or upon which he does not possess the written consent of the owner to operate a motor driven vehicle. In any event, no person shall operate a motor driven vehicle in such close proximity to a building or structure such as would pose a hazard to their person and to the peace, tranquility, person or property of others. 
(h)  Operation on public lands. No person shall operate any motor driven vehicle upon any public lands, including, but not limited to, highways, highway rights-of-way, streets, street rights-of-way, roadways, road rights-of-way, sidewalks, sidewalk rights-of-way, parklands, waysides, bridle paths, bicycle trails, drainage ditches or basins, unless the said area is specifically designated as an area that has been set aside for the operation of motor driven vehicles, or in the event that the area is a highway, highway right-of-way, street, street right-of-way, sidewalk, sidewalk right-of-way, roadway or road right-of-way then, in that event only, no person operating a motor driven vehicle shall cross the same unless he does so by the most direct route practicable, in a safe manner and so as to not disturb the peace, tranquility and property of others. Public land also includes any land owned by a government or a government agency where the state traffic laws in this chapter do not apply. 
(Code 1997, § 7.115; Cr. # 699 )  
Sec. 48-14. - Low-speed vehicles permitted. 
(a)  Definition. A "low-speed vehicle" (LSV) means a self-propelled motor vehicle that conforms to the definition and requirements as adopted in the federal motor vehicle safety standards for "low-speed vehicles" under 49 CFR 571.3(b) and 571.500. "Low-speed vehicle" does not include golf carts. 
(b)  Requirements. LSVs shall be four-wheeled and have a speed range of at least 20 mph and not more than 25 mph on a paved surface and have a gross vehicle weight at rest of less than 2,500 pounds. LSVs shall have: 
(1)  Head lamps. 
(2)  Front and rear turn signals. 
(3)  Stop lamps. 
(4)  Reflex reflectors: One red on each side as far to the rear as practicable, and one red on the rear (three total). 
(5)  An exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side, and either an exterior mirror on the passenger side or an interior rearview mirror. 
(6)  A parking brake. 
(7)  A windshield that conforms to the requirements of the federal motor vehicle safety standard on glazing materials (49 CFR 571.205). 
(8)  A vehicle identification number (VIN) that complies with federal law (49 CFR 565). 
(9)  A Type 1 or Type 2 seatbelt assembly conforming to 49 CFR 571.209 and federal motor vehicle safety standard No. 209 for each designated seating position. 
(10)  Meets the general test conditions under 49 CFR 571.50056. 
(c)  Permitted users of low-speed vehicles. To use a LSV on city streets, the operator must have a valid Wisconsin driver's license. 
(d)  Operation. Operation of a LSV within the City of Delafield is permitted on roadways and alleys located within the territorial boundaries of the City of Delafield, subject to the following prohibitions: 
(1)  Operation of a LSV is prohibited on any roadway with a speed limit greater than 35 mph. 
(2)  Operation of a LSV is prohibited on any municipal sidewalk or recreational trail. 
(3)  Operation of a LSV is prohibited within any municipal park, golf course, or recreational area except on a roadway or parking area routinely open to motor vehicle traffic. 
(4)  Headlamps must be on at all times during operation of a LSV on city streets. 
(e)  Operational requirements of low-speed vehicles. LSVs shall comply with all state and local traffic laws, including, but not limited to, this chapter, and owners and operators of LSVs shall be subject to citations and forfeitures for any violations. 
(f)  Registration. LSVs operated within the City of Delafield shall be registered with the Wisconsin department of transportation and shall display that registration in accordance with Wis. Stats. ch. 341. 
(g)  Enforcement. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in section 48-16. 
(h)  Severability. In any portion of this section or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the validity of this section as a whole, or any other provision herein and its application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Code 1997, § 7.12; Cr. #639)  
Sec. 48-15. - Bicycle regulations. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bicycle means every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals and having wheels any two of which are not less than 14 inches in diameter. 
Bicycle lane means that portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or other modes of travel where permitted under Wis. Stats. § 349.23(2)(a), and so designated by appropriate signs and markings. 
Bicycle way means any path or sidewalk or portion thereof designated for the use of bicycles. 
Bike route means any bicycle lane, bicycle way or highway which has been duly designated and which is identified by appropriate signs and markings. 
(b)  Rules of the road. 
(1)  Riding bicycle on bicycle lane. 
a.  Unless two-way traffic is authorized, every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle lane shall ride in the same direction in which vehicular traffic on the lane of the roadway nearest the bicycle lane is traveling. 
b.  Two-way traffic may be authorized on any portion of a roadway which it has set aside as a bicycle lane. Appropriate traffic signs shall be installed on all bicycle lanes open to two-way traffic. 
c.  1.  A person operating a bicycle may enter or leave a bicycle lane only at intersections or at driveways adjoining the bicycle lane. 
2.  A person may leave a bicycle lane at any point by dismounting from the bicycle and walking it out of the lane. A person may enter a bicycle lane at any point by walking his bicycle into the lane and then mounting it. 
d.  Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle lane shall exercise due care and give an audible signal when passing a bicycle rider proceeding in the same direction. 
e.  Every operator of a bicycle entering a bicycle lane shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles in the bicycle lane. Upon leaving a bicycle lane, the operator of a bicycle shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians. 
(2)  Riding bicycle on bicycle way. 
a.  Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle way shall: 
1.  Exercise due care and give an audible signal when passing a bicycle rider or a pedestrian proceeding in the same direction. 
2.  Obey each traffic signal or sign facing a roadway which runs parallel and adjacent to a bicycle way. 
b.  Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle way open to two-way traffic shall ride on the right side of the bicycle way. 
c.  Every operator of a bicycle entering a bicycle way shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles and pedestrians in the bicycle way. 
(3)  Riding bicycle on sidewalk. When bicycles are permitted on the sidewalk under Wis. Stats. § 346.94(1), every person operating a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall exercise due care and give an audible signal when passing a bicycle rider or pedestrian proceeding in the same direction. 
(4)  Riding bicycle on roadway. 
a.  Unless preparing to make a left turn, every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway carrying two-way traffic shall ride as near as practicable to the right edge of the unobstructed traveled roadway, including operators who are riding two abreast. On one-way roadways, the operator of the bicycle shall ride as near as practicable to the right edge or left edge of the unobstructed traveled roadway, including operators who are riding two abreast. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction, allowing a minimum of three feet between the bicycle and the vehicle. 
b.  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall ride single-file on all roadways which have center lines or lane lines indicated by painting or other markings. On roadways not divided by painted or other marked centerlines or lane lines, bicycle operators may ride two abreast. 
c.  Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway but moped riders shall use such path only if signs specifically indicate that use of the path is required for both bicycles and mopeds. 
d.  No person may operate a bicycle or moped upon a roadway where a sign is erected indicating that bicycle or moped riding is prohibited. 
e.  Every rider of a bicycle shall, upon entering on a highway, yield the right-of-way to motor vehicles. 
(5)  Special rules applicable to bicycles. Whenever a bicycle is operated upon a highway, bicycle lane or bicycle way the following rules apply: 
a.  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
b.  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
c.  No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the operator from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars. 
d.  No person riding a bicycle shall attach himself or his bicycle to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
e.  No person may ride a moped upon a bicycle way. 
(6)  Lamps and other equipment on bicycles. 
a.  No person may operate a bicycle upon a highway, bicycle lane or bicycle way during hours of darkness unless such bicycle is equipped with or the operator is wearing a lamp emitting a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front of such bicycle. Such bicycle shall also be equipped with a red reflector that has a diameter of at least two inches of surface area on the rear so mounted and maintained as to be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 500 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to but not in lieu of the red reflector. 
b.  No person may operate a bicycle upon a highway, bicycle lane or bicycle way unless it is equipped with a brake in good working condition, adequate to control the movement of and to stop the bicycle whenever necessary. 
c.  No bicycle may be equipped with nor may any person riding upon a bicycle use any siren or compression whistle. 
(7)  Use of controlled access highways, expressways and freeways. 
a.  No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from a controlled access highway, expressway or freeway, except through an opening provided for that purpose. 
b.  No pedestrian or person riding a bicycle or other non-motorized vehicle or person operating a power driven cycle or motor bicycle shall go upon any expressway or freeway when official signs have been erected prohibiting such person from using the expressway or freeway. 
(Code 1997, § 7.13; Cr. #706 )  
Sec. 48-16. - Penalty. 
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a forfeiture and penalty assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 757.07, a jail assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 53.46(1), plus any applicable fees prescribed in Wis. Stats. ch. 814. 
(1)  State forfeiture statutes. Any forfeiture for violation of the statutes adopted by reference in section 48-1 shall conform to the forfeiture permitted to be imposed for violation of such statutes in the uniform deposit and misdemeanor bail schedule of the Wisconsin Judicial Conference, including variations or increases for subsequent offenses, which schedule is adopted by reference. 
(2)  Local regulations. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the penalty for violation of sections 48-3 through 48-6 and 48-8 shall be as provided in section 1-4. 
(3)  Parking violations. 
	Forfeiture 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
346.51(1) 	Improper parking on/off roadway 	$30.00 	$300.00 
346.52(1) 	Stopping/standing in prohibited areas 	$20.00 	$40.00 
	Second conviction within one year 	$50.00 	$100.00 
346.52(2) 	Stopping/standing on highway by grade school 	$20.00 	$40.00 
	Second conviction within one year 	$50.00 	$100.00 
346.53 	Parking/standing where prohibited 	$20.00 	$40.00 
	Second conviction within one year 	$50.00 	$100.00 
346.54 	Improper parking/standing of vehicle 	$20.00 	$40.00 
	Second conviction within one year 	$50.00 	$100.00 
346.55(1) 	Parking on left side of highway 	$30.00 	$300.00 
346.55(2) 	Parking vehicle for sale on highway 	$30.00 	$300.00 
346.55(3) 	Parking on posted private property 	$20.00 	$40.00 
	Second conviction within one year 	$50.00 	$100.00 
 
(Code 1997, § 7.20; Am. MSC '91; Am. MSC '92; Rep. & Recr. #144; # 699 )  
Sec. 48-17. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement procedure. This chapter shall be enforced according to Wis. Stats. §§ 23.33, 66.0114, 345.11 to 345.61, and 350.17 and ch. 800, as amended, revised and renumbered from time to time. 
(b)  Deposit. 
(1)  Any person arrested for a violation of this chapter may make a deposit of money as directed by the arresting officer at the police station or at the office of the clerk of court or by mailing the deposit to such places. The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall notify the arrested person, orally or in writing, that: 
a.  If the person makes a deposit for a violation of a traffic regulation, he need not appear in court at the time fixed in the citation and will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture and penalty assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 757.07, a jail assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 53.46(1), plus any applicable fees prescribed in Wis. Stats. ch. 814, not to exceed the amount of the deposit that the court may accept as provided in Wis. Stats. § 345.37. 
b.  If the person fails to make a deposit for a violation of a traffic regulation or appear in court at the time fixed in the citation, the court may enter a default judgment finding the person guilty of the offense or issue a warrant for his arrest. 
(2)  The amount of the deposit shall be determined in accordance with the deposit schedule established by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference and shall include the penalty assessment established under Wis. Stats. § 757.07, a jail assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 53.46(1), and court costs. If a deposit schedule has not been established, the arresting officer shall require the alleged offender to deposit the forfeiture established by the municipal judge, which shall include the penalty assessment established under Wis. Stats. § 757.07. Deposits for nonmoving violations shall not include the penalty assessment. 
(3)  The officer or clerk receiving payment in person shall issue the arrested person a receipt therefor as required by Wis. Stats. § 345.26(3)(b). 
(c)  Petition to reopen judgment. Whenever a person has been convicted in this state on the basis of a forfeiture of deposit or a plea of guilty or no contest and the person was not informed as required under Wis. Stats. § 345.27(1) and (2), the person may, within 60 days after being notified of the revocation or suspension of the operating privilege, petition the court to reopen the judgment and grant him an opportunity to defend on merits. If the court finds that the petitioner was not informed as required under Wis. Stats. § 345.27(1) and (2), the court shall order the judgment reopened. The court order reopening the judgment automatically reinstates the revoked or suspended operating privilege. 
(d)  Notice of demerit points and receipts. Every officer accepting a forfeited penalty or money deposit under this chapter shall receipt therefor in triplicate as provided in Wis. Stats. § 345.26(3)(b). Every officer accepting a stipulation under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 343.28, 345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2), and shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice in substantially the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11, as amended, revised, renumbered from time to time. 
(e)  Forfeitures; officer to post bond, qualify. Any officer accepting deposits or forfeited penalties, except parking violation forfeitures, under this chapter shall deliver them to city hall within 20 days after receipt. After the court orders a forfeiture, it shall deliver the money to the city treasurer. Any officer authorized to accept deposits under Wis. Stats. § 345.26 or this chapter shall qualify by taking the oath and filing an official bond in the sum of $500.00 as described by Wis. Stats. § 19.01. 
(Code 1997, § 7.21; Am. MSC '90; Am. #699 )  
Chapter 50 - UTILITIES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Agreement to comply with water utility operating rules. 
All persons now receiving a water supply from the utility, or who may hereafter make application therefor, shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by all rules and regulations as filed with the state Public Service Commission. 
(Code 1997, § 13.01; Rep. and Recr. # 741 )  
Sec. 50-2. - Public service commission rules adopted. 
The following provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 185 are adopted by reference and made a part of these rules as if set forth in full. A violation of any of such rules shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be punishable as provided in section 50-8. 
§ 185.11 	Authorization for and Application of Rules 
§ 185.12 	Definitions 
§ 185.13 	General Requirements 
§ 185.15 	Free or Discriminatory Service Prohibited 
§ 185.16 	Protection of Utility Facilities 
§ 185.17 	Interference with Public Service Structures 
§ 185.18 	Location of Records 
§ 185.19 	Retention of Records 
§ 185.21 	Schedules to be Filed with the Commission 
§ 185.22 	Information Available to Customers 
§ 185.31 	Metered Service 
§ 185.32 	Meter Readings and Billing Periods 
§ 185.33 	Billing 
§ 185.35 	Adjustment of Bills 
§ 185.36 	Deposits 
§ 185.37 	Disconnection and Refusal of Service 
§ 185.38 	Deferred Payment Agreement 
§ 185.39 	Dispute Procedures 
§ 185.41 	Employees Authorized to Enter Customers' Premises 
§ 185.42 	Customer Complaints 
§ 185.43 	Construction Records 
§ 185.44 	Records and Reports of Service Interruptions 
§ 185.45 	Pumpage Records 
§ 185.46 	Metering Equipment Records 
§ 185.47 	Other Records 
§ 185.51 	Requirement for Good Engineering Practice 
§ 185.52 	Construction Standards 
§ 185.61 	Meters 
§ 185.65 	Accuracy Requirements for Customer Meters 
§ 185.71 	Meter Testing Facilities and Equipment 
§ 185.72 	Calibration of Meter Testing Equipment 
§ 185.73 	Testing of Customer Meters 
§ 185.74 	Test Flows 
§ 185.75 	Required Tests of Customer Meters 
§ 185.76 	Periodic Tests 
§ 185.77 	Complaint Tests 
§ 185.78 	Referee Tests 
§ 185.79 	Testing of Metering Installations Having Remote Registers 
§ 185.795 	Jumpering Meter Settings 
§ 185.81 	Quality of Water 
§ 185.815 	Adequacy of Water Supply 
§ 185.82 	Pressure Standards 
§ 185.83 	Station Meters 
§ 185.84 	Station Meters 
§ 185.85 	System Losses 
§ 185.86 	Flushing Mains 
§ 185.87 	Operation of Distribution System Valves and Hydrants 
§ 185.88 	Interruptions of Service 
§ 185.89 	Thawing Frozen Services 
 
(Code 1997, § 13.02)  
Sec. 50-3. - Delafield-Hartland water pollution control commission. 
(a)  Created. Commission created a joint commission to represent the City of Delafield and Village of Hartland. Such commission shall be known as the "Delafield-Hartland Water Pollution Control Commission" (hereafter called the "commission"), pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.30. The purpose of this commission is to provide sewage collection, treatment and distribution services for the municipalities and such persons, organizations or municipalities as the commission may contract with pursuant to subsection (g) of this section, and all of the actions taken by the commission prior to the effective date hereof, are hereby confirmed and ratified in all respects. It is hereby declared that the commission has not been created for profit and that no part of any net income of the commission shall inure to the benefit of any individual, organization or association created for profit. 
(b)  Membership. 
(1)  Number of members. The commission shall be composed of eight members, four selected by each municipality. 
(2)  Selection. The members selected by each municipality shall be appointed by the mayor or village president, as the case may be, and such appointment shall be confirmed by a majority vote of such municipality's governing body. 
(3)  Term of office. The term of office of all commission members shall be for three years commencing on June 1 and ending on May 31. 
(4)  Removal. Any commission member selected by a municipality may be removed without cause by a four-fifths vote of the governing body of such municipality; provided, however, that such removal shall become effective only upon the appointment of a successor member pursuant to subsection (b)(5) of this section. For purposes of subsection (b)(5) of this section, such a vote to remove a commission member shall be deemed to create a vacancy in such member's office notwithstanding the fact that such member shall continue to hold such office until his or her successor shall be appointed. Upon such removal, the clerk of such municipality shall notify the clerk of the commission in writing of such removal. 
(5)  Vacancies. A vacancy in the office of a commission member created for any reason shall be filled by the municipality from which such member has been previously selected by the appointment of a successor member by the chief executive officer of such municipality, which such appointment shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the governing body of such municipality. Each successor so selected shall serve the remaining term of the member whose office has been vacated. 
(6)  Alternate members of the commission. In recognition that members of the commission may be unable to attend meeting(s) of the commission due to absence, illness or other reason, the presiding officer of the municipality (i.e., the mayor or village president, as the case may be), shall appoint at least two alternate members who can fill in whenever appointed members are unable to attend any meeting of the commission. Alternate members shall serve a term of one year or until their successor(s) shall have been duly appointed. Whenever it shall appear to the chairperson of the commission, or to the chairperson's designee, that one or both of the municipalities will not have all of the members appointed by such municipality present at any meeting of the commission due to illness, absence or otherwise, the chairperson may communicate the need for one or more alternate members to attend such meeting, by contacting the presiding officer of the municipality (the mayor or village president). The mayor or village president, as the case may be, shall designate an alternate member to attend such meeting in place of the member who is not able to attend; and in such event, the alternate member shall have the same power and authority as the member in question. The alternate member may continue to attend all meetings of the commission until such time as the member (in whose stead the alternate member has been so designated) is able to attend meeting of the commission. Alternate members shall be appointed by the mayor or village president in writing, which writing shall be filed with the city or village clerk, as the case may be, and with the clerk of the commission. 
(c)  Officers. 
(1)  Offices designated. The officers of the commission shall be a chairman, vice-chairman, clerk and treasurer. In addition to the foregoing officers, the commission may appoint a deputy clerk and deputy treasurer. The commission may, at its discretion, combine the offices of clerk and treasurer and of deputy clerk and deputy treasurer. 
(2)  Selection and term of office. Each commission officer shall be selected from among the membership of the commission at the commission's regular June meeting each year and shall serve for a term of one year and until such officer's successor shall be elected and qualified. The vice-chairman shall be selected from the municipality other than the municipality from which the chairman serving the same term has been selected. 
(3)  Removal. Any officer may be removed from office by a vote of the majority of all the members. 
(4)  Vacancies. A vacancy in any office created for any reason shall be filled by the commission at its next meeting held after such vacancy shall occur. The member selected to fill such vacant office shall serve the remainder of the term of the member leaving such office vacant. 
(5)  Powers and duties. 
a.  Chairman. The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the commission and shall sign all resolutions, rules of procedure and amendments thereto, contracts and any other documents of any kind requiring a signature on behalf of the commission. The chairman shall countersign all checks drawn on the commission's account. 
b.  Vice-chairman. The vice-chairman shall perform all of the duties and have all of the powers of the chairman in the absence of the chairman. 
c.  Clerk. The clerk shall make and keep a permanent record of all commission proceedings, including public hearings, have custody of all records of the commission, furnish the clerk of each municipality with a copy of the agenda of the next succeeding commission meeting prior to such meeting, furnish all notices of commission meetings and proceedings as may be required by law, countersign all contracts and any other documents requiring signature on behalf of the commission, attest and/or certify to all actions taken by or on behalf of the commission and supervise all clerical employees of the commission. 
d.  Clerk/treasurer. The treasurer shall receive all monies belonging, accruing or paid to the commission from any source, deposit all monies so received in the name of the commission in a public depository designated by the commission, disburse the funds of the commission, sign all checks drawn on the commission's account, keep an accurate and detailed account of all receipts and disbursements by the commission, including the amount and source of all receipts and the payee, amount and purpose of all disbursements, keep all bills filed with the commission and render a report of all funds received, bills presented and disbursements made and the general condition of the commission's finances at each regular commission meeting and at such other times as the commission shall direct. 
e.  Deputy clerk and deputy treasurer. The deputy clerk and deputy treasurer shall perform all of the duties and exercise all of the powers and perform all of the duties of the clerk and treasurer, as the case may be, in the absence of such officer, and shall perform such other duties as the commission shall direct. 
f.  Surety bonds. Such officers of the commission as may be designated by recorded resolution of the governing bodies of both municipalities shall furnish to the commission a surety bond issued by a company or companies authorized to do business in the State of Wisconsin conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of their respective duties in such amount as the governing bodies of both municipalities shall specify. The commission shall pay the cost of any premiums for all such surety bonds. The form and execution of such surety bonds shall be approved by the commission's attorney. 
(d)  Meetings, hearings and rules of procedure. 
(1)  Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the commission shall be held at least once each calendar quarter at the time and place specified by the commission in its rules of procedure without any other notice to the commission members being required. 
(2)  Special meetings. Special meetings shall be called in the manner and held at the time and place specified in the commission's rules of procedure. 
(3)  Quorum. The quorum necessary for the commission to conduct business shall consist of five members present, with at least two members from each municipality; provided, that a meeting may be adjourned to another time and place without a quorum being present. In such event, notice of the adjournment shall be given by the clerk in writing to all members of the commission. Commission officers shall be counted in determining whether a quorum is present. 
(4)  Voting. All matters considered by the commission at a duly held meeting thereof shall be determined by a vote of the majority of the members present at such meeting. All commission officers shall have a vote. 
(5)  Rules of procedure. The commission shall adopt rules of procedure which may be amended from time to time in the commission's discretion. Such rules of procedure shall specify the time and place of regular and special meetings of the commission, the method for calling special meetings, and such other rules as the commission shall deem appropriate with respect to the conduct of its business, including the holding of public hearings, which shall not be inconsistent with this section and any amendments hereto. 
(e)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  General powers. The commission shall have the power to purchase, acquire, construct, extend, add to, improve, control, operate, manage and hold title to such real and personal property, including a treatment plant, interceptor mains, and the plans and specifications developed in connection therewith, in order to provide the municipalities, and any other person which shall have entered into a contract with the commission pursuant to subsection (g) of this section, with sewage collection, treatment and distribution services, provided that the commission shall not have the power to condemn real or personal property or to select the location of its sewer facilities without the prior consent of the governing bodies of both municipalities. 
(2)  Employees and attorneys. The commission may employ a secretary, treatment plant operator, maintenance personnel and such other persons to perform such other functions as the commission shall deem appropriate to carry out the purpose for which it has been created as specified in subsection (a) of this section. The commission shall determine the terms and conditions of employment of all such employees. The commission may employ one or more attorneys upon such terms as the commission shall determine to advise the commission as general counsel, to represent the commission in connection with specific matters, and to serve as "bond counsel." 
(3)  Insurance. The commission shall purchase fire and extended coverage insurance on the commission's sewer facilities from such company or companies and in such coverage amounts as the commission shall determine, subject to approval by governing bodies of both municipalities. The commission shall purchase liability insurance naming the commission, its members, its employees and the municipalities as insureds with such coverage, from such company or companies and in such coverage amounts as the commission shall determine, subject to approval by the governing bodies of both municipalities. 
(4)  Financing of the commission. 
a.  Budget. In August of each year, the commission shall prepare and adopt a budget for the next succeeding calendar year. Until the commission shall receive the proceeds from the first mortgage revenue bonds issued by the commission, such budget shall be submitted to the municipalities for approval. No disbursements shall be made by the commission for any item included in a budget until such budget shall have been approved by the governing bodies of the municipalities. No disbursements shall be made for any item, which disbursements in the aggregate exceed the total amount budgeted for such item without the consent of the governing bodies of the municipalities. After the commission shall have received the proceeds of such mortgage revenue bonds, each budget adopted by the commission shall be submitted to the municipalities for information purposes only, and neither the nature nor amounts of disbursements made by the commission for items included in such a budget shall be subject to approval by the governing bodies of the municipalities. 
b.  Financial reports. The commission shall annually cause to be prepared audited financial statements and shall deliver a copy of such financial statements to the clerk of each municipality. 
c.  Mortgage revenue bonds. The commission may issue its mortgage revenue bonds to the extent permitted by law in order to provide funds to carry out the purpose for which the commission has been created as specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
d.  Revenue contracts. The commission shall negotiate and enter into contracts with both municipalities and with any other person, organization or municipality which shall be authorized, pursuant to subsection (g) of this section, to use the commission's sewer facilities, pursuant to which the commission shall agree to provide the use of its sewage collection, treatment and distribution facilities in consideration of a covenant by each such user not to make use of the facilities as may be owned by such user, other than the commission's sewage facilities so long as any mortgage revenue bonds issued by the commission shall be outstanding; and payment by each such user of an amount which the commission estimates will, when combined with the amounts to be paid to the commission by all other users of its sewage facilities reduced by all amounts received by the commission from sources other than users of its facilities, be sufficient to pay the following expenses as the same become due and payable: 
1.  All expenses incurred by the commission in connection with the operation and maintenance of its sewer facilities, including the overhead expenses of the commission and its employees. 
2.  All expenses incurred in connection with the issuance of mortgage revenue bonds and the principal and interest payments to be made on such bonds; and which will be sufficient to establish any reserve for depreciation with respect to the commission's sewer facilities which the commission shall determine is necessary in order to pay the costs of any replacements or extensions of or any improvements or additions to the commission's sewer facilities. Subject to the requirements of the foregoing sentence, such contracts shall contain such provisions as the commission shall deem appropriate, and the commission shall not be required to contract with any user of the commission's sewer facilities upon the same terms as any or all other users of such facilities. Such contracts may be amended from time to time as the commission deems appropriate. 
(5)  Examination of books and records. The commission shall permit the officers of both municipalities or their duly authorized agents to inspect the books and records of the commission at any time. 
(f)  Purchase and operation of sewerage treatment plant and interceptors. 
(1)  The city council and village board hereby agree to purchase necessary land and construct a sewerage treatment plant and interceptor mains as may be necessary to jointly service the sewerage disposal needs of the city and village as they may require. The Delafield-Hartland water pollution control commission is hereby authorized to commence negotiations necessary to purchase and construct the plant and to report its progress thereon. 
(2)  The sewerage treatment plant and interceptors shall be jointly owned, financed and maintained on a 50-50 basis by the two municipalities. 
(3)  Once the plant and interceptors are in operation, flowage meters shall be installed, and each municipality shall pay for the actual usage of the plant at such rate as may be established by the commission. Each municipality shall pay according to the percentage of flow usage. 
(4)  The Delafield-Hartland water pollution control commission shall have the responsibility to operate, manage and control the treatment plant and interceptors on behalf of the city and village. 
(5)  Each municipality shall be solely responsible for construction, maintenance and control of its own sewerage disposal mains, laterals and layout wherever not jointly used by the municipalities. 
(g)  Additional users. The commission may enter into contracts, as provided in subsection (e)(4)d of this section, with any person, organization or municipality other than the municipalities for the purpose of providing to such other contracting party the use of the commission's sewer facilities. As used in this section, the term "municipality" shall include any city, village, town, town sanitary district or school district. Each municipality hereby covenants that it will not enter into a contract with any person, organization or municipality to provide the use of the municipality's sewer utility services unless: 
(1)  Within a reasonable time after learning of such person's, organization's or municipality's interest in obtaining the use of such sewer utility services, such municipality shall inform the commission in writing of such interest; and 
(2)  The commission shall either: 
a.  Waive in a writing delivered to the clerks of both municipalities its right to contract directly with such person, organization or municipality pursuant to this subsection (g); or 
b.  Fail, within a reasonable time after receipt of such notice from such municipality, to execute such a waiver or to deliver to the clerk of such municipality written notice of its intent to enter into such a contract. 
(h)  Termination of the commission. The commission may be terminated at any time upon the majority vote of the governing bodies of both municipalities, provided that the commission shall not be terminated unless all of its outstanding indebtedness shall have been paid in full or funds shall have been irrevocably set aside in an amount sufficient to pay such indebtedness in full along with all interest accruing thereon and any other changes related thereto. Upon such termination: 
(1)  Title to all assets owned by the commission other than cash and marketable securities shall vest in both municipalities as tenants-in-common, each having an undivided one-half interest in such assets; and 
(2)  After all of the commission's liabilities have been satisfied and provision has been made for the satisfaction of any and all of the commission's contingent liabilities, all remaining cash and marketable securities of the commission shall be paid and distributed to the municipalities in equal shares. 
(i)  Amendment. This section shall not be amended except by an ordinance adopted by both the village and the City of Delafield. 
(1)  If the governing bodies of the city and village cannot agree on any decision regarding such jointly owned treatment plant or interceptors, the matter shall be submitted to an arbitration committee consisting of a representative picked by the city, a representative picked by the village and a third member chosen by the two representatives. The arbitration committee shall schedule a date for a hearing. The arbitration committee, before deciding the dispute, shall call for and consider the recommendation of the Delafield-Hartland water pollution control commission. 
(2)  The decision of the arbitration committee shall be binding and the municipalities hereby agree to abide by the decision. There shall be no right of appeal except in the event the decision is arbitrary and capricious or in violation of the law and then the appeal shall be to the circuit court of Waukesha within 30 days of the decision. The appeal shall be in the form of a declaratory judgment on the record. 
(Code 1997, § 13.03) 
( Ord. No. 751 , § 1, 11-20-2018)  
Sec. 50-4. - Sewer use. 
(a)  Introduction and general provisions. 
(1)  Introduction. This section regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains, connections to the public sewer system, discharge of septage into the public sewerage system, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewerage systems within the City of Delafield (the "municipality"). It also provides for and explains the method used for levying and collecting wastewater treatment services charges, sets uniform requirements for discharges into the wastewater collection and treatment systems and enables the said municipality to comply with administrative provisions, and other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by the State of Wisconsin or federal law. Its intent is to derive the maximum public benefit by regulating the characteristics of wastewater discharged into the sewerage system. 
(2)  General provisions. This section provides a means for regulating the use of the public sewers, effectuating connections thereto, determining wastewater volumes, constituents and characteristics, the setting of charges and fees, and the issuing of permits to certain users. Revenues derived from the application of this section shall be used to defray the costs of operating and maintaining the wastewater collection and treatment systems and to provide sufficient funds for capital outlay, debt service costs and capital improvements. The charges and fees herein have been established pursuant to requirements of the Wisconsin Statutes. This section shall supersede any previous ordinances, rules or regulations of the municipality relating to the subject matter hereof; and shall repeal all parts thereof that may be inconsistent with this section. If there is any conflict between this section and any applicable Wisconsin Statute, the Wisconsin Statute shall control in such instance. 
(3)  Legal authority. This section is enacted pursuant to the power and authority conferred by Wis. Stats. § 66.0821, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this section shall be as follows: 
Approving authority of the municipality means the City of Delafield common council or its duly authorized committee, agent, or representative. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building or structure and conveys it to the building sewer. 
Building sewer means the pipe extension beginning at the outside face of the building wall, to a point of connection with the public sewer. 
Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD) means the quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical degradation of organic material in five days at 20 degrees Celsius when the oxidation of reduced forms of nitrogen is prevented by the addition of an inhibitor. This analytical procedure shall be performed in accordance with Standard Methods. 
Committee means the public works committee of the City of Delafield. 
Compatible pollutants means carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, plus additional pollutants identified in the WPDES permit for the publicly owned treatment works receiving the pollutant if such works were designed to treat such additional pollutants to a substantial degree. 
Del-Hart Ordinance means the sewer use and user charge ordinance of the Delafield-Hartland water pollution control commission (herein the "Del-Hart commission") adopted on January 16, 2007, and effective February 27, 2007, and any amendments thereto or restatements thereof. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater or septage shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system or treatment system. 
Garbage means the residue from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce. 
Ground garbage means the residue from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particulates will be no greater than one-half inch in any dimension and will be carried freely in suspension under normal flow conditions in sewers. 
Incompatible pollutants or wastewater means wastewater or septage with pollutants of such a strength that will adversely affect or disrupt the wastewater treatment processes or effluent quality or sludge quality if discharged to the sewerage system facility. 
Industrial waste means the wastewater from an industrial process, trade, or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage, including cooling water and the discharge from sewage pretreatment facilities. 
May is permissible. 
Municipal wastewater means the wastewater of a municipality, including that of the municipality. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residential, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may have inadvertently entered the sewerage system of the municipality. 
Municipality means the City of Delafield, a municipal corporation. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Parts per million means a weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
Person means any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, government agency, or other entity. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10 7 . 
Public sewer means any sewer owned or provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the municipality, the Del-Hart commission or any other municipality. 
Sanitary sewage means a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities, together with such groundwaters, surface waters, and stormwaters as may have inadvertently entered the sewerage system. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with small quantities of groundwater, stormwater, and surface water that are not admitted intentionally. 
Septage means the wastewater or contents of septic or holding tanks, dosing chambers, grease interceptors, seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage trenches, privies or portable restrooms. 
Sewer service charge is a service charge levied on users of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities for payment of use-related capital expenses as well as the operation and maintenance costs, including replacement costs, of said facilities. 
Sewer system means the public sanitary sewers within a sewerage system. The facilities which convey wastewater from individual structures, from private property to the public sanitary sewer, or its equivalent, are specifically excluded from the definition of "sewer system"; except that pumping units and pressurized lines for individual structures or groups of structures may be included as part of a "sewer system" when such units are cost effective and are owned and maintained by the municipality. For example, a building sewer is not part of the sewer system. 
Sewerage system means all structures, conduits and pipes, by which sewage is collected, treated, and disposed of, except plumbing inside and in connection with buildings served, and service pipes, from building to street main, i.e., a building sewer. 
Shall is mandatory. 
Slug load means any substance released at a discharge rate and/or concentration which causes interference to wastewater treatment processes or plugging or surcharging of the sewer system. 
Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage, and Industrial Wastes" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation and is in compliance with Federal Regulations 40 CFR 136, "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants," all as amended from time to time. 
Storm sewer (sometimes termed storm drain) means any drain or sewer for conveying surface water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source. 
Stormwater runoff means that portion of the rainfall that is collected and drained into the storm sewers. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, septage, or other liquids, and that are removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods" and is referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) means the quantity of organic nitrogen and ammonia as determined in accordance with Standard Methods. 
Total phosphorus (TP) means the quantity of total phosphorus as determined in accordance with Standard Methods. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, store, and treat domestic and industrial waste and septage and dispose of the effluent and sludge. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, septage, industrial waste, and sludge. Sometimes use is synonymous with waste treatment facilities. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 
Wis. Stats. means the Wisconsin Statutes in effect and as amended from time to time. 
(c)  Management, operation and control. 
(1)  Management. The management, operation, and control of the sewer system for the municipality shall be vested in its approving authority. All records, minutes and all written proceedings thereof shall be kept by the city clerk. The city treasurer shall keep all the financial records thereof. 
(2)  Construction authority. The municipality shall have the power to construct sewer lines for public use, and shall have the power to lay sewer pipes in and through the public alleys, streets, and public grounds located within the municipality; and generally, to do all such work as may be found necessary or convenient in the management of the sewer system. The municipality shall have power by itself, its officers, agents, and servants, to enter upon any land in the municipality for the purpose of making examination or supervise in the performance of their duties under this section, without liability therefor; and the municipality shall have power to purchase and acquire for the municipality all real and personal property which may be necessary for construction of the sewer system, or for any repair, remodeling, or additions thereto. 
(3)  Owner's maintenance of building sewer. The owner of property abutting a public sewer shall maintain sewer service from the public sewer main to the structure or building on the owner's property, including all controls between the same, without expense to the municipality, except when they are damaged as a result of negligence or carelessness on the part of the municipality. Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, the owner has the sole responsibility for the repair and maintenance of all building sewers; and the ownership thereof shall at all times be vested in such property owner. All sewer services must be maintained free of defective conditions, by and at the expense of the owner or occupant of the property. In the event of any obstruction of, damage to or repair of a building sewer, the same shall be the responsibility of the property owner, except as provided for in subsection (d)(6) of this section or as otherwise provided for herein. 
(4)  Title to real estate and personal property. All property, real, personal, and mixed, including, but not limited to, easements, acquired for the construction of the municipality's sewer system, and all plans, specifications, diagrams, papers, books and records connected therewith, and all buildings, machinery, and fixtures pertaining thereto, shall be the property of and titled in the name of the municipality. 
(5)  No limitation. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as limiting the power and authority of the municipality as provided for by applicable Wisconsin Statutes; and the municipality shall have all rights and authority as provided for by law. 
(6)  Additions to municipality. Territory may be added to the municipality in the manner provided for by law. In the event of any such addition, the municipality may condition the provision of sewer service to such territory upon the owner thereof making such contributions, dedications and payments as the municipality may reasonably require in order to provide such sewer service. 
(d)  Administrative rules and regulations. The following rules, regulations and ordinances for the regulation of licensed plumbers, sewer users, property owners and others, are hereby adopted and established: 
(1)  General provisions. 
a.  Agreement to rules and regulation. All persons now receiving sewerage service from the municipality or who may hereafter make application for such service or who otherwise receive such service, shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by all of the terms and provisions of this section, as amended from time to time; and such agreement is a condition precedent to the provision of such sewerage service. 
b.  Application for service. Every person desiring to connect property, buildings or structures to public sewers shall make application in writing to the municipality on such forms as are prescribed for that purpose, prior to commencing use of such service. The application must describe fully and truthfully all the wastes which are anticipated to be discharged. If the applicant is not the fee simple owner of the property, the written consent of the owner must accompany the application. Persons connected to the public sewers of the municipality are referred to herein as "users." By submitting such an application, all users are deemed to have agreed to be bound by this section, as amended from time to time. If it appears that the service applied for will not provide adequate service for the contemplated use, the municipality may reject the application. If the municipality approves the application, it shall issue a connection permit as shown on the application. No service shall be provided or application approved without prior payment of all applicable fees. 
c.  Application fee. Where the application for service is for a connection to the municipality's public sewers, the application shall be accompanied by an application fee(s) in an amount to be determined from time to time by the municipality. Such fee shall cover the cost of processing the application and inspection of the connection. Application fees may vary in amount between residential users and commercial/industrial users. The payment of this fee shall be in addition to any connection fees that may be charged to or on account of new users by the municipality and/or by the Del-Hart commission. 
d.  Inspections. Any connection to the public sewers within the municipality shall be subject to the prior inspection and approval of the work by an authorized representative of the municipality. No trench or other excavation shall be filled, or any connection completed, without such prior inspection. The applicant requesting the connection shall reimburse the municipality for all inspection costs incurred, if not previously paid as part of the application fee. 
e.  Disconnection and refusal of service. Sewer service may be disconnected or refused for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Violation of this section, as amended from time to time; 
2.  Violation of the Del-Hart Ordinance, as amended from time to time; 
3.  Failure to pay the application fee, any connection fee or delinquent sewer service charges of the user. 
f.  Disconnection for delinquent accounts or where dangerous conditions exist. 
1.  A bill for service is delinquent if unpaid after the due date shown on the bill. The municipality may disconnect service for a delinquent bill by giving the user, at least eight calendar days prior to disconnection, a written disconnect notice which may be included in the bill for service. For purposes of this section, the due date shall not be less than 20 days after issuance of the bill. 
2.  The municipality may disconnect service without notice where a dangerous condition exists for as long as the condition exists. Service may be denied to any user for failure to comply with the applicable requirements of this section and regulations or if a dangerous or unsafe condition exists on the user's property. 
g.  Subsequent amendments. The municipality reserves the right to subsequently amend, modify, repeal and modify, any or all provisions of this section. 
(2)  Plumbers. No plumber, pipe fitter, or other person will be permitted to do any plumbing or pipe fitting work in connection with the sewer system without first receiving a license from the State of Wisconsin and obtaining permission from the municipality in which the work is to be performed. All service connections to the sewer main shall comply with the state plumbing code, as amended. 
(3)  Mandatory connections. 
a.  Within the municipality, the owner of each parcel of land adjacent to a public sewer main on which there exists a building used or usable for human habitation or in a block through which such system is extended, shall connect to the sewer system within 365 days of notice in writing from the municipality. Upon failure to do so, the municipality may cause such connection to be made and bill the property owner for all such costs. If such costs are not paid within 30 days, such costs shall constitute a special tax lien against the property, in the manner provided for by law. However, the owner may within 30 days after the completion of the work file a written election with the municipality stating that the owner cannot pay such amount in one sum and ask that the sum be levied in five or less equal annual installments. The amount shall be so collected with interest at a rate of two percent per annum above the city's current rate of borrowing from the date of completion of the work, all as determined by the municipality. The unpaid balance shall constitute a special tax lien, all pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 281.45, as amended. 
b.  In lieu of the above, the municipality, at its option, may impose a penalty for the period that the violation continues after ten days' written notice to any owner failing to make a connection to the sewer system. The penalty shall be in the amount of $40.00 per day. Upon failure to make such payment, said penalty shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property, all pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 281.45, as amended. 
c.  Property with private wastewater disposal systems on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be exempt from the requirement of subsection (d)(3)a of this section, provided the Waukesha County department of public health certifies to the city that such private wastewater disposal systems are not polluting groundwater or otherwise creating a health hazard. Upon receipt of a report of inspection and such certification, the property with private wastewater disposal systems shall be deemed exempt from the requirements of subsection (d)(3)a of this section. Such property shall remain exempt from the requirements of subsection (d)(3)a of this section upon submission by the owner of record, at least once every two years, of proof or certification that the private wastewater disposal systems are not polluting groundwater or otherwise creating a health hazard. If the property is transferred or conveyed, or if as a condition of issuing a building permit for the property, the existing septic system must be in any way modified, changed or upgraded so as to increase the capacity of the septic system, the transferee or owner shall be required to comply with subsection (d)(3)a of this section within one year of the date of transfer, conveyance or issuance of the building permit. Except as otherwise provided herein, the duration of any exemption provided under this subsection shall not exceed a period of ten years, and upon expiration of the exemption, mandatory connection shall be required in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d)(3)a of this section. 
(4)  Building sewer connection expense. Persons attaching to a public sewer shall have the building sewer, or lateral, installed at their own cost and expense. 
(5)  Tap permits. After sewer connections have been introduced into any building or upon any premises, no plumber shall make any alterations, extensions, or attachments, unless the party ordering such tapping or other work exhibits the proper permit for the same from the municipality. 
(6)  Obstruction of building sewers in public rights-of-way. In the event of any blockage, damage or break in any building sewer, which occurs within a public street, alley, highway, or other public right-of-way, the municipality shall have the exclusive right and option to repair the building sewer within said street, alley, highway, or right-of-way. In such event, the owner of the building sewer shall promptly reimburse the municipality for all costs so incurred. If not so reimbursed, the same shall be added to the owner's sewer service charges and collected in the same manner as such charges are so collected. 
(7)  User use only. No user shall allow other persons or other services to connect to the sewer system through their lateral or building sewer. 
(8)  Discontinuance of service. Whenever any person desires to discontinue sewer service from the system, the municipality must be notified in writing prior to such disconnection. 
(9)  User to permit inspection. Every user shall permit the municipality or its duly authorized agent, at all reasonable times, to enter their premises or building to examine the pipes and fixtures, and the manner in which the drains, and sewer connections operate; and the user must at all times, frankly and without concealment, answer all questions put to them relative to its use, all in accordance with this section and Wis. Stats. § 196.171, to the extent applicable. 
(10)  Municipal responsibility. It is expressly stipulated that no claim shall be made against the municipality or its officers, commissioners, agents, employees and representatives by reason of the breaking, clogging, stoppage, or freezing of any pipes; nor from any damage arising from repairing mains, making connections or extensions or any other work that may be deemed necessary. The right is hereby reserved to cut off sewer service at any time for the purpose of repairs or any other necessary purpose, any permit granted or regulations to the contrary notwithstanding. Whenever it shall become necessary to shut off the sewer within the municipality, the municipality shall, if practicable, give notice to each and every user within the affected area of the time when such service will be shut off. 
(11)  Excavations within public right-of-way. 
a.  In making excavations in public streets or other public highways for laying pipe or making repairs, the pavement and earth removed must be deposited in a manner that will result in the least inconvenience to the public. Prior to commencing any such excavations, a street opening and right-of-way opening permit shall be obtained from the municipality. In connection therewith, the person making application for such permit shall comply with such terms and conditions as the municipality may impose with respect to such excavation. Further, the person obtaining the permit shall guarantee that all excavation and repair of streets and the construction of facilities shall be free from defect in material and installation for a period of 12 months after restoring it to its original condition and official acceptance of the work. No person shall leave any such excavation made in any street or highway open at any time without barricades; and during the night, warning lights must be maintained at such excavations. All excavations shall be completely backfilled with slurry as required by the standard specifications of the street opening and right-of-way opening permit to prevent settling. This work, together with the replacing of sidewalks, ballast and paving, must be done so as to make the street as good, at least, as before it was disturbed, and satisfactory to the municipality. No opening of the streets for tapping the pipes will be permitted when the ground is frozen, except in emergency situations or except as the municipality may otherwise expressly allow in writing. 
b.  Any excavation performed under this subsection (d)(11) shall be subject to the inspection of the municipality, and no work shall be deemed completed unless and until accepted by the municipality. All work performed under this subsection (d)(11) and the inspection thereof shall be at the cost of the person obtaining the street opening and right-of-way opening permit described herein. 
(12)  Tapping the mains. Connections to the sewer system other than building sewer connections, shall be done only in accordance with the Del-Hart Ordinance, as amended. 
(13)  Installation of building sewers. All building sewers on private property shall be installed in accordance with State of Wisconsin Administrative Code "Design, Construction, Installation, Supervision, and Inspections of Plumbing," especially, Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 82.10, "Basic Plumbing Principles," as amended. As required therein, all laterals shall be inspected. The building sewer and/or private interceptor main sewer shall be inspected upon completion of placement of the pipe and before backfilling and tested before or after backfilling. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the building inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the building inspector or his representative. 
(14)  No unauthorized connections. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the municipality. 
(15)  Classes of permits. 
a.  There shall be two classes of building sewer (plumbing) permits: 
1.  For residential and commercial service. 
2.  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
b.  In either case, the owner or the owner's agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city building inspector. A permit and inspection fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. This permit and inspection fee may be from time to time amended by resolution of the city council. 
(16)  Old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the building inspector to be in good condition and meet all requirements of this section. 
(17)  Construction requirements. The size, slope, alignment, materials and construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of chapter 8 and all other applicable rules and regulations. 
(18)  Elevation. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer at the owner's expense. 
(19)  Excavations to be guarded. All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(20)  Clear water drains. Roof leaders, swimming pool drains, surface drains, groundwater drains, foundation footing drains and other clear water drains shall be connected wherever possible with a storm sewer, but they shall not be connected to a building sewer which discharges into a sanitary sewer or private wastewater treatment plant. All such connections existing at the time of passage of this section shall thereafter be illegal. If stormwater or clear water is being discharged into a sanitary sewer, the city administrator or his designee shall give the offending person 15 days' notice to disconnect. Failure to disconnect after such notice shall authorize the city to cause disconnection and assessment of the costs of such disconnection against the property involved. The city may, in the alternative, institute action for violation of this paragraph. 
(21)  Connection into public sewers. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of chapter 8 and other applicable rules and regulations of the city, including license bond and street opening permit, where necessary. 
(22)  Application of Del-Hart Ordinance. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, any connection to the public sewers shall be subject to the provisions of the Del-Hart Ordinance, as amended from time to time, to the extent applicable. 
(23)  New connections. New connections to the municipality's sewer system will be allowed only if there is available capacity in all of the downstream wastewater collection and treatment facilities of the municipality and the Del-Hart commission. 
(e)  Use of the public sewer. 
(1)  Required. No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(2)  Illegal discharge. No person shall discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this section. 
(3)  Privy vaults, cesspools, etc., prohibited. Except as herein provided, no person shall construct or maintain within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(4)  No clear water discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, swimming pool water or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer. 
(5)  Compliance with the Del-Hart Ordinance. No person shall discharge wastes into a public sewer within the municipality, except in accordance with the provisions of the Del-Hart Ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(6)  Accidental discharges. The accidental discharge of any prohibited waste into any sewer shall be reported to the city by the person responsible for the discharge or by the owner or occupant of the premises when the discharge occurs immediately upon obtaining knowledge of the fact of such discharge so that steps may be taken to minimize its effect on the treatment plant. 
(7)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the city they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease or other substances specified in the Del-Hart Ordinance or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the city. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(8)  Special arrangements. No provision contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the municipality and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the wastewater collection and treatment facilities, either before or after pretreatment, provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities by reasons of the admission of such wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the municipality without recompense from such person. 
(9)  No discharge to violate general permit for bypassing. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any waters, wastewaters or other substances of any kind or nature that will result in or otherwise cause a violation of any general permit for bypassing issued by the Wisconsin department of natural resources and held by the municipality. 
(f)  Public sewer main extensions. 
(1)  Application and approval. The extension of public sewer mains to serve new customers/users is subject to the prior review and approval of the municipality and any other governmental agency having appropriate jurisdiction thereof. Any person seeking to develop real property and requiring sewer service in connection with such development, shall make application to the municipality for a public sewer main extension, if so required in order to serve such development. Such application shall be in writing and shall set forth the following information: 
a.  Name of development and the legal description of the property involved. 
b.  Plat map or certified survey map or other map showing street layout and lot sizes. 
c.  Zoning of the property. 
d.  Proposed plans and specifications for the sewers. 
e.  Name and address of consulting engineer. 
f.  Number of housing units and/or other units to be constructed. 
g.  Such additional information as the municipality may require. 
(2)  Conditions of approval. The municipality shall have the discretion to approve or disapprove the requested public sewer main extensions. In granting such approval, the municipality may condition its approval upon compliance with: 
a.  Any applicable ordinances of the municipality, the Del-Hart commission or Waukesha County. 
b.  Any applicable statute, rules, orders, or codes of the State of Wisconsin. 
c.  The preparation of plans and specifications for the sewer main extension, subject to the approval of the municipality and its consulting engineer. 
d.  The applicant making and installing the public sewer main extension at his/her/its sole cost and expense or otherwise providing a surety bond or other security to ensure that the main will be so constructed within a reasonable period of time. 
e.  The dedication of such rights-of-way, easements and sewerage facilities as the municipality may reasonably require. 
f.  The payment of all costs and expenses incurred or to be incurred by the municipality in connection with the review and approval of such sewer extension, including, but not limited to, engineers' fees, attorneys' fees, inspection fees and other similar costs and expenses. 
g.  The payment of any applicable connection fees due or to become due pursuant to section 50-5(f). 
h.  Any other condition determined by the municipality to be fair and reasonable in order to protect the interest of the municipality in connection with the proposed development. 
(3)  Contract for sewer improvements. The municipality may require the person filing an application pursuant to subsection (f)(1) of this section, to enter into a written development agreement with the municipality, as a condition of the approval of the sewer main extension. Such agreement shall define the scope of the work, the obligations of the applicant to construct the sewer facilities, the requirement of security for performance of the applicant's obligations set forth therein, and such other matters as the municipality may reasonably determine. The applicant shall reimburse the municipality for all costs and expenses incurred hereunder, including, but not limited to, attorneys' fees, engineers' fees and other similar costs and expenses. 
(4)  Sewer extension by municipality. The municipality may, on its own, cause any public sewer main to be extended at such time and under such conditions as the municipality deems appropriate in its sole discretion. 
(Code 1997, § 13.04)  
Sec. 50-5. - User charges. 
(a)  Sewer user charge system. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (a), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Debt service charges means and includes all costs associated with repayment of debt(s) incurred for the construction and/or rehabilitation of the wastewater collection system and treatment facility. 
Domestic user equivalent (DUE) means a single-family residential dwelling unit that discharges normal domestic strength wastewater and shall be used as an equivalent measure of the average single-family residential flow. For purposes of this chapter, one DUE shall be assumed to equal 75,000 gallons per year (205 gallons per day). 
Normal domestic strength wastewater means wastewater with concentrations of CBOD, suspended solids, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, and total phosphorus no greater than 200, 250, 40, and ten milligrams per liter (mg/l), respectively. 
Normal user means a user whose contributions to the sewerage system consist only of normal domestic strength wastewater originating from a house, apartment, flat, or other living quarters occupied by a person or person constituting of distinct household, business or commercial enterprise. 
Operation and maintenance costs means and includes all costs associated with the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system, including, but not limited to, administrative costs and expenses. 
Replacement costs means and includes all costs necessary to replace equipment as required to maintain capacity and performance during the design life of the sewerage facilities. When required by appropriate authority having jurisdiction thereof, a separate, segregated and distinct replacement fund shall be established and used for only replacement of equipment. 
(2)  Measurement. The unit of volume measurement for wastewater or other wastes discharged into the municipality's sewerage system shall be 1,000 gallons, United States liquid measure. The unit for assessing costs with respect to strength wastewater parameters shall be avoirdupois pounds. 
(3)  Fiscal policy. It shall be the policy of the municipality to obtain sufficient revenues to pay the costs of the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system, including debt service and a replacement fund (i.e., a cash account to be used for future expenditures for obtaining or installing replacement equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the sewerage system during the service life for which such facilities were designed and constructed), through a system of sewer service charges as defined in this section. The system shall assure that each user of the sewerage system pays their fair and proportionate share of the cost of such facilities. 
(4)  Sewer service charges generally. Sewer service charges to each user shall be based on wastewater parameters established from time to time by the municipality. The sewer service charges shall consist of the sum of the annual debt service charges, all annual operation and maintenance costs, all replacement costs, and all sewer service charges levied or assessed to the municipality by the Del-Hart commission. 
(5)  Biennial review. The sewer service charges of the municipality shall be reviewed not less than biennially. Sewer service charges shall be adjusted, as required, to reflect actual number and size of users and actual costs. Users will be notified annually of the portion of such sewer service charges attributable to operation and maintenance, debt service, and replacement costs. For purposes hereof, the municipality may satisfy this notice requirement by including in the budget summary required to be published under Wis. Stats. § 65.90, a statement of the aforesaid components of the sewer service charges, based on the results of operations for the preceding fiscal year. 
(6)  Determination of sewer service charges. A sewer service charge is hereby imposed upon each lot, parcel of land, building, or premise served by the public sewer or otherwise discharging sewage, including industrial wastes, into the public sewerage system. Such sewer service charge shall be payable as hereinafter provided and in amount determined as follows: 
a.  Category A service charges shall be imposed on each user whose water use is metered and whose sewer discharges are normal domestic strength wastewater. The Category A service charge is of the following form: 
Service charge = DUE charge. 
DUE charge = The domestic user equivalent multiplied by the domestic user equivalent unit rate (DUE rate). 
DUE rate = The average cost of providing wastewater service to a residential customer for one calendar quarter. 
The number of domestic user equivalents assigned for a Category A sewer user shall be based on metered water usage. 
b.  Category B service charges shall be imposed on each user whose water use is not metered and whose sewage discharges are normal domestic strength wastewater. The Category B sewer service charge shall be of the form as follows: 
Service charge = DUE charge. 
DUE charge = The domestic user equivalent multiplied by the domestic user equivalent unit rate (DUE rate). 
DUE rate = The average cost of providing wastewater service to a residential customer for one calendar quarter. 
The number of domestic user equivalents assigned for a Category B sewer user shall be based on Schedule "A." 
c.  Category C service charges shall be imposed on users whose sewer discharges are high strength wastewater having concentrations of carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD) greater than 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l), and/or suspended solids greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and/or total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) greater than 40 milligrams per liter (mg/l), and/or total phosphorus (TP) greater than ten milligrams per liter (mg/l). The form of the Category C service charge is as follows: 
Service charge = DUE charge + high strength surcharge. 
DUE charge = The domestic user equivalent multiplied by the domestic user equivalent unit rate (DUE rate). 
DUE rate = The average cost of providing wastewater service to a residential customer for one calendar quarter. 
High strength surcharge = The excessive CBOD, suspended solids, KN, and total phosphorus multiplied by the respective CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and total phosphorus rates. The excessive CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and total phosphorus are the portions of each of these constituents that are in excess of normal domestic strength wastewater. The excessive amounts of CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and total phosphorus are expressed in pounds, and their respective rates are expressed in dollars per pound. 
Water usage for all Category C sewer users shall be metered and the number of domestic user equivalents assigned for a Category C sewer user shall be based on metered water usage. 
d.  Reassignment of categories of sewer users. The municipality may reassign sewer users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if wastewater sampling programs and other related information indicate a change of categories is necessary or otherwise required. 
(7)  Sewer rate determinations. The municipality shall determine each year, the sewer rates referred to in subsection (a)(6) of this section; and the municipality shall have the right to amend, modify, adjust, or change the rates at any time and from time to time. The DUE rate schedule is and shall be as follows: 
	2014 	2015 	2016 	2017 	2018 	2019 
Local conveyance (per month) 	$14.45 	$14.74 	$15.03 	$15.33 	$15.64 	$15.95 
Del-Hart Treatment (per month) 	$15.50 	$15.50 	$15.50 	$15.50 	$15.50 	$15.50 
Total per month 	$29.95 	$30.24 	$30.53 	$30.83 	$31.14 	$31.45 
Quarterly DUE rate 	$89.85 	$90.72 	$91.59 	$92.49 	$93.42 	$94.35 
 
The local conveyance (per month) charge shall continue to increase annually, effective January 1, by two percent until such time as the city's sewer fund operates at a profit, as indicated by the city's audited financial statements. 
The high strength surcharges for Category C sewer users shall be at the prevailing rate at the time as established by the city council. The rates shall be based on the Del-Hart commission charges to the city. The Del-Hart commission shall establish the rates by resolution. 
(8)  Domestic user equivalent (DUE) assignments. No user shall be assigned less than one domestic user equivalent. Any single-family residence shall be treated as a single DUE regardless of the metered or estimated wastewater originating from such single-family residence. Multiuse buildings, such as a mixture of a commercial establishment with a residence or apartments, will be charged a minimum of one DUE for each separate commercial user with metering required for each commercial use per subsection (a)(9) of this section and one DUE for each residence/apartment unit. Should there be an incidental commercial use combined with a residence with no significant additional flow being generated by the commercial use, there would not be an additional charge for the commercial use. Should there be multiple offices or shops in one building, a meter shall be installed to serve the building. DUEs shall be established to the nearest 0.25 DUE. The following schedule (Schedule "A"), shall be used to determine the appropriate number of DUEs for non-metered sewer users: 
SCHEDULE A. DOMESTIC USER EQUIVALENTS (DUEs) FOR VARIOUS USERS 
 
Type of User 	Number of DUEs 
Residential 
Single-family residence 	1 
Duplex 	2 
Apartments 	1 per apartment 
Condominiums 	1 per unit 
Institutional 
Community-based residential facility (CBRF) 	0.25 per resident (including support personnel) 
Church 	1 
Hospital 	0.75 per bed 
Nursing home 	0.50 per bed 
Schools 
Boarding 	0.35 per student or other person residing on campus on system. It shall not include support personnel/faculty not living on the system. It shall not count support facilities.* 
Elementary 	0.03 per student and faculty 
High 	0.04 per student and faculty 
Commercial/Industrial 
Bar 	0.04 per seat 
Bowling alley 	0.35 per lane 
Car wash 	Average daily flow in gpd divided by 205 
Factory 	0.08 per employee plus process waste in gpd divided by 205 
Garage 	1 per 4,000 sq. ft. plus car wash** 
Hotel 	0.25 per bedroom 
Laundromat 	Average daily flow in gpd divided by 205*** 
Motel 	0.2 per bedroom 
Restaurant 	Normal operation, 0.04 per seat 
24-hour, 0.06 per seat 
Retail stores and small business 	1 per 3,000 sq. ft. 
Service station 	Normal location, 1 plus car wash** 
Freeway location, 2 plus car wash** 
Shopping center 	1 per 4,000 sq. ft. 
Supermarket 	1 per 4,000 sq. ft. 
*Annual census shall be taken of CBRF and schools each year in October until metered. 
  When metered, no census necessary. 
**Car washes to be considered separately upon application based on estimated flow from facilities 
  involved. 
***Flow to be estimated on equipment installed. 
 
Unit determinations for facilities not set forth in Schedule "A" shall be done on a case-by-case basis by the city council and approved by the Del-Hart commission. 
(9)  Water meters. The city council by a majority vote may require that all existing and new institutional, governmental, commercial, industrial users or other users whose flows may vary from permanent calculated estimates shall install a water meter with outside reading for all water usage. The city council by a majority vote may require that in multi-use buildings, such as a mixture of commercial and residential or apartments, a water meter shall be installed for the use where it would otherwise be required due to the commercial nature of the use. Upon majority vote of the council, certain commercial users may be exempt from the requirements to meter by reason of seasonal or periodic use or due to minimum flows. Meters shall be furnished and maintained by the city. Meters shall be replaced or tested by the city in accordance with the Public Service Commission requirements according to meter size. Installation of the meter shall be performed by a licensed plumber. All costs shall be at the expense of the user requiring the meter, including installation and any piping revisions required. The city will provide water usage readings on a quarterly basis within 30 days following the end of each quarter indicating water usage. If water usage of a facility is not in direct relationship to sewage flow, such as cooling water, lawn sprinkling or other process water not discharged into the sewer, then an exemption meter(s) may be installed as per subsection (a)(10) of this section. Water usage shall be the measure for determining both sewer service charges and additional connection fees. If a user's sewer flow based on water usage after a previous assignment of DUEs increases on an average of 1.00 DUE or more for a full year (July 1—June 30), then and in that event the proper additional reserve capacity connection fee shall be billed the city by the Del-Hart commission and the city shall pass the cost (plus additional city connection fees) on to the user with the increased flow. Future sewer service charges shall also be based on the increased DUEs from that point on. The city shall order all users covered by this subsection to install and connect a water meter within one year of receipt of written notice from the city. 
DUEs may be established for other than single-family residential, duplex and multifamily units by the property owners by installation of an approved water meter and the supplying of the actual metered flow to the city administrator or his designee. The water meter shall be installed in such a manner to provide accessibility to the city administrator or his designee so actual meter readings can be observed. Once a meter is installed, it shall not be removed (except for exemption meters, which may be removed at the request of the user). If a meter becomes defective or damaged in some way, it shall be replaced at property owner's expense. The city shall not be responsible for damage to property because of a defective meter. All costs shall be at the expense of the person requiring the meter, including any piping revisions required to ensure that only water required to be sewered is metered by the meter. The sewer utility shall collect a meter charge for reading and maintaining meters. The amount of the quarterly meter charge shall be as established by the approving authority from time to time and shall be based on the meter size. This charge shall be in addition to the wastewater service charge. Regardless of the amount of metered water shown, no user shall be charged for less than one DUE. 
If commercial or industrial users obtain all or any part of their water from sources other than a public water utility, all or any part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the user shall be required to have a water meter or meters installed for the purposes of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources. Should the city determine that the water usage is too small to justify a meter, the city shall have the authority to waive this requirement and a rate shall be established based on estimated water usage and the provisions in this section. Schedule A shall be used as the basis for such rates. The city shall charge for each meter to compensate for reading and servicing the meter. 
(10)  Exemption meters/credits for water not discharged to public sewers. If a person discharging wastes into the public sewers produces evidence satisfactory to the city that significant amounts of the total annual volume of metered water used for all purposes does not reach the sanitary sewer, the person may be permitted to have an exemption water meter installed. Such meter shall be furnished by the city. All other costs shall be at the expense of the user requiring the meter, including installation and any piping revisions required to ensure that only water not reaching the sanitary sewer is metered by the exemption meter. The city shall charge for each meter at the rate of 50 percent of the minimum service charge set for that size meter to compensate for furnishing, reading and servicing the meter. This charge shall be in addition to the wastewater service charge. The amount of exemption water metered shall be subtracted from the total amount of water used by the person to determine the applicable wastewater service charge. Regardless of the amount of metered exemptions, no user shall be charged for less than 1.00 DUE. 
(b)  Control of industrial wastes. 
(1)  General. 
a.  An "industrial discharge" or "industrial waste" shall have the same meaning as provided for in the Del-Hart Ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
b.  Each person discharging industrial waste into the public sewers of the municipality shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Del-Hart Ordinance, in effect from time to time. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any industrial waste that contains substances or possesses characteristics that are detrimental to the municipality's sewerage collection system. In such event, the municipality may impose any of the treatment alternatives provided for in the Del-Hart Ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(2)  Control manholes. 
a.  Each person discharging industrial waste into a public sewer shall construct and maintain one or more control manholes or access points to facilitate observation, measurement, and sampling their waste, including domestic sewage. 
b.  Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built at such locations and in such manner as may be acceptable to the Del-Hart commission. If measuring devices are to be permanently installed, they shall be of a type acceptable to the Del-Hart commission. 
c.  Control manholes, access facilities, and related equipment shall be installed by the person discharging the industrial waste at its expense, and shall be maintained by the person discharging the waste so as to be in safe condition, accessible, and in proper operating condition at all times. Plans for installation of the control manholes or access facilities and related equipment shall be approved by the Del-Hart commission prior to the beginning of construction. 
(3)  Wastewater measurement, sampling, and reporting. Wastewater flow measurements, sampling, and reporting shall be done in accordance with the Del-Hart Ordinance, as amended from time to time. Each user discharging industrial waste into a public sewer shall be charged for all costs associated with sampling and analytical testing. 
(c)  Discharge of holding tank waste. 
(1)  General. For purposes of this section, the terms "holding tank waste" and "licensed disposer" shall have the same meaning as provided for in the Del-Hart Ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(2)  Prohibition of discharge into the municipality's public sewers. No person, including a licensed disposer, shall discharge any holding tank waste, or any other similar waste, into any manhole or other opening in a public sewer owned or maintained by the municipality. Instead, all such discharges of holding tank wastes shall be made pursuant to the Del-Hart Ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(d)  Billing and payment of sewer service charges. 
(1)  Calculation. Sewer service charges that are to be assessed to users shall be computed by the municipality according to the rates and methodology presented in subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  Billing. Sewer service charges shall be billed to each user on a quarterly basis. Bills for such charges shall be sent out on or about the first business day of the first month of each quarter (April, July, October and January) and shall be due by the 25th day of that month. Every reasonable care will be exercised in the proper delivery of sewer bills. Failure to receive a sewer bill, however, shall not relieve any person of the responsibility for payment of sewer rates within the prescribed period nor exempt any person from any penalty imposed for delinquency in the payment. 
(3)  Penalty for delinquent payments. A penalty equal to one percent per month of the delinquent amount shown on any bill for services shall be added to all bills not paid by the date fixed therein for final payment. An additional penalty of ten percent shall be assessed and delinquent bills placed on the tax roll pursuant to the provisions set forth in Wis. Stats. § 66.0809(3), as amended from time to time. 
(4)  Remedies for failure to make payments. The municipality may direct that unpaid sewer service charges, connection fees, or other charges due from any person or user, shall be collected and taxed and shall be a lien upon the property served in the manner provided for in Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0809 and 66.0821(4)(d), as amended from time to time, or the municipality may utilize any other remedy available to it under Wisconsin law. 
(5)  Obligation for payment. The obligation for payment of sewer service charges, connection fees or other charges due the municipality shall be a joint and several obligation of the user and property owner, where the user and property owner are not the same person. To the end that there may be attempts at avoidance of payment of such charges and fees by nonproperty owner users, and to overcome the same, the municipality may send the bill for such a user, in care of the property owner. 
(6)  Remedies cumulative. All remedies provided for in this section are distinct and cumulative to any other right or remedy under this section or any other ordinance of the municipality or afforded by law or equity; and may be exercised by the municipality concurrently, independently, or successively. 
(7)  Disposition of revenue. The amounts received from the collection of sewer service charges authorized by this section shall be credited to the sanitary sewerage account which shall show all receipts and expenditures of the sewerage system. Charges collected for replacement expenses shall be credited to a segregated, nonlapsing replacement account. These funds are to be used exclusively for replacement. When appropriated by the municipality, the credits to the sanitary sewerage account shall be available for the payment of the requirements for operation, maintenance, repairs, and depreciation of the sewerage system consistent with 40 CFR 35.929. Any surplus outside the purview of 40 CFR 35.929, in said account, shall be available for the payment of principal and interest of obligations issued and outstanding, or which may be issued, to provide funds for said sewerage system, or part thereof, and all or a part of the expenses for additions and improvements and other necessary disbursements or indebtedness, and the municipality may resolve to pledge such surplus or any part thereof for any such purpose. All present outstanding sewer system obligations, including refunding obligations, shall be paid from this fund as to both principal and interest, unless otherwise required by law. 
(8)  Excess revenues. Excess revenues collected from a user class will be applied to operation and maintenance costs attributable to that class for the next year. 
(e)  Audit. Unless otherwise required by applicable statutes, the municipality shall conduct an annual compilation or an independent annual audit, the purpose of which shall be to maintain the proportionality between users and user classes of the user charge system and to ensure that adequate revenues are available relative to increasing operation, maintenance and replacement costs and debt retirement. A summary of the findings and recommendations of this audit shall be published, from time to time, as determined by the municipality. 
(f)  Connection charges. 
(1)  Del-Hart commission connection charge. For each connection of a building sewer to a public sewer within the municipality, there shall be paid to the municipality a connection charge as determined pursuant to the Del-Hart Ordinance, as amended from time to time, together with any other tapping fees, impact fees or similar charges imposed under such ordinance for the privilege of connecting to the public sewers. 
(2)  Municipality connection charges. For each connection of a building sewer to a public sewer within the municipality, there shall be paid to the municipality a connection charge, in the amount as is set forth in the municipality's charge schedule as adopted from time to time by the approving authority. The current (2013) connection charge is $2,637.00 per DUE (domestic user equivalent). Such connection charge shall be assessed to the person seeking the connection and shall be paid at the time a building permit is obtained and payment in full shall be a condition precedent to the actual connection. The amount of the connection charge of the municipality provided for hereunder may be amended as the approving authority may from time to time determine. 
(3)  Connection charges. For purposes of this section, the connection charges described in subsections (f)(1) and (2) of this section are collectively referred to as "connection charge(s)." The failure to pay any connection charge is a violation of this section; and this municipality may pursue all rights and remedies provided for herein. City and Del-Hart connection charges shall be based upon a user's potential needed capacity in the treatment facility in accordance with Schedule "A." Each new user or existing user who changes its use requiring additional capacity in the treatment facility shall be charged connection charges or additional connection charges, payable as provided herein. Such connection charges shall apply to all connections to the city's sewer system resulting from new construction or the change of an existing use whereby additional capacity shall be required from the treatment facility. The minimum connection charges shall never be less than 1.00 DUE regardless of the use of the premises from which connection is made. While it is contemplated herein that connection charges will be based upon the estimated future average flow of each new user or user changing their use, the city will on a periodic basis have the right to reevaluate any user's flow and strength and to charge additional connection charges if additional usage of the system is shown and additional capacity in the facility are utilized. The plumbing inspector shall ascertain the number of fixture units tributary to each building sewer and document that the building sewer meets the requirements as set forth in Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 82 and that the connection charges have been appropriately assessed as provided by this section. 
a.  New users. On or before the date of issuance of a building permit or plumbing permit for the construction of a new structure which will be connected to a building sewer that discharges into a public sewer, the city shall advise the commission of: 
1.  The parcel identification information where the connection is to occur; 
2.  The name, address and contact information of the new user; 
3.  Whether or not the new user will also be served by a public water supply system; 
4.  The number of DUEs applicable to the new user, which determination shall be made in accordance with Del-Hart Ordinance section 18.12.4(6); and 
5.  Any additional information the commission or its designee may reasonably require. 
Upon receipt of such information, the commission shall issue an invoice to the new user for the connection charges due the commission and the city. At said time, the commission shall provide the new user with a copy of Del-Hart Ordinance section 18.12.4(4) notifying the user of the user's rights of appeal as it relates to the determination of DUEs applicable to the property. The city shall collect the connection charges as a condition precedent to the issuance of the building or plumbing permit; provided, however, that the city may defer collection of the connection charges until issuance of an occupancy permit for the structure in question. 
b.  Appeal by new user. A new user who disputes: 
1.  The determination of DUEs applicable to such user; or 
2.  The determination of the connection charges; 
may within 60 days following the date of the commission's invoice described in subsection (b) of this section, file a written appeal with the commission specifying the nature of the dispute. No appeal may be considered by the commission unless the appeal is timely filed, as required herein, and the connection charges are paid in accordance with the terms of this chapter and the invoice. If an appeal is timely filed, the commission shall hold a hearing in accordance with Del-Hart Ordinance section 18.12.4(5). Any appeal not timely filed, shall be summarily denied by the commission. 
c.  Existing user's increase in wastewater discharges. Connection charges are also applicable to existing users who substantially increase their wastewater discharges to the wastewater facilities. For existing users, additional connection charges are due when the average daily flow from such User increases by 1.00 DUE or more over an average 24-month period, the first 12 months of which is determined on a July 1 through June 30 time period. Within 60 days following the end of the first 12-month period, the commission shall notify in writing (the "initial notice") the user and the city wherein the user is located that the average daily flow from such existing user exceeds the foregoing baseline. The initial notice shall advise the user and city of the excess wastewater discharge, the potential number of additional DUEs that may be assigned as a result of such excess, and the anticipated amount of the additional connection charges associated therewith and to become due to the commission if the user does not reduce such discharges. The existing User shall then have the succeeding July 1 through June 30 time period of 12 calendar months within which to take action and/or reduce the excess discharges. If the wastewater discharge is not subsequently reduced during the said second 12-month period of time, then the commission shall notify the user and city in writing of the additional DUEs that are due. Such notice (the "final notice") shall advise of the number of additional DUEs that have been assigned; the additional connection charges due to the commission and the city as a result thereof; and that the user has the right to appeal the determination of the additional DUEs that have been so assigned. The final notice shall include a copy of said section; and shall be given within 60 days following the end of the expiration of the second 12-month time period. 
d.  Appeal by existing user. An existing user shall have the right to appeal a determination assessing additional DUEs in accordance with the following procedure: 
1.  Within 60 days after the date of mailing of the final notice by the commission that additional connection charges are due as a result of additional DUEs resulting from increased flows, the said user may file a written appeal with the commission which written appeal shall: 
(i)  Request a reconsideration of the DUE determination; and 
(ii)  Specify the grounds, reasons, and/or facts supporting the request. 
2.  No appeal shall be permitted unless as a condition precedent, the additional connection charges are timely paid within 60 days after the filing of the final notice by the commission. Any appeal not timely filed shall be summarily dismissed. 
3.  If a timely appeal is taken, then the commission shall hold a hearing at which time the user and any interested party may present evidence and reasons in support of or in opposition to the appeal. The commission shall within 60 days after such hearing, render its decision, to the user, unless a longer period of time is granted by the user. If the appeal is based upon the claim that excess wastewater discharges are the result of a water leak or faulty meters, the user shall have the burden of proof to show: 
(i)  Good cause why the leak or faulty meter could not have been remedied within the 24-month period described in subsection (f)(3)c of this section; and 
(ii)  That the water resulting from the leak did not subsequently, either in whole or in part, enter the public sewerage system. 
4.  The decision of the commission shall be in writing and mailed to the user and customer in question. If the commission redetermines the assignment of DUEs to such user and/or the amount of the associated connection charges based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, it shall order the refund of any connection charges previously paid which are found to be unsubstantiated. Such refund shall be without interest thereon. 
5.  The user may appeal from the written decision of the commission by filing a petition for review within 60 days after date of mailing of the decision, with the Wisconsin Public Service Commission pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0821(5), as amended. 
(g)  Violations, abatement procedures and penalties. 
(1)  Violations constituting public nuisance. A violation (other than the failure to pay sewer service charges or other fees or costs due under this section) of any provision of this section or any other rule or order of the municipality is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(2)  Damage to municipality's property. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure of equipment which is a part of the municipality's sewerage system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(3)  Enforcement. The municipality shall have the right to enforce the provisions of this section and shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under this section to abate a public nuisance unless the municipality shall have inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and shall have satisfied itself that a nuisance does in fact exist. 
(4)  Summary abatement. If the municipality determines that a public nuisance exists within the municipality and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the municipality may cause the same to be abated and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be. 
(5)  Abatement after notice. If the municipality determines that a public nuisance exists on the private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to present great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the municipality shall serve notice to the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the same within ten days. If such nuisance is not removed within such ten days, the municipality shall cause the nuisances to be removed as provided in subsection (g)(4) of this section. 
(6)  Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the municipality or its officials in accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin. 
(7)  Court order. Except when necessary under section 50-4, the municipality shall not use force to obtain access to private property to abate a public nuisance, but shall request permission to enter upon private property if such premises are occupied, and, if such permission is denied, shall apply to any court having jurisdiction for an order assisting the abatement of public nuisance. 
(8)  Cost of abatement. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this section for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the municipality shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, and such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. For purposes hereof, costs shall include, but not be limited to, actual attorneys' fees and court costs. 
(9)  Continued violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the aforesaid notice time limit provided shall forfeit not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution. In default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, said violator shall be imprisoned in the Waukesha County jail for a period of not to exceed 30 days. Each day in which any violation is continued beyond the aforesaid notice time limit shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(10)  Accidental discharge. Any person found to be responsible for accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewerage system which causes damage to the sewerage system and/or a receiving body of water (e.g., lake, river, stream, etc.) shall, in addition to a fine, pay the amount to cover all damages, both of which will be determined by the municipality or other governmental authority having appropriate jurisdictions. 
(11)  Accidental discharge reporting. Any person responsible for an accidental discharge that may have a detrimental impact on the sewerage system, shall immediately report the nature and amount of the discharge to the Del-Hart commission. 
(12)  Liability for losses. Any person violating any provision of this section shall become liable to the municipality for any expense, attorneys' fees, costs, engineering fees, loss, or damage occasioned by reason of such violation which the municipality may suffer as a result thereof. Without intent to limit the generality of the foregoing, the municipality shall have the right of recovery from all such persons, any expense incurred by the municipality for the repair or replacement of any part of the public sewerage system damaged in any manner by any person by the performance of any work under its control, or by any negligent acts. 
(h)  Appeals. 
(1)  Review of administrative determinations. Any person having a substantial interest which is adversely affected by an administrative determination of the municipality or any agent thereof, may have such determination reviewed or provided for herein. Only administrative determinations described in Wis. Stats. § 68.02, as amended from time to time, are subject to review under this subsection (h). Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, any determinations involving sewer service charges (or any component thereof), application fees, connection fees, or any other fees or costs due under this section are not subject to review hereunder. Further, any determinations involving the levying and assessment of special assessments or any of the determinations described in Wis. Stats. § 68.03 are not subject to review hereunder. 
(2)  Procedure for review. A person satisfying the requirements of subsection (h)(1) of this section, shall first make a written request to the municipality for a review of the administrative determination, which request shall be submitted to the approving authority within 15 days following the determination in question. The request shall be in writing, shall state the name and address of the person seeking the review, shall describe the circumstances surrounding the determination and shall state the grounds upon which such person contends that the determination should be modified or reversed. 
(3)  Hearing. Upon receipt of a request for review under subsection (h)(2) of this section, the person seeking the review shall have a hearing before the approving authority, provided the provisions of subsection (h)(4) of this section are satisfied. The hearing shall be held at a time and place determined by the approving authority, within 30 days from the date of receipt of the request. The approving authority shall notify such person, by mail or personal service, at least ten days before such hearing of the time and place of the hearing. Except as otherwise provided for herein, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 68.11(2), as amended from time to time. 
(4)  Costs. Any appeal to the approving authority under subsection (h)(2) of this section shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable review fee of $250.00. In the event the person seeking review desires the hearing proceedings to be taken by stenographer or by a recording device, the expense thereof shall be paid by the person seeking the review. 
(5)  Decision and appeal. Within 30 days of completion of the hearing under subsection (h)(3) of this section and the filing of briefs, if any, the approving authority shall make its written determination on the request for review. Such determination shall be mailed or delivered to such person at the address set forth in the request for review. The decision of the approving authority may be subject to judicial review under Wis. Stats. § 68.13, as amended from time to time, in the manner provided for therein. 
(6)  Application of Wis. Stats. ch. 68. Except as to those specific statutes expressly incorporated herein, the municipality elects not to be governed by any other provision of Wis. Stats. ch. 68, as amended. 
(7)  Costs. In the event the approving authority does not modify or reverse the administrative determination in question following the hearing thereon, or in the event the administrative determination is sustained on appeal under Wis. Stats. § 68.13, then in either of such events, the person who has sought the review shall reimburse the municipality for all hearing and court costs incurred, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(i)  Septic systems. 
(1)  Septic tanks prohibited. Except as otherwise allowed by the exemptions contained in section 50-4(d)(3)c, the maintenance and use of a septic tank or other private sewerage disposal system by any owner of land located within the municipality, where such land is adjacent to a public sewer main, and who has failed to connect to the municipality's sewerage system once so directed to connect, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a health hazard. Such nuisance and hazard shall be abated; and damages and costs recovered therefore in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 823.02. 
(2)  Septic systems allowed. In certain isolated locations within the boundaries of the municipality it may be necessary for the owners of certain properties not served by the municipality's sanitary sewer system to continue the maintenance and use of a septic tank or other private sewerage disposal system. Such maintenance and use shall also be allowed according to the exemptions contained in section 50-4(d)(3)c. Such maintenance and use shall be considered as a temporary wastewater disposal system and is subject to the review and approval of the municipality. The review and approval will be on a case-by-case basis, with each case determined upon its particular facts and circumstances. 
(3)  Written permit required. Before commencement of the construction of a private wastewater disposal system or additions to an existing private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the office of the proper state or county agency. 
(4)  Size of system. The type, capacity, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all state and county requirements. 
(5)  Maintenance. The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times. 
(6)  Health requirements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(7)  Future connection. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, the property owner shall be required to comply with the connection requirements contained in section 50-4(d)(3). At such time as the connection is made, the private wastewater disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with sand, gravel or similar material or the system shall be completely removed. 
(Code 1997, § 13.05)  
Sec. 50-6. - Septic waste and sewerage sludge disposal. 
(a)  Septic waste disposal. 
(1)  Definition. As used in this subsection (a), the term "septic waste" means the accumulated residual solids generated by private septic systems, portable toilets, out-door toilets or holding tanks of any type, including sanitary systems incorporated in recreational boats or vehicles. 
(2)  Restrictions. No person shall apply or allow septic waste to be applied to any lands under their ownership, lease or control in the city. 
(3)  Disposal facility. Septic waste may be disposed of at the Del-Hart wastewater treatment plant subject to requirements established by that facility. All costs incurred from such disposal shall be borne by the person disposing of such waste. 
(b)  Sewerage sludge disposal. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (b), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Site orproperty site means the property on which the applicant intends to apply sludge. Each real estate tax parcel as found on the tax rolls of the city shall constitute a separate "site" or "property site." 
Sludge means the accumulated residual solids (usually in aqueous solution) generated through the treatment of municipal or industrial wastewaters. 
(2)  Permit required. No person shall apply or allow sludge to be applied to any lands under their ownership, lease or control in the city without having first obtained a permit from the city council. This shall apply to both existing and proposed sludge disposal operations. 
(3)  Application. Written application for a permit to apply sludge on any lands located within the city shall be made to the city clerk. The application shall state: 
a.  The applicant shall be the owner of the wastewater treatment facility generating the sludge. 
b.  The name and address of the applicants, and if the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent of the corporation. 
c.  The post office and legal description of the site to be used. 
d.  The name of the firm, corporation and/or person(s) that has ownership, lease or control of the site to be used. (A copy of any contract in force between the applicant and the firm, corporation or person that has such ownership, lease or control of the site shall be appended to the application.) 
e.  The name of the firm, corporation and/or person(s) with whom the applicant has a contract for the disposal of the sludge. (A copy of such contract shall be appended to the application.) 
f.  The name(s) and address of the owners of any other site(s) upon which the applicant is presently applying sludge, whether such site(s) is within or outside the city limits. (This requirement may be waived by a majority vote of the city council.) 
g.  The name and post office address of all property owners whose property, or any portion thereof, are located within 500 feet of any boundary of the property site on which the applicant intends to dispose of the sludge. 
(4)  Term of permit. A permit issued hereunder shall be for a period commencing on April 1 in the year of application and ending on November 30 in the year of application. Winter (December 1 through March 31) sludge disposal will not be permitted. 
(5)  Permit fee. A nonrefundable annual permit fee of $300.00 shall accompany each application. 
(6)  Public hearing. The city clerk shall, within 30 days of receipt of an application hereunder, schedule a public hearing on the application. Notice of the public hearing shall be published as a Class I notice under the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 985. The city clerk shall, not less than ten days before the hearing, by certified mail, notify all property owners of the hearing whose properties are located within 500 feet of the proposed sludge disposal site. 
(7)  Granting of permit. 
a.  The city council shall consider the evidence presented at the public hearing and may, upon a majority vote, issue a permit for sludge disposal, but only after an affirmative finding: 
1.  That the sludge will be immediately incorporated with the soil. 
2.  That the sludge will be applied in accordance with the appropriate regulations of the Wisconsin department of natural resources and that approval therefor has been obtained by the applicant to apply sludge to the lands described in the application. 
3.  That no sludge will be applied at a distance less than 200 feet from the nearest residence. 
4.  That no sludge will be applied at a distance less than 25 feet from any property line. 
5.  That no sludge will be applied at a distance less than 25 feet from any road right-of-way, ditch or dry run. 
6.  That the sludge will not be applied at a distance less than 200 feet from the nearest private water supply well and/or 1,000 feet from the nearest public supply water well, and that the application of the sludge shall not constitute a possible contamination source for any water supply, irrespective of the location of the water supply from the disposal site. 
7.  That the sludge will not be applied at a distance less than 500 feet from any stream, pond, navigable water body or other channelized waterway. 
8.  That the sludge will not be applied to any soil which, because of its composition, would tend to create a health hazard. 
9.  That the applicant has applied for and received all appropriate licenses from county and state licensing authorities. 
10.  That the application of sludge will not constitute a public nuisance. 
11.  That the sludge will not be applied to any area with less than three feet of soil above bedrock and high ground water levels. 
b.  Before any action is taken upon an application for a permit, the council may require the applicant to conduct soil testing to determine the ability of the soil upon the premises described in the application to absorb sludge. The manner and type of such soil test shall be determined by the council and all costs and expenses for such soil test shall be paid by the applicant. 
(8)  Bond. Before such permit shall be issued, the applicant shall file with the city clerk a surety bond in the amount of $10,000.00, and proof of liability insurance conditioned upon and as a guarantee that the applicant will fully abide by all of the terms and provisions of this section and any other ordinance of the city applicable thereto, and any rules and regulations imposed by the city council as conditions for granting of such permit, and as a further guarantee that the applicant will be fully able to compensate any resident of the city who might be injured or damaged by application of the sludge to the property site described in the application. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be subject, upon conviction, to a forfeiture of not more than $1,000.00, together with the cost of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
(Code 1997, § 13.06)  
Sec. 50-7. - Wellhead Protection Ordinance (WHPO). 
(a)  Purpose and authority. The residents of the city depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality. The purpose of this Wellhead Protection Ordinance is to institute land use regulations and restrictions to protect the city's municipal water supply and well fields, and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. Statutory authority of the city to enact these regulations was established by the Wisconsin Legislature in 1983, Wisconsin Act 410 (effective May 11, 1984), which specifically added groundwater protection to the statutory authorization for municipal planning and zoning to protect public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Application of regulations. 
(1)  The regulations specified in this Wellhead Protection Ordinance shall apply to all lands that lie within the five-year time of travel (TOT) of each city municipal well or 1,200 feet minimum and are within the city corporate limits. 
(2)  No new use or change in use of any structure, land or water shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered and no development shall commence without full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agricultural activities means and includes pesticide and/or fertilizer storage and use, septage and/or sludge spreading, animal waste land spreading, animal waste facilities and animal confinement facilities. 
Aquifer means a saturated, permeable geologic formation that contains and will yield significant quantities of water. 
Cone of depression means the area where the water level is lowered by pumping. For City Well No. 1 the cone of depression has been estimated mathematically to be 17,396 feet in radius, assuming 30 days continuous pumping at 500 gallons per minute with no recharging; or 5,501 feet in radius assuming three days continuous pumping at 500 gallons per minute with no recharging. This area is protected by the Maquoketa shale and will require no additional restrictions. For City Well No. 2 the cone of depression or as referenced in the report, the zone of influence has been estimated mathematically to be 234,000 feet in radius, assuming 30 days continuous pumping at 500 gallons per minute with no recharging. 
Five-year time of travel (TOT) means the recharge area upgradient of the cone of depression, the outer boundary of which it is determined or estimated that groundwater and potential contaminants will take five years to reach a pumping well(s). The five-year TOT for the City Well No. 1 is estimated as a distance of 477 feet upgradient of the well. This area is also protected by the Maquoketa shale. The minimum required wellhead protection radius of 1,200 feet will be used as the five-year total area for Well No. 1. The five-year TOT for the City Well No. 2 extends approximately 900 feet downgradient (south-southeast) and approximately 1,950 feet upgradient (north-northwest). A combination of the 1,950 feet and the minimum required wellhead protection radius of 1200 feet will be used as the five-year total area for Well No. 2. 
Groundwater divide means a ridge in the water table, or potentiometric surface, from which groundwater moves away at right angles in both directions; line of highest hydraulic head in the water table or potentiometric surface. 
Groundwater protection district means and includes the following areas: 
(1)  Minimum separation distances specified in NR 811.12(4)(d). 
(2)  Recharge area for five-year total upgradient. 
Natural vegetation means and includes native trees, shrubs and prairie species and nonnative plants, excluding lawns. 
Net lot area is determined by subtracting the area of the building footprint, driveways and other impervious surfaces from the total lot area. 
Nonconforming use means an existing lawful use of land, structure, building or accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this section. 
Recharge area mean an area in which water reaches the zone of saturation by surface infiltration and encompasses all areas or features that supply groundwater recharge to a well. 
Well field means a piece of land used primarily for the purpose of locating wells to supply a municipal water system. 
(d)  Groundwater protection district (hereafter district). The district consists of two separate areas: 
(1)  Lands immediately surrounding the well. The limitations placed on this area are those specified in the Administrative Code. 
(2)  Lands within the 1,200 feet [radius] for Well No. 1 and lands within the combined radius of 1,950 feet and 1,200 feet for Well No. 2. 
The wellhead protection areas are shown on Figure 1 which is incorporated herein by reference and on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer. 
(1)  Administrative Code separation distances. 
a.  Intent. The area to be protected are the lands immediately surrounding Wells No. 1 and No. 2. These lands are subject to the most stringent land use and development restrictions because of their close proximity to the well field and the corresponding threat of contamination. 
b.  Separation distances. 
1.  Fifty feet between a well and a storm sewer main. 
2.  Two hundred feet between a well and any sanitary sewer main, lift station or single-family residential fuel oil tank. A lesser separation distance may be allowed for sanitary sewer mains where the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main materials and joints and pressure tested in place to meet current AWWA 600 specifications. In no case may the separation distance between a well and a sanitary sewer main be less than 50 feet. 
3.  Four hundred feet between a well and a septic tank receiving less than 8,000 gallons per day, a cemetery or a storm water drainage pond. 
4.  Six hundred feet between a well and any gasoline or fuel oil storage tank installation that has received written approval from the department of industry, labor and human relations or its designated agent under Wis. Admin. Code § ILHR 10.10. 
5.  One thousand feet between a well and land application of municipal, commercial or industrial waste; industrial, commercial or municipal wastewater lagoons or storage structures; and septic tanks or soil absorption units receiving 8,000 gallons per day or more. 
6.  One thousand two hundred feet between a well and any solid waste storage, transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor, processing, one time disposal or small demolition facility; sanitary landfill; salt or de-icing material storage area; gasoline or fuel oil storage tanks that have not received written approval from the department of industry, labor and human relations or its designated agent under Wis. Admin. Code § ILHR 10.10; bulk fuel storage facilities; and pesticide or fertilizer handling or storage facilities. 
(2)  Five-year time of travel areas. 
a.  Intent. The primary areas to be protected is the land within 1,200 feet of Well No. 1, and the land within the combined radius of 1,950 feet and 1,200 feet of Well No. 2, known as the wellhead protection areas. These lands are subject to the most stringent land use and development restrictions because of their close proximity to the well and the corresponding threat of contamination. 
b.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses within Wellhead Protection Ordinance area: 
1.  Parks, provided there is no on-site waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities associated within this use. 
2.  Playgrounds. 
3.  Wildlife areas. 
4.  Non-motorized trails, such as biking, skiing, nature and fitness trails. 
5.  Residential uses. 
6.  Agricultural uses. 
7.  Commercial and/or industrial uses, except those listed as prohibited below. 
c.  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited uses within the Wellhead Protection Ordinance area: 
1.  Septage and/or sludge spreading. 
2.  Animal waste facilities. 
3.  Gas stations. 
4.  Vehicle repair establishments, including auto body repair. 
5.  Printing shop. 
6.  Bus or truck terminals. 
7.  Landfills or waste disposal facilities. 
8.  Nonmunicipal wastewater treatment facilities. 
9.  Nonmunicipal spray wastewater facilities. 
10.  Junkyards or auto salvage yards. 
11.  Bulk fertilizer and pesticide facilities. 
12.  Asphalt products manufacturing. 
13.  Dry cleaning facilities. 
14.  Salt storage. 
15.  Electroplating. 
16.  Exterminating shops. 
17.  Paint and coating manufacturing. 
18.  Hazardous and toxic materials storage and use. 
19.  Hazardous and toxic waste facilities. 
20.  Radioactive waste facilities. 
21.  Tire and battery services. 
22.  Garage and vehicular towing. 
23.  Public and municipal maintenance garages. 
24.  Underground storage tanks. 
25.  Other similar uses that pose a threat to groundwater quality. 
(e)  Other permitted uses. 
(1)  Individuals and/or facilities may request the city to permit other land uses in the district. 
(2)  All requests shall be in writing to the city and shall include an environmental assessment report. 
(3)  A copy of the environmental assessment report shall be forwarded to the city administrator as designee for recommendation to the city plan commission. 
(4)  Any permitted uses shall be conditional and may include required environmental and safety monitoring consistent with local, state and federal requirements, and/or bonds and/or sureties satisfactory to the city. 
(f)  Nonconforming uses; general. Insofar as the standards in this section are not inconsistent with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), they shall apply to all nonconforming uses. The existing lawful use of a structure or building or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this section may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use shall be permitted unless they are made in conformity with the provisions of this section. For the purposes of this section, the words "modification" and "addition" shall include, but not be limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing structure or accessory use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications or additions; such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components. 
(2)  If a nonconforming use is discontinued for three consecutive months, any future use of the land, structure or building shall conform with the appropriate provisions of this section. 
(g)  Requirements for existing facilities. 
(1)  Facilities shall provide copies of all federal, state and local facility operation approvals or certificates and ongoing environmental monitoring results to the city. 
(2)  Facilities shall provide additional environmental or safety structures/monitoring as deemed necessary by the city, which may include, but are not limited to, stormwater runoff management and monitoring. 
(3)  Facilities shall replace equipment or expand in a manner that improves the existing environmental and safety technologies already in existence. 
(4)  Facilities shall have the responsibility of devising and filing with the city a contingency plan satisfactory to the city for the immediate notification of city officials in the event of an emergency. 
(5)  In the event the individual and/or facility causes the release of any contaminants which endanger the district, the activity causing said release shall immediately cease and a cleanup satisfactory to the city shall occur. 
(6)  The individual/facility shall be responsible for all costs of cleanup, city consultant fees at the invoice amount, plus administrative costs for oversight, review and documentation. 
(h)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  Violations. It shall be unlawful to construct or use any structure, land or water in violation of any of the provisions of this section. In case of any violation, the city council may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin a violation of this section. 
(2)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00 plus the costs of prosecution for each violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall have such costs added to their real property as a lien against the property. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1997, § 13.07)  
Sec. 50-8. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter, except section 50-4(h) through (j), shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall within the period of time stated in such notice permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall upon conviction thereof pay a forfeiture in the amount provided for in section 1-4. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city, commission and others, as their interest may appear, for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city, commission or others by reason of such violation, including any costs in connection with repairing damages to the wastewater facilities or any downstream user or facilities damaged as a result of a prohibited discharge or any violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided by section 1-4. 
(Code 1997, § 13.10)  
Secs. 50-9—50-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER UTILITY REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 50-35. - Creation. 
It is hereby ordained by the common council of the City of Delafield, Waukesha County, Wisconsin, that the Water Utility Ordinance is hereby created to read as set out herein. 
(Code 1997, § 13.20)  
Sec. 50-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Community water system means a public water system which serves at least 15 service connections used by year-round residents or regularly serves at least 25 year-round residents. 
Cross connection means any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from a public water system, and the other, water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems. 
Distribution system means all pipes or conduits by which water is delivered to consumers except piping inside buildings served and service pipes from a building to a distribution main or pipe. 
District No. 1 means the area defined on the map as "Exhibit A" of this section and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Groundwater means that part of the subsurface water which is in the zone of saturation. 
Groundwater source means all groundwater obtained from horizontal collectors, infiltration lines, springs and dug, drilled or other types of wells. 
Municipal water system means a community water system owned by a city, village, county, town, town sanitary district, utility district or a federal, state, county, or municipally owned institution for congregate care or correction, or a privately owned water utility serving the foregoing. 
Noncomplying means a well or pump installation which does not comply with the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 112 in effect at the time the well was constructed, a contamination source was installed, the pump was installed or work was done on either the well or pump installation. 
Person means an individual, corporation, company, association, cooperative, trust, institution, partnership, state, municipality, or federal agency. 
PSC means the Wisconsin Public Service Commission, including its rule and rate structures. 
Pump installation means the pump and related equipment used for withdrawing water from a well, including the discharge piping, the underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling faucets and well seals or caps. 
Unsafe means a well or pump installation which produces water which is bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with substances in excess of the standards of Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 809 and 140 or for which a health advisory has been issued by the state DNR. 
Unused means a well or pump installation which is not in use or does not have a functional pumping system. 
Utility means a public utility as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 196. 
Water service means any water lateral or service piping within the public right-of-way or on private lands which is used to supply any building or dwelling with potable water. 
Water utility means the public utility authorized by the Public Service Commission by order dated April 5, 1994. 
Waterworks orwater system means any facility installed or constructed to obtain, store, treat or convey water for drinking or domestic use for a public water system. 
Well means an excavation or opening into the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods for the purpose of obtaining groundwater. 
Well abandonment means the filling and sealing of a well according to the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 112. 
Well driller means a person defined as a well driller by Wis. Stats. § 162.05(5). 
(Code 1997, § 13.21)  
Sec. 50-37. - Water District No. 1. 
The common council does hereby create and establish Water District No. 1. The boundaries of said district are as shown on "Attachment A" on file in the office of the city clerk and described in "Attachment B." 
(Code 1997, § 13.22)  
Sec. 50-38. - Control of community water system. 
(a)  Control of community water system. The common council does hereby create and establish a community water system for the city. The management and control of said water system shall be vested in the city council, acting as the board of public works, who shall have the powers and perform the functions of the public utility commissions as prescribed by state statutes. All records, minutes and written proceedings of the city council relating to the water public utility shall be kept and maintained by the city clerk, who shall keep all financial records as well. 
(b)  Facilities and ownership. Said community water system shall consist of deep wells, storage tanks, distribution facilities, including fire hydrants, metering vaults and other facilities required in connection therewith. The city shall have the power to lay mains through the alleys, streets, private and public grounds of the territory encompassed by water utility, and to construct and install required facilities and do all such work as may be necessary or convenient in the management of the water system. The city council shall have the power by themselves, their officers, agents and employees to enter upon any land for the purpose of making examinations or to supervise in the performance of their duties under this section without liability therefor; and the city council shall have the power to purchase and acquire in the name of the water utility all real and personal property necessary for the construction, repair and remodeling or additions to said municipal water system. 
(c)  Condemnation of real estate. Whenever any real estate or any easements therein, or use thereof, shall, in the judgment of the city council, be necessary to the operation of the water system and, whenever, for any cause, an agreement for purchase thereof cannot be made with the owner thereof, the city council shall proceed with all necessary steps to take such real estate or easement therein by condemnation in accordance with the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(d)  Title to real estate and personality. All property real, personal and mixed acquired for the construction of the water system and all city-originated plans, specifications, diagrams, papers, books and records connected therewith and all buildings, machinery and fixtures pertaining thereto shall be city property. 
(Code 1997, § 13.23)  
Sec. 50-39. - Consumer rules and regulations. 
That the rules, regulations and water rates of the water system of water utility hereinafter set forth shall be considered a part of the contract with every person, company or corporation who is supplied with water through the water system; and every such person, company or corporation, by taking water or connecting with the said system, shall be considered as expressing his or her assent and be bound thereby. Whenever any of said rules and regulations or such conditions as the city council or PSC may hereafter adopt are violated, the water shall be shut off from the building or place of such violation even though two or more parties are receiving water through the same pipe and shall not be turned on again except by order of the city council and on payment of all arrears, expenses and established charges of shutting off and turning on, and on such other terms as the city council may determine. These rules shall conform to the established rules and regulations of the PSC of the State of Wisconsin or Wisconsin Statutes applicable thereto. In case of such violation, the city council may declare any payment made for the water by the party or parties committing such violation to be forfeited and the same shall thereupon be forfeited. The right is reserved to the city council to change said rules, regulations and water rates from time to time as they may deem advisable and to make special rates and contracts in all proper cases, subject to the authority of the Wisconsin Public Service Commission. 
(Code 1997, § 13.24)  
Sec. 50-40. - Operating rules. 
(a)  Establishment of service. 
(1)  Customers to be subject to PSC rules. All persons who may hereafter receive water from the water utility or who may hereafter make application therefor shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by rules and regulations as filed with the PSC. 
(2)  Application. Application for water service shall be made in writing on a form furnished by the city clerk. The application shall contain a legal description of the property to be served, including tax key number, name of applicant, the use to be made of service and such other information as the utility may require. 
(3)  Conditions for service. Service shall be furnished only if: 
a.  Applicant has installed or agrees to install an approved service pipe from the water main in the street to the point of use laid not less than six feet below the surface of any established or proposed grade and according to utility's specifications. 
b.  Applicant pays the required connection charge or special assessment charges in accordance with the resolution for the project. 
c.  Premises have adequate piping beyond the metering point. 
d.  Applicant shall pay any water capacity assessment charges which the city council shall deem reasonable and necessary. 
(4)  Division of water service prohibited. No division of the water service of any lot or parcel of land shall be made for the extension and independent meterage of the supply to an adjoining lot or parcel of land. No division of a water supply service shall be made at the curb or lot line for separate supplies therefrom for two or more separate premises having frontage on any street or public service strip whether owned by the same or different parties. The water service shall be of undiminished size from the lot line into the building. 
(5)  Approval may be withheld. The city council is hereby empowered to withhold approval of any application wherein full information of the purpose of such supply is not clearly indicated and set forth by the applicant property owner. 
(b)  Service contract. 
(1)  The minimum service contract period shall be one year unless otherwise specified by special contract or in the applicable rate schedule. Where a customer at his/her request, has been disconnected prior to expiration of the customer's minimum contract period and the customer's account is not delinquent and where thereafter the customer requests the reconnection of service, a reconnection charge of $100.00, payable in advance, shall be collected. The minimum contract period is renewed with each reconnection. 
(2)  A reconnection charge of $100.00 shall also be required from consumers whose services are disconnected because of nonpayment of bills when due, including disconnection for failure to comply with deposit or guarantee rules. 
(3)  A person shall be considered as the same consumer provided the reconnection is required for the same premises by any member of the same family, or if a place of business, by any partner or employee of the same business. 
(c)  Turning on water. No water shall be turned on for a consumer except by a duly authorized employee of the water utility. When a plumber has completed his work he shall leave the water turned off. Said plumber will be permitted to test his work, however, but when said testing is completed the plumber shall leave the water service shut off. 
(d)  Stop boxes. The consumer shall protect the stop box on his property and shall keep the same free from dirt and other obstructions. The water utility shall not be liable for failure to locate the stop box and shut off water in case of a leak on the consumer's premises. The consumer shall allow access to the stop box by, and not interfere with, water utility personnel at all times. 
(e)  Thawing frozen services. 
(1)  Frozen services shall be thawed out by and at the expense of the water utility unless freezing was caused by contributory fault or negligence by the consumer such as reduction of grade, improperly installed consumer service pipe, etc. 
(2)  Following the freezing of a service the water utility shall take such steps and issue such instructions as may be necessary to allow the water to flow to prevent refreezing. No charge will be made for rethawing if instructions are followed. In case it is necessary to allow the water to flow to prevent refreezing, the consumer must make provision for proper disposal of the wastewater. The charge for water will be adjusted to allow a credit for water permitted to run as a result of water utility instructions. Credit will not be allowed if ordered to run due to negligence or fault as stated in subsection (e)(1) of this section. 
(f)  Installation of meters. Meters will be furnished and placed by the water utility and are not to be disconnected or tampered with by the consumer. All meters shall be so located that they shall be protected from obstructions and permit ready access thereto for reading, inspection and servicing, such location to be designated and approved by the city administrator or his designee. In industrial, commercial or any other building where the meter setting is not adjacent to an outside wall, it shall be the owner's responsibility to provide a conduit (minimum one-half inch) from the meter to the outside wall for the purpose of installing the low voltage wire from the water meter to the outside reader. Location and routing of conduit will be at the discretion of the city administrator or his designee. All piping within the building must be supplied by the consumer. Where additional meters are desired by the consumer, the consumer shall pay for all piping and an additional amount sufficient to cover the cost of maintenance and depreciation, but not less than $0.25 per month. The meters furnished and installed by the water utility shall at all times remain the property of the water utility. 
(g)  Service piping for meter settings. 
(1)  In cases where a new customer whose service is to be metered installs the original service piping or where an existing metered customer changes his service piping for his own convenience, or where an existing flat rate customer requests to be metered, the customer shall, at the customers expense, provide a suitable location and the proper connections for the meter. 
(2)  The city administrator or his designee should be consulted as to the type and size of meter setting. Where it is possible to set meters in the basement, or other suitable place within the building, a short nipple shall be inserted after the stop and waste cock, then a union, and then another nipple and coupling of the proper length. The nipple attached to the union and coupling shall be cut to a standard length provided by the plans of the city administrator or his designee, who may require a horizontal run of 18 inches in such pipe line, which may later be removed for the insertion of the meter into the supply line. 
(h)  Repairs to meters. 
(1)  Meters will be repaired by the water utility and the cost of such repairs caused by ordinary wear and tear will be borne by the water utility. 
(2)  Repair of any damage caused by the carelessness of the owner of the premises, the owner's agents or tenants, or from the negligence of any of the same to properly secure and protect same, including any damage that may result from allowing a water meter to become frozen or to be injured from the presence of hot water or steam in the meter, shall be paid for by the consumer or the owner of the premises should the consumer fail to pay. 
(i)  Charges for water wasted due to leaks. When the meter registers losses due to pipe leaks, the water utility shall determine whether or not the defect in the piping or equipment was known to the customer or, being known, had the customer used his/her best efforts to correct the conditions. If the water utility determines that the loss occurred without the consumer's knowledge, or having known about it the consumer had tried to correct the condition, the water utility may determine as nearly as possible what is the amount of loss by comparison with the use of the water during a like period, and the excess may be billed at the lowest step in the rates. However, if consumer knew of the leak and failed to give proper attention to it, the water utility will bill for the total consumption shown by the meter at regular rates. 
(j)  Failure to read meters. 
(1)  Where the water utility is unable to read a meter after two successive attempts, that fact shall be indicated on the bill, the minimum charge applied and the difference adjusted when the meter is read again, that is, the bill for the succeeding quarter will be computed with the gallons in each block of the rate schedule doubled and credit will be given on that bill for the amount of the minimum bill paid the preceding month. 
(2)  Only in unusual cases or when approval is obtained from the consumer shall more than two consecutive estimated bills be rendered where the billing period is two months or more. 
(3)  If the meter fails to operate, the bill will be based on the average use during the corresponding quarter of the past year unless there is some reason why the use was not normal. If the average use cannot be properly employed, the bill will be estimated by some equitable method. 
(k)  Temporary supply. 
(1)  An applicant for temporary water supply on a metered basis shall make and maintain a monetary deposit of not less than $25.00 for each meter installed. The charge for setting the valve and furnishing and setting the meter will be $15.00 so that $10.00 of the $25.00 deposit will be available to pay for the water used at the scheduled rates. 
(2)  When no other supply is available, permission may be granted by the water utility to use a hydrant after such hydrant is equipped with a meter. A charge of $15.00 will be made for setting the meter or moving it. A deposit of $15.00 (each piece) shall be required for the hydrant meter and related fittings. In no case shall a meter be placed, removed or moved except by an employee of the water utility unless permission has been granted by the water utility. Hydrant fittings and wrench will be supplied by the water utility upon payment of deposit. The balance of deposited funds will be refunded to the depositor on the termination of the use of the water, the payment of all charges levied against the depositor and the undamaged return of hydrant wrench and fittings. 
(l)  Repairs to mains. The water utility reserves the right to shut off the water in the mains temporarily to make repairs, alterations or additions to the plant or system. When the circumstances will permit sufficient delay, the water utility will give notification by newspaper publication or otherwise, of the discontinuance of the supply. No rebate or damages will be allowed to consumers for such temporary suspension of supply. 
(m)  Handling water mains and service pipes in trenches. 
(1)  Where excavating machines are used in digging, all water mains shall be maintained at the expense of the contractor. 
(2)  Contractors must ascertain for themselves the existence and location of all service pipes. Where they are removed, cut or damaged in the construction, the contractor shall, at his own expense, cause them to be replaced or repaired at once. Said repair shall not cause water service to any consumer to be shut off for a period exceeding six hours. 
(n)  Settling of main or service trenches. Trenches in streets shall be refilled with approved backfill in accordance with State of Wisconsin highway specifications, or City of Delafield specifications where more restrictive. The contractor shall be responsible for the repair of all settled trenches for one year from the date of final payment of the project. 
(o)  Relief valves. On all "closed systems" (i.e., systems having a check valve, pressure regulator, or reducing valve, water filter or softener) an effective pressure relief valve shall be installed either in the top tapping or the upper side tapping of the hot water tank, or on the hot water distributing pipe connection at the tank. A one-half-inch drain pipe shall be connected to the relief valve for discharge on the floor or into a sink or open drain through an air gap. No stop valve shall be placed between the hot water tank and the relief valve or on the drain pipe. 
(p)  No claims for damages. No person shall enter a claim for damage against the City of Delafield or water utility as a utility, or any officer thereof, for damage to any pipe, fixture or appurtenances by reason of interrupted service, variation of pressure, or for damage of any nature whatsoever caused by the turning off or turning on, whether wholly or partially, of the water supply for the extension, alteration or repair of any water main or premises supply, or for the discontinuance of the premises water supply for the violation of any rule or regulation of the water utility. No claims will be allowed against the water utility on account of the interruption of the water supply caused by the breaking of pipes or machinery, or by stoppage for repairs, on account of fire or other emergency, and no claims shall be allowed for any damage caused by the breakage of any pipe or machinery. 
(q)  Purity of supply not to be impaired by cross connections. Every person owning or occupying a premises receiving water utility water supply shall maintain such water supply free from any connection, either of a direct or indirect nature, with a water supply from a foreign source, or of any manner of connection with any fixture or appliance, whereby water from a foreign supply or the waste from any fixture, appliance, waste or soil pipe may flow, be siphoned or pumped into the piping of the water utility system. Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 811.09, Cross Connections and Interconnection, and Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 82.41, Cross Connection Control, shall apply to all applicable situations. 
(r)  Operation of valves and hydrants. Any person who shall without authority of the water utility operate any valve connected with the street or supply mains, or open any fire hydrant connected with the distribution system, except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, or who shall damage or impair the same shall be subject to a forfeiture as hereinafter provided. Permits for the use of hydrants for filling sprinkling carts or water trucks apply only to such hydrants as are designated for such use. 
(s)  Inspection of premises. Any officer or authorized employee of the water utility shall have the right of access during reasonable hours to any premises supplied with service, for the purpose of inspection or enforcement of the water utility's rules and regulations. The water utility will make a systematic inspection of all metered and unmetered water service at least once every three years for the purpose of checking waste and unnecessary use of water. 
(t)  Vacation of premises. Before premises are to be vacated, the water utility shall be notified in writing, so that it may remove the meter and shut off the water at the curb valve. The owner of the premises shall be liable for any damage to water utility property by reason of failure to notify the water utility of vacancy. 
(u)  Tap permits. After water connections have been introduced into any building or upon any premises, no plumber shall tap into or connect with the pipes upon such premises, for alterations, extensions or attachments, unless the party ordering such tapping or other work shall exhibit the proper permits for the same from the water utility. No person, corporation or entity shall perform any work on the premises water system unless said person, corporation or entity is a licensed plumber except that the owner of a residential dwelling may perform his/her own plumbing provided that said owner complies with the plumbing code of the State of Wisconsin, local municipal codes and obtains all required permits. 
(v)  Consumers to conserve water. All consumers shall keep the hydrants, taps, hose, water closets, urinals, baths or other fixtures allotted to their use closed, except when obtaining water for use, and shall be responsible for any damage or injury that may result to others from the improper use of said water. 
(w)  Surreptitious use of water. When the water utility has reasonable evidence that a consumer is obtaining the consumer's supply of water, in whole or in part, by means of devices or methods used to stop or interfere with the proper metering of the utility service being delivered to the consumer's equipment, the water utility reserves the right to estimate and present immediately a bill for service unmetered as a result of such interference. Such bill shall be payable subject to a 24-hour disconnection of service. When the water utility shall have disconnected the consumer for any such reason, the water utility will reconnect the consumer upon the following conditions: 
(1)  The consumer will be required to deposit with the water utility an amount sufficient to guarantee the payment of the consumer's bills for water service to the water utility. 
(2)  The consumer will be required to pay the water utility for any and all damages to its equipment on the consumer's premises due to such stoppage or interference with its metering. 
(3)  The consumer shall agree to comply with reasonable requirements to protect the water utility against further losses. 
Wis. Stats. §§ 98.26 and 943.20, as relating to water service, are hereby adopted and made a part of these rules. 
(x)  Consumer to keep in repair. All consumers shall keep their own service pipes, stopcock and apparatus in good repair and protected from frost, at their own risk and expense and shall prevent any unnecessary waste of water and overburdening of the system. All expenses relating to the introduction of water into buildings or private premises, and connections with the system, shall be paid by the applicant. No charge, however, shall be made for the services of the water utility employee in directing where and in what manner the mains shall be tapped and excavations made in the street for laying pipe. The city reserves the right to inspect such connections and charge the costs of such inspections to the applicant. 
(y)  Consumer's use only. No consumer shall supply water to others for resale nor charge others to take it off the consumer's premises nor shall the consumer allow others or other services to connect to the system. 
(z)  Consumer to permit inspection. Every consumer shall permit the city, or its duly authorized agent, at all reasonable hours of the day, to enter their premises or building to examine the pipes and fixtures, and the manner in which the water is used and drains operate. Such consumers will at all times, frankly and without concealment, answer all questions put to them relative to water consumption. 
(aa)  Excavations. 
(1)  In making excavations in streets or highways for laying service pipes or making repairs, the planks, paving and earth removed must be deposited in a manner that will cause the least inconvenience to the public, and provide for the passage of water along gutters or ditches. 
(2)  No person shall leave any such excavation made in any street or highway open at any time without barricades; and during the night, warning lights must be maintained at such excavations. 
(3)  In backfilling the opening after the service pipes are laid, the earth must be laid in layers of not more than 12 inches in depth, and each layer thoroughly rammed or puddled to prevent settling. Backfill shall be as specified by the water utility or its agent and may, include but is not limited to, spoil material, crushed road gravel or slurry material. This work, together with replacing sidewalks, ballast and paving, shall be done in accordance with water utility specifications and to a condition equal to or better than that which existed prior to excavation. No excavations shall be made without first obtaining a permit from the superintendent or his designated representative. All trenches and excavations in sidewalks or pavements shall be sawcut to provide a neat edge. 
(bb)  Tapping mains. 
(1)  No person, except those having special permission from the city council, or persons in its service and approved by it, will be permitted, under any circumstances, to tap into mains or distribution pipes, or to insert stopcock, corporation stops, valves or service piping therein. The type and size of the connection with the mains shall be those specified by the superintendent or his designated representative and as may be specified in permits to permit such work. 
(2)  Mains shall be tapped on the side and not within 24 inches of any pipe joint or 12 inches from another tap. Taps less than three feet apart shall be staggered from each other with a minimum angle of 30 degrees. 
(cc)  Emergency restrictions. 
(1)  In the event there exists an emergency or water shortage and in the judgment of the mayor, president of council, or city administrator, it is necessary to declare an emergency, said mayor or authorized person as listed above, will have the power to declare said emergency and direct the superintendent or his designated agents to restrict the usage of water for any use other than personal bathing, food preparation and other domestic use as necessary. The restrictions may apply to lawn sprinkling, car washing, swimming pool filling, construction use or other uses deemed appropriate by the mayor. 
(2)  Notice of the restriction shall be published as soon as possible in the official newspaper of the city. Failure of the consumer to read such notice shall not allow for the consumer to circumvent the restrictions. The notice shall describe the general area and type of prohibited usage. Any person violating this section shall be subject to those penalties contained in section 50-50. 
(dd)  Obstruction of hydrants. No person shall obstruct a hydrant such that it becomes inaccessible for normal maintenance or emergency use. Obstructions that are not allowed include, but are not limited to, fencing, retaining walls, landscaping, bushes, trees and ditches. A clear space of five-inch radius from the center of the hydrant shall be maintained at all times. The water utility shall have the right to remove or cause the removal of any obstructions to maintain the operation of the system. 
(Code 1997, § 13.25)  
Sec. 50-41. - Water rates. 
(a)  Authority. The following water rates and regulations prescribed by the PSC by order dated April 5, 1994, are hereby adopted by the water utility and incorporated into this section as a part thereof. 
(b)  Lien for delinquent charges. Any delinquency in the payment of charges for water and electric service shall be a lien upon the property served after notice is provided to the owner and occupant of such delinquency. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  The water utility clerk shall inform the city treasurer before October 15 of each year of all lots or parcels for which water charges are still owed for service supplied in the year preceding October 1. 
(2)  On October 15, the treasurer shall give written notice to the owner and occupant of each lot or parcel for which water charges are still owed for service supplied in the year preceding October 1 of the delinquent charges. The notice shall state: 
a.  That an amount is owed for water; 
b.  The amount still owed, including any penalty assessed pursuant to the council's rules; 
c.  That, unless that amount is paid by November 1, an additional penalty of ten percent of the amount in arrears plus penalty shall be charged by November 15; and 
d.  That, if the delinquent charge plus penalties are not paid by November 15, the amount will be levied as a tax on the lot or parcel served and for which payment is delinquent. Notice mailed to the lot address shall be notice to the occupant. Notice mailed to the last known address of the lot owner shall be notice to the owner. The owner shall notify the treasurer of any change in address. 
(3)  After November 16, the treasurer shall certify to the city clerk a list of all parcels or lots for which payments are in arrears and for which notice has been given, including the amount of arrears with any penalty added thereto. Such delinquent amounts, including any penalty, shall thereupon become a lien upon the property and shall be collected as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 66.069(1)(b) and 66.60(15) and (16). 
(d)  Hearing. If any owner or occupant shall dispute the delinquency in writing to the city clerk before November 15, a hearing on the dispute shall be held before the water utility committee (or the common council acting as the water utility committee) within 50 days, unless the time for hearing is extended by the committee. The delinquency shall not become a lien during the pendency of the dispute. Unless modified by the committee after hearing, the delinquency shall become a lien on the real estate as set forth herein as of the date of the delinquency. 
(e)  Owner responsibility. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 196.543, are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. 
(f)  Severability. This section shall not affect the right of the city to collect delinquent charges by other means. If this section is found to be illegal, other ordinances are not affected thereby. If any portion of this section is found to be illegal, it shall not affect the remainder of this section. 
(Code 1997, § 13.26)  
Sec. 50-42. - Water capacity assessments. 
(a)  There is hereby levied against each parcel of land serviceable by said water system (vacant, unimproved parcels and established lots all included), a reserve capacity assessment which is an area assessment in the area being served by the reserve capacity of the system. Said water capacity assessment is hereby established at $500.00 per domestic user equivalent. 
(b)  Water capacity assessments (WCA) are assessments payable at the time of connection to the system to reflect the costs of oversizing wells, reservoirs, pump stations and tanks of the water utility. All properties connecting to the initial system and future extensions of the initial system shall pay a WCA whether or not they have paid other assessments. The WCA is based upon a domestic user equivalent connection with a five-eighths-inch water meter considered as one WCA. Connections to the municipal system with meters larger than five-eighths inch will be assigned WCAs according to the following schedule which is based upon the safe maximum operating capacity for various size water meters as determined in AWWA Standards C700—C710: 
Meter Size 
(inches) 	Meter 
Type 	Safe Maximum
Operating Capacity
(GPM) 	DUEs 
Assigned 
? 	Displacement-Plastic or Bronze 	20 	1.0 
? x ¾ 	Displacement-Plastic or Bronze 	20 	1.0 
¾ 	Displacement-Plastic or Bronze 	30 	1.5 
1 	Displacement-Plastic or Bronze 	50 	2.5 
1½ 	Displacement-Plastic or Bronze 	100 	5.0 
2 	Displacement-Plastic or Bronze 	160 	8.0 
2 	Turbine Class II 	160 	8.0 
3 	Turbine Class II 	350 	17.5 
4 	Turbine Class II 	630 	31.5 
6 	Turbine Class II 	1400 	70.0 
8 	Turbine Class II 	2400 	120.0 
10 	Turbine Class II 	3800 	190.0 
12 	Turbine Class II 	5000 	250.0 
 
(c)  Meters other than listed may be approved by the utility on a case-by-case basis. WCA charges will be based upon the AWWA safe maximum operating capacity for the meter adjusted for equivalent DUEs based upon one DUE equaling a 20 GPM safe maximum operating capacity. 
(d)  WCA assessments may be increased annually as determined by the city council to pay for the costs of additional waterworks facilities that are constructed or placed in service. 
(e)  Water capacity assessments may, in hardship cases, be payable in installments of equal principal plus interest as determined by the city council. 
(f)  There is capacity in the initial system to service an area considerably beyond the properties fronting the proposed mains. The city council directs that additional oversizing costs in future extensions may also be paid from WCAs. 
(Code 1997, § 13.27)  
Sec. 50-43. - Maintenance of services. 
(a)  All building water services from the point of connection of curb stop to the house or to the premises served must be maintained free of defective conditions, by and at the expense of the owner or occupant of the property served. 
(b)  The service pipe from the main, to and through the curb stop, will be maintained and kept in repair and when worn out, replaced at the expense of the utility. The property owner shall maintain the service pipe from the curb stop to the point of use. All adjustments to stop boxes due to landscaping or other changes in grade level, except those performed by public contract, will be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(c)  If the property owner does not repair an existing leak between the curb stop and the building within 24 hours, the water will be shut off and remain off until the repair is made. 
(Code 1997, § 13.28)  
Sec. 50-44. - Severance of private wells. 
(a)  Severance from municipal system. Upon connection to the water utility's municipal water system, the owner of any private well shall sever completely from the municipal system the operation of his private water supply. Once the private water supply has been severed from the municipal water system, there shall be no reconnection of said private supply to the municipal system. 
(b)  Method of severance. Severance of a private well consists of disconnection and removal of the well lateral at the well casing, and thereafter any use of the private well shall be by separate water piping. 
(c)  Private wells to be tested and those testing unsafe abandoned and sealed. 
(1)  Private wells where a municipal connection exists. Private wells, after complete separation from the municipal system, shall be allowed to be maintained by the owner, if said owner complies with the following procedure and receives a permit therefor. 
(2)  Safe well test. The city council, or its agents, will, annually, at its discretion, test all private wells on those premises served by municipal water. Owner will permit the water utility or its agents to collect a sample from said private well following correct sampling procedures. Said water sample collected by the water utility will then be provided to a certified testing laboratory for analysis. The property owner will be charged the actual cost of such analysis, plus $25.00 administrative charge, including, but not limited to, cost of collection, postage and handling. If the water sample tests bacteriologically safe, owner will receive from the water utility a permit for private well usage for ensuing year. If the owner of a private well disputes the test performed by the water utility, said owner will have the right to provide to the water utility the results of its own water test performed by a certified water testing laboratory under the terms of this section or the well will be permanently abandoned as hereinafter provided. 
(d)  Abandonment of private wells when determined by the water utility, as needed. 
(1)  In order to prevent contamination of groundwater and to protect public health, safety and welfare by assuring that unused, unsafe or noncomplying well or wells which may serve as conduits for contamination or wells which may be illegally cross connected to the municipal water system, the water utility will review such wells to determine that the wells are properly abandoned. 
(2)  All wells located on premises served by the municipal water system shall be abandoned in accordance with the terms of this section and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811.10 and 812.26, by no later than one year from the date of connection to the municipal water system, unless a well operation permit has been obtained by the well owner from the water utility. 
(3)  The water utility may grant a permit to a private well owner to operate a well as outlined in this section providing the conditions of said section are met. An owner may be required to renew a well operation permit by submitting information verifying that the conditions of this section are met. The water utility, or its agent, may conduct inspections or have water quality tests conducted at the applicant's expense to obtain or verify information necessary for consideration of a permit application or renewal. Permit applications and renewals shall be made on forms provided by the city clerk. The following conditions must be met for issuance or renewal of a well operation permit: 
a.  The well and pump installation meet or are upgraded to meet the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812. 
b.  The well construction and pump installation have a history of producing bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by at least two samplings taken a minimum of two weeks apart. No exception to this condition may be made for unsafe wells, unless the DNR approves, in writing, the continued use of the well. 
c.  There are no cross connections between the well and pump installation and the municipal water system. 
d.  The proposed use of the well and pump installation can be justified as being necessary in addition to water provided by the municipal water system. 
e.  All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this section or rule shall be abandoned according to the procedures and methods of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812.26. All debris, pump, piping, unsealed liners and any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing operations shall be removed prior to abandonment. 
f.  The owner of the well, or the owner's agent, shall notify the city clerk at least 48 hours prior to commencement of any well abandonment activities. The abandonment of the well shall be observed by the city administrator or his designee. 
g.  An abandonment report form, supplied by the DNR, shall be submitted by the well owner to the city clerk and the DNR within ten days of the completion of the well abandonment. 
(4)  Any well owner violating any provision of this section shall upon conviction be punished by forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 and the cost of prosecution. Each day of violation is a separate offense. If any person fails to comply with this section for more than ten days after receiving written notice of the violation, the municipality may impose a penalty and cause the well abandonment to be performed and the expense to be assessed as a special tax against the property. 
(Code 1997, § 13.29)  
Sec. 50-45. - Continuation of private wells permitted. 
(a)  Use of private wells upon connection to municipal water service. 
(1)  Intent. Since it is recognized that the entire private water supply in the water utility has the potential for pollution, the building's distribution system upon connection to the municipal water system shall be completely severed from the private well. If such private well does not test "safe" according to standards of the state DNR and Waukesha County health department, such well shall be permanently sealed and abandoned in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 112.21. 
(2)  Test results to be filed. The owners of those wells testing "safe" and being utilized for outside chores not involving human consumption of water shall on or before June 1, commencing the first year following the year of severance, file with the water utility test results performed by the Waukesha County health department, or recognized private testing laboratory, showing that the water from such well is bacteriologically safe. Testing such well shall be performed by a person working for the testing laboratory from a sample obtained from the well and that person shall certify the test results. 
(3)  Test required. Such well tests shall be required every five years before the renewal well permit is issued. 
(4)  Severance from private well supply. 
a.  Once the private water supply has been severed from the municipal system, there shall be no reconnection of said private supply to the municipal system. After severance of the private well, no cross connection between the public and private system will be allowed. Those owners that desire to keep the private well in service shall install a backflow preventer approved by the water utility. The backflow preventer shall be installed in the outlet piping from the water meter and no outlets shall be permitted between the water meter and the backflow preventer. All municipal water entering the building must pass through the reduced pressure backflow preventer before being distributed for other use. 
b.  Backflow preventers shall be installed and maintained in compliance with Wis. Admin. Code § ILHR 82.41. 
(5)  Permanent abandonment procedure. 
a.  Owners intending to permanently abandon a well will notify the water utility of the date of the intended abandonment. The water utility will be permitted to fully inspect the entire process of abandonment. Owner will comply with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 112.21(1) and (3). In the event the owner of a private well that has tested unsafe or has failed to obtain a well permit refuses or neglects to permanently abandon said well on or before September 1 of each year, the water utility, or its agents or contractors may, without notice, enter upon owner's property and permanently seal said well in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 112.21(1) and (3) and the cost thereof shall be presented to the city treasurer who shall place said amount on the tax roll as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.60(16). 
b.  Any person who shall attempt to abandon said well without having first notified the water utility shall be subject to the requirements of furnishing the water utility proof of proper compliance with Wis. Adm. Code § NR 112.21(1) and (3). In the event owner is unable to furnish satisfactory proof to the water utility that said well was properly abandoned under said Administrative Code provision, the water utility shall have the right to enter upon the property and perform all necessary tasks to verify that the abandonment of said well was done under the Administrative Code procedure and specifications. Any and all costs incurred by the water utility in permanently sealing said well shall be presented to the city treasurer who shall place said amount on the tax roll as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.60(16). 
(6)  Wells testing unsafe or wells not having a permit. All private wells in the water utility that test unsafe or have not received a permit as provided for herein shall be immediately removed from use and shall on or before September 1 of each year be permanently sealed and abandoned as provided below. 
(7)  Temporary sealing not permitted. Because of the clear and present danger from the water supply serving private wells in the water district, private wells, whether within or without the municipal water service area, will not be permitted to be temporarily sealed. 
(8)  Permit procedure for new wells. New wells will be permitted to be constructed only under the following conditions: 
a.  Said new well must be located in an area where municipal water service is not available and cannot readily be made available by the water utility. 
b.  Owner or applicant applies to Waukesha County health department and the city and receives a permit for the construction of the new well. 
c.  The new well is constructed in complete conformity with state and local regulations and codes. The owner of the new well, before it will be permitted to be put into use, will furnish to the water utility test results verified by a certified testing laboratory that said well water is bacteriologically safe. 
d.  All new wells constructed within the water utility limits will be permitted on the condition that the owner agrees that once municipal water is available to the property, said private well owner will immediately connect to municipal water and sever the private well. 
e.  Whenever municipal water service is available or can readily be made available by the water utility, no new wells for potable or nonpotable water will be permitted to be constructed and the owner of the property will be required to connect to the municipal service. 
(Code 1997, § 13.30)  
Sec. 50-46. - Connection of malfunctioning wells. 
In the event that the water utility undertakes a project and the project adversely affects the local well water supply of local residents, or if the water utility anticipates that a project may adversely affect the local well water supply, then the water utility at its option may undertake the following steps: 
(1)  The water utility shall request that the residents or property owners allow the water utility to test and inspect individual wells. Such testing and inspection may include but is not limited to: 
a.  Testing for potability of water supply. 
b.  Removal of pump for water level inspection. 
c.  General inspection of well pump facilities. 
(2)  If during the inspection of the well, either the well or appurtenant facilities are damaged through no fault of the property owner, the water utility may have the damages repaired at no cost to the owner, or, if public water is available the owner may connect to the public water supply and the water utility will credit the owner for the cost of the damages against any outstanding assessments or water connection fees. The water utility reserves the right to prorate the cost of repairs if it is determined that the age or existing condition of the owner's facilities were at or near the point of failure at the time of damage. Determination will be made by the water utility or its authorized representatives. 
(3)  If the owner cooperates with the water utility and allows inspection of the owner's well, and if the well is determined to be operating within normal standards as defined in Wis. Admin. Code § 112, and it is determined that the water utility's operations have adversely affected the owner's well, then the following shall apply: 
a.  The water utility reserves the right to determine if the well will return to its normal functioning capacity. This includes waiting for 14 days after termination of water utility activities to determine if the adverse effect on the private well was minor in nature. The water utility shall provide interim relief. 
b.  If the well is determined to be permanently damaged then the property owner shall connect to the public water supply. The water utility shall waive the water capacity assessment fee and shall pay all costs related to the connection of the residence to the public water supply. The resident will still be responsible for the payment of all frontage and right-of-way lateral costs and pay those costs in accordance with the final resolution for the respective water main project. The water utility shall be allowed to approve or deny the plumbing contractor that will be making the residential connection. The water utility will only pay for those costs associated with the connection of the public water supply to the point of the meter horn and the abandonment of the owner's well, or at the water utility's option, improve or upgrade the existing private well. 
(4)  Documentation necessary in lieu of testing. 
a.  If the owner fails to cooperate with the water utility and does not allow for testing and inspection of the owner's well, the owner shall provide documentation that the water utility's activities caused the owner's well to malfunction. Such documentation shall include, but is not limited to, well logs and tests that indicate that the well was properly functioning immediately prior to the commencement of water utility activities. 
b.  If it is determined that the water utility's activities adversely affected the owner's well then the water utility shall connect the owner to the public water supply as in subsections (1)a through c of this section. 
c.  If it cannot be determined that the water utility activities adversely affected the owner's well or documentation cannot be provided by the owner of a properly functioning well as per Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 112, then no reimbursement will be made to the owner. 
(Code 1997, § 13.31)  
Sec. 50-47. - Connections. 
(a)  Required connections. To assure preservation of public health, comfort and safety, the owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other habitation, situated within the city and adjacent to a water main, or in a block through which a water main extends, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install a lateral and to connect such facilities to the structural plumbing in accordance with the provisions of this article within 12 months after the public water main first becomes operational, upon receipt of notice from the city administrator or his designee; or if an immediate health hazard exists, within ten days, upon receipt of notice from the city health officer or the city building inspector, unless said required connection is waived by resolution of the common council. 
(b)  If a person fails to comply with said notice to connect within the given period of time, the city may, at its option, cause such connection to be made and bill the property owner for such costs. If such costs are not paid within 30 days, such costs shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property, unless the owner within 30 days after completion of the work files a sworn affidavit with the city clerk stating that he cannot pay such amount in one sum and asking that it be levied in not to exceed five equal annual installments, and the amount shall be so collected with interest at a rate which is sufficient to recover the city's cost of borrowed funds or interest lost plus one percentage point per annum from the completion of the work, the unpaid balance to be a special tax lien. 
(Code 1997, § 13.32)  
Sec. 50-48. - Billing and payment. 
(a)  Billing. Billing for water service shall be on a quarterly basis with quarters ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31. The property owner is held responsible for all water bills on the real estate he/she owns. All water bills and notices relative to water service shall be addressed to the owner and mailed to the address of the premises referred to on such bill or notice or to such other address as requested in writing by the owner. 
(b)  Failure to receive bill no excuse. Reasonable care shall be exercised in proper delivery of water bills. Failure to receive a water bill shall not relieve any owner of responsibility of payment of a water bill within the prescribed period, nor exempt any person from any penalty imposed for delinquency in the payment thereof. 
(c)  Penalty for polluting water or injuring waterworks. No person shall willfully pollute or otherwise injure any water supplied by the system in any tunnel, aqueduct, reservoir, pipe, etc.; to willfully injure or cause damage to the system, building, machinery or fixture pertaining thereto; to willfully and without authority of the water utility impede or divert the flow of water in any tunnel, aqueduct, pipe, etc., belonging to such system; to willfully and without written authority of the city council to otherwise cause to leak any tunnel, aqueduct, reservoir, pipe, etc., used in the system to hold, convey or distribute water. 
(d)  Damage recovery. 
(1)  The water utility shall have the right to recover from any person any expense incurred by such water utility for repair or replacement of any water pipe, curb cock, valve, hydrant or valve box damaged in any manner by any person by reason of operation of any electrical system, performance of any work under their control or by negligence. 
(2)  Owners or operators of motor vehicles shall be liable for the cost of repair of any hydrant damaged by such vehicle. The water utility or the city shall not be responsible for the damage caused to the motor vehicle or individuals by reason of such accident. 
(Code 1997, § 13.33)  
Sec. 50-49. - City of Delafield Wellhead Protection Ordinance. 
City of Delafield Wellhead Protection Ordinance, section 50-7 of the Municipal Code, and all amendments thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1997, § 13.34)  
Sec. 50-50. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00 plus the costs of prosecution for each violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall have such costs added to their real property as a lien against the property. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1997, § 13.35)  
Secs. 50-51—50-73. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER DISTRICT NO. 1 
 
Sec. 50-74. - Legal description. 
Lying within Sections 21, 22 and 27 all in T7N, R18E, City of Delafield and Town of Delafield, Waukesha County, Wisconsin, described as follows: 
All those parcels described in the following tax key numbers: 
1. Waukesha County Park & Planning Commission 	801.999 
2. Allen & Angela Van Ert 	803.001 
3. Spiro & Katy Mehail 	803.002 
4. Thomas & Sharon Schweda 	803.003 
5. Country Pride Inn Ptr. 	803.004 
6. Country Pride Inn Ptr. 	803.005 
7. Allen & Angela Van Ert 	803.006 
8. Allen & Angela Van Ert 	803.007 
9. Allen & Angela Van Ert 	803.008 
10. Allen & Angela Van Ert 	803.009 
11. Allen & Angela Van Ert 	803.010 
12. Judith A. Moore 	803.011 
13. Albert S. Stumpf 	803.979.004 
14. Albert S. Stumpf 	803.979.005 
15. William R. Toson 	803.988.001 
16. Dayton Hudson Corp. 	803.993.001 
17. Edward Bautz & Richard Flath 	803.990.001 
18. Ozaukee Food Services Inc. 	803.991 
19. Amoco Oil Co. 	803.994 
20. McDonald Corp. 	803.998 
21. Terratron Inc. 	803.999 
22. Hans & M. Weissgerber, Sr. 	804.993 
23. First Wisconsin Bank Waukesha 	804.994.001 
24. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. 	804.994.002 
25. Kensington Development Corp. 	804.994.003 
26. Frederick & E. Warden 	804.994.005 
27. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. 	804.994.006 
28. Kensington Development Corp. 	804.994.007 
29. Kensington Development Corp. 	804.994.008 
30. H R C Development 	804.994.009 
31. Emil R. Leuzinger 	804.994 
32. USS & Carnegie Pen FD 	804.995 
33. Marshall & Ilsley Corp. 	804.996 
34. Hans & M. Weissgerber, Sr. 	804.997 
35. Hans & M. Weissgerber, Sr. 	804.998 
36. Hans & M. Weissgerber, Sr. 	804.999 
37. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.982 
38. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.983 
39. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.984 
40. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985 
41. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985.001 
42. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985.002 
43. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985.003 
44. Mark Lien 	807.985.004 
45. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985.005 
46. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985.006 
47. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985.007 
48. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985.008 
49. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985.009 
50. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985.010 
51. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985.011 
52. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985.012 
53. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985.013 
54. Christoph Trust 	807.985.014 
55. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.985.015 
56. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.986 
57. William & Susan Isler 	807.987 
58. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.987.001 
59. Ronald W. Nickel 	807.988 
60. Paul D. Stefan 	807.991 
61. Walter Nickel Trust 	807.992 
62. Ronald W. Nickel 	808.985 
 
(Code 1997, ch. 13, att. B)  
Chapter 52 - ZONING  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 52-1. - Authority. 
These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23(7) and 703.2(1). 
(Code 1997, § 17.01; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics, orderly development, and general welfare of this community. 
(Code 1997, § 17.02; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-3. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate and restrict the use of all structures and lands; regulate and restrict lot coverage, population distribution, and density and the size and location of all structures so as to: 
(1)  Lessen congestion in and promote the safety and efficiency of the streets and highways. 
(2)  Secure safety from fire, flooding, panic, and other dangers. 
(3)  Prevent overcrowding. 
(4)  Avoid undue population concentration. 
(5)  Facilitate the adequate provision of public facilities and utilities. 
(6)  Stabilize and protect property values. 
(7)  Further conservation of natural resources and the appropriate use of land. 
(8)  Preserve and promote the beauty and environmental quality of the community. 
(9)  Implement the community's comprehensive plan or plan components. 
(10)  Achieve those "purposes in view" set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(c). 
(b)  It is further intended to provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and to provide penalties for its violation. 
(Code 1997, § 17.03; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-4. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to laws. However, wherever this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1997, § 17.04; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-5. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1997, § 17.05; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-6. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1997, § 17.06; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-7. - Repeal. 
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the city inconsistent or conflicting with this chapter to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict only are hereby repealed. 
(Code 1997, § 17.07; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-8. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as, referred to, or cited as the "Zoning Ordinance, City of Delafield, Wisconsin." 
(Code 1997, § 17.08; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-9. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall be effective March 11, 1997. 
(Code 1997, § 17.09; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-10. - Jurisdiction. 
The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all lands and waters within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 17.10; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-11. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall be used: words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural number; and the plural number includes the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. Any words not defined herein shall be construed as defined in the Wisconsin Uniform Building Code or as defined by common dictionary usage. 
Accessory building means a building or portion of a building subordinate to the main building and used for a purpose customarily incidental to the permitted use of the main building or the use of the premises. 
Accessory use or structure means a use or detached structure subordinate to the principal use of a structure, land or water and located on the same lot or parcel serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal structure. Earth satellite dishes are considered to be accessory structures. 
Addition means any new construction whereby an existing building or structure or building or structure in course of construction is increased in area or cubical content. 
Adjoining lot line means the line between adjoining lots, plots of land or parcels of land of different or same ownership. 
Administrator means the city administrator or other city staff designated and authorized by the common council to administer this chapter. 
Alley means a public right-of-way or easement which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties. A street shall not be considered an alley. 
Alteration means any change or modification in construction or occupancy. 
Animal hospital means a totally enclosed sanitary structure, adequately soundproofed, for the express purpose of medically or surgically treating animals, but not serving as a commercial kennel. 
Apartment means a room or suite of rooms which is occupied or which is intended or designed to be occupied by one family for living and sleeping purposes. 
Area, as applied to dimensions, means the maximum horizontal projected area of a building, structure, room, apartment or open space, not including overhangs. 
Arterial street means a public street or highway used or intended to be used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. Arterial streets and highways shall include freeways, expressways and parkways. 
Attic means a space not suitable for human occupancy under the roof and above the ceiling of the topmost story of any building or part thereof. 
Automobile service station or filling station means a place where gasoline, kerosene or any other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles, including greasing and oiling on the premises and minor repairs, but which furnishes none of the other facilities of a public or storage garage. 
Average improved slope means the grade line resulting from foundation backfill, originating at the top of slope finished grade and extended directly to the bottom of slope finished grade. 
Base setback lines. Refer to Setback lines, base. 
Basement means all portions of a building, the ceiling of which is not more than three feet above the average improved slope, or unimproved slope, which ever creates the greatest floor area ratio. 
Bed and breakfast means a place of lodging licensed under Wis. Admin. Code ch. HFS 197 that provides eight or fewer rooms for rent to no more than 20 tourists or transients; provides no meals other than breakfast and provides breakfast only to renters of the place; is the owner's personal residence; is occupied by the owner at the time of rental. 
Boarding means an accessory use in any residential district where meals or lodging and meals are regularly furnished by prearrangement for not more than two persons not members of the family and not open to transient customers. 
Boathouse means an accessory structure located close to the ordinary high water mark and designed and used for the storage of boats and accessory marine equipment normally used in the daily activities of lakefront property and which has a large garage type door for primary access on the side of the building facing the water. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, equipment, machinery or materials or other property. 
Building area. Refer to Floor area. 
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade of the street facing façade, to the highest point of the top plate at the exterior wall or the elevation of the roof bearing point of the highest story. Buildings with more than one street facing façade shall be measured at the lowest average elevation. Exposed foundation, on facades not facing a street shall not be considered in determining building height. 
Exception: Additional building height on a street facing façade shall be allowed to facilitate access to underground parking. A maximum of ten feet below the first-floor elevation may be permitted for up to 15 percent of the building perimeter. 
Building inspector means an independent contractor engaged by the City of Delafield to conduct building inspections and administer and enforce certain provision of this chapter under the direction of the city administrator. 
Building, principal means that building on a lot, intended or used for the primary use permitted by the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Building, utility means a building designed for the shelter and storage of gardening equipment, normal household goods and tools and materials customarily associated with a single-family residence. No utility building shall exceed 220 square feet in area. Truck bodies, trailers or vans shall not be permitted as utility buildings. 
Business establishment means a place of business carrying on business operation, the ownership and management of which are separate and distinct from those of any other place of business located on the same lot. 
Cellar. See Basement. 
Clothing stores means retail stores where clothing is sold, such as department stores, dry goods and shoe stores, dress, hosiery and millinery shops. 
Community based residential facility means a place where three or more unrelated adults reside in which care, treatment, or services above the level of room and board, but not including nursing care, are provided to persons residing in the facility as a primary function of the facility. 
Comprehensive plan means a comprehensive plan for the City of Delafield adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(3). 
Conditional uses means uses of a special nature as to make impractical their predetermination as a principal use in a district. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of earthen materials. 
Development regulations means that part of this chapter that applies to elements including setback, height, lot coverage, and side yard requirements. 
District, base, means a section of the city created for the purpose of establishing the general pattern of intended land uses consistent with the city comprehensive plan. Each basic district establishes regulations governing the height, area, and the use of buildings and land. 
District, overlay, means overlay districts provided for the possibility of superimposing certain additional requirements upon a basic district without disturbing the requirements of the basic district. In the instance of conflicting requirements, the more strict of the conflicting requirements shall apply. 
Drive-in establishment means an establishment which is designed to provide, either wholly or in part, service to customers while in their automobiles parked upon the premises. 
Dwelling, efficiency apartment, means a dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, an individual bathroom, and cooking facilities, with no separate sleeping room. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence not to exceed the number of dwelling units provided. Not including rooming and boarding houses and transient hotels and motels. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family for a period of not less than 90 consecutive days. 
Dwelling, two-family, means a detached building containing two separate dwelling or living units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used exclusively as a residence or living quarters for one family, but not including boarding or lodging houses, motels, hotels, tents, cabins or mobile homes. 
Elderly households means one- or two-person households headed by a person over 62 years of age. 
Election campaign sign means any sign that states the name and/or picture of an individual seeking election or appointment to a public office, or pertaining to a forthcoming public election or referendum, or pertaining to or advocating social or political views or policies. 
Essential services means services provided by public and private utilities necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure. These services include underground, surface or overhead gas, electricity, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, storm water drainage and communication systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires, mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations and hydrants, but not including buildings. 
Exception, special, means the use of property, including the use and location of buildings, the size of lots and the dimensions of yards, otherwise not allowable under the terms of this chapter, which is permissible by reason of special provisions of this chapter or for which a special use permit may be issued by the board of appeals under conditions specified in this chapter. 
Existing means a building, structure, equipment or premises completed or in course of construction or used or occupied and for which a legal permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Family means any number of persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, or not to exceed four persons not so related, including boarders, living together in one dwelling as a single housekeeping entity. 
Farm, fur, means a tract of land devoted in whole or part to the raising of fur-bearing animals for commercial purposes. 
Farm, pig, means a tract of land devoted in whole or in part to the raising or feeding of pigs and hogs. 
Farm, poultry, means a tract of land devoted in whole or in part to the raising of poultry for commercial purposes. 
Fence means a structure which creates an enclosure, barrier, or boundary; having a permanent location in the ground, or which is attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
Floor area means the sum of the horizontal areas of all floors of all buildings on a lot, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. The term "floor area" shall include all above grade levels of both principal and accessory buildings, interior balconies and mezzanines, penthouses, garages, elevator shafts, stairwells at each story, floor space used for mechanical equipment with structural headroom of 5.0 feet or more, and usable attic space providing structural headroom of 5.0 feet or more. 
In residential properties basements, unenclosed exterior porches, decks, breezeways, and balconies, are not considered part of the gross floor area. All other areas under roof shall be calculated in the floor area. 
Every building erected or relocated after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with floor area herein defined. 
Floor area ratio (FAR) shall be used to indicate the total floor area of buildings allowed on a given lot, expressed as a percentage ratio to the total area of the lot (i.e., an FAR of 100 percent allows a floor area equal to the lot, an FAR of 0.50 allows a floor area of one-half the total area of the lot, etc.). A floor area ratio of 0.50 could be applied to a one story building occupying 50 percent of the lot or a two story building occupying 25 percent of the lot. 
Frontage means all the property abutting on one side of a street between two intersecting streets or all of the property abutting on one side of a street between an intersecting street and the dead-end of a street. 
Frontage, reversed, means frontage facing at right angles or approximate right angles to each other within the same block. 
Garage, private, means an accessory building in which private vehicles are kept for storage purposes only and wherein such use is accessory to the residential use of the property on which such vehicles are stored. 
Garage, public, means any building or premises, other than an automobile service or filling station or a private or storage garage, where motor driven vehicles are hired, equipped, repaired, serviced, sold or stored as a business. 
Garage, storage, means any building or premises used for the storage only of motor driven vehicles, pursuant to previous arrangements and not to transients, and where no equipment, parts, fuel, grease or oil is sold and vehicles are not equipped, serviced, repaired, hired or sold as a business. 
Gift stores means retail stores where items, such as art, antiques, jewelry, books and notions are sold. 
Guest house means an accessory building on a residentially zoned lot providing quarters for the temporary housing for not more than 30 consecutive days for nonpaying guests of the occupants of the principal building on the lot. 
Grade, building, means elevation of ground adjacent to the structure. 
Grade, established, means the elevation of the finished street at the centerline as fixed by the city engineer or by such authority as shall be designated by law to determine such an elevation. 
Handicapped households means one or two person households headed by a person who is under a disability or is handicapped as defined in section 3 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended. 
Hard surface means a surface of bituminous asphalt, concrete, or other comparable impervious material. 
Hardware stores means retail stores where items, such as plumbing, heating and electrical supplies, sporting goods, and paints are sold. 
Highway means a right-of-way designated on a comprehensive system for the principal purpose of providing vehicular thoroughfare and not necessarily affording direct access to abutting property (traffic artery). 
Historical flood of record means the highest recorded water level for any lake or flood for any given stream or reach of stream. 
Home business means an occupation for gain or support that has no more than one employee residing outside the residence and is conducted entirely within a principal or accessory building whose primary use is as a single-family or duplex residence, is incidental to the principal use of the premises as a residence, does not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area of a dwelling, does not require a sign larger than two square feet. A home business shall not include the use of any machinery, tools, or other appliances that create a nuisance to the surrounding residential area by reason of noise, vibration, dust, smoke or odor. Home business requires a conditional use permit (see section 52-136) and a plan of operation permit (see section 52-89). 
Home occupation means an occupation for gain or support that is conducted entirely within the principal building whose primary use is as a single-family or duplex residence, is incidental to the principal use of the premises as a residence, does not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area of the principal structure, does not require a sign larger than two square feet, and does not involve the employment of any individual not living on the premises. A home occupation shall not include the use of any machinery, tools, or other appliances that create a nuisance to the surrounding residential area by reason of noise, vibration, dust, smoke or odor. 
Horticulture means the culture of growing and cultivating fruits, flowers, and related plant material. 
Hotel means a building in which lodging, with or without meals, is offered primarily for transients for compensation and having more than four sleeping rooms for this purpose. 
Island means a tract of land surrounded on all sides by water or marshlands. 
Kennel, commercial, means an establishment where more than three dogs or other household pets more than six months of age are raised, bred, boarded, or cared for as a gainful occupation. 
Lane means a public or private way in the nature of easement, not more than 20 feet in average width, affording access to or from a lot or lots. 
Living rooms means all rooms within a dwelling, except closets, foyers, storage areas, utility rooms, and bathrooms. 
Loading space means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings and abutting on or affording direct access to a public street or alley for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading cargo. 
Lot means a parcel of land on which a principal building and its accessory building are placed, together with the required open spaces, provided that no such parcel shall be bisected by a public street, and shall not include any portion of a public right-of-way. No lands dedicated to the public or reserved for roadway purposes shall be included in the computation of lot size for the purposes of this chapter. 
Lot area means the area of contiguous land bounded by lot lines, exclusive of land provided for public thoroughfare. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees on the side thereof on which such lot abuts. The point of intersection of the street lines is the "corner." 
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance measured between the front and rear lot lines or measured between the street line and the opposing rear or shore lot line. 
Lot, flag, means a lot that may abut on a public street but where access to the public street system is by a narrow strip of land. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
Lot lines, shore, means the ordinary high water line of a lake or stream on which a lot abuts. 
Lot lines, side, means a lot line extending from a street line towards the interior of the block and separating adjoining lots. 
Lot of record means a parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds. A lot or parcel of land created prior to the enactment of the city zoning code constitutes a lot of record. 
Lot, through, means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
Lot width means the width of a parcel of land measured at the required front building setback line or at the required building setback from the ordinary high water mark. 
Machine shops means shops where lathes, presses, grinders, shapers and other wood and metal working machines are used as blacksmith, tinsmith, welding and sheet metal shops; plumbing, heating and electrical repair and overhaul shops. 
Manufactured home means a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is built in compliance with Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code). 
Mobile home means a single-family dwelling unit designed for long-term occupancy which is or was as originally constructed, designed to be transported by any motor vehicle upon a public highway arriving at the site where it is to be occupied complete, with or without major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and hookup operations, and designed, equipped and used primarily for sleeping, eating, and living quarters or is intended to be so used and includes any additions, attachments, annexes, foundations, and appurtenances and built prior to the enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, which became effective June 15, 1976. 
Model home means a residential structure used for display and advertising purposes only. A sales office shall not be permitted in conjunction with a model home. 
Modular homes means factory-built housing certified as meeting the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. 
Motel means a building or series of related buildings on a lot in which lodging is offered primarily for transients for compensation, which may have more than four sleeping rooms or units for this purpose and which is distinguished from a hotel primarily by reason of providing direct independent access to and adjoining parking for each rental unit. 
Navigable waters. 
(1)  The term "navigable waters" means all natural inland lakes within the city and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within the territorial limits of the city. Under Wis. Stats. § 144.26(2)(d), not promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under Wis. Stats. §§ 61.351 or 62.231, and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if: 
a.  Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river. 
b.  Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching. 
c.  Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use. 
(2)  Wisconsin's Supreme Court has declared navigable bodies of water that have a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and levels or flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis. A stream which is navigable by skiff or canoe during normal spring high water is navigable, in fact, under the laws of Wisconsin though it may be dry during other seasons. 
Nonconforming lot means a lot of record existing at the time of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which does not conform with the lot area and/or lot width provisions of this chapter. 
Nonconforming structure means a dwelling or other building that existed lawfully before the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but that does not conform with one or more of the development regulations of this chapter. 
Nonconforming use of structures, land or water means any use of land, buildings, structures or water lawfully in existence, occupied or erected at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendments thereto, which does not comply with the regulations of this chapter or amendments thereto. Any structure conforming in respect to use, but not in respect to frontage, width, height, area, yard, parking, loading or access requirements, shall be considered a nonconforming structure and not a nonconforming use. 
Offset means the distance between any lot line, other than a street line, and the nearest portion or projection of a building. The offset distance shall be measured between a building or structure and the lot line, exclusive of such features which are permitted to project into a yard. See section 52-16(b). 
Open space means that portion of the front, side or rear yard or court on a lot which is unoccupied by buildings or structures and is open and unobstructed to the sky. 
Ordinary high water mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
Parcel. See Lot. 
Parking lot means a structure or premises containing parking space open to the public. 
Parking space means a graded and surfaced area of not less than 160 square feet in area, either enclosed or open, for the parking of a motor vehicle, having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley. 
Parties in interest includes all abutting property owners, all property owners within 200 feet, and all property owners of opposite frontages. 
Pierhead line means 100 feet lakeward from the ordinary high water line of any navigable lake. 
Plan of operation means a written expression of proposed activity to include at least the following items: description of operation; hours of operation; number of employees; operational characteristics, such as noise, smoke, odor, lighting, etc.; and plot plan indicating building location, parking, and other uses on the site. See section 52-89. 
Political message means a message intended for a political purpose or a message which pertains to an issue of public policy of possible concern to the electorate, but does not include a message intended solely for a commercial purpose. 
Premises means a lot as otherwise used in this chapter. 
Private club means a building or grounds used for regular or periodic meetings or gatherings of a group of persons privately organized for a nonprofit purpose, but not groups organized to supply goods or render services customarily carried on as a business. 
Professional office means the offices of a doctor, practitioner, dentist, minister, architect, landscape architect, professional engineer, lawyer, author, musician or other similar recognized profession, whose advertising is limited to professional signs permitted under this chapter. 
Public access facility means a place at least 60 feet wide, providing access to the lake or stream, and meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.16(3). 
Public and semipublic buildings means structures, principally of an institutional nature and rendering as their principal activity a recognized public service, such as churches, hospitals, rest homes, schools, including private academic schools and nursery schools, libraries, museums, post offices, police and fire stations, public and private utilities and other public services, but not including such private commercial enterprises as clinics, business or trade schools or any enterprise other than a franchised utility, primarily devoted to sale of commodities or services. 
Pyramiding means the act of obtaining or providing access to public bodies of water across private lots or lands in a manner which increases the number of families which have access to that water to a degree greater than what would occur with individual riparian owners having individual lots fronting on the water. The effect of pyramiding is to funnel backlot access from offshore lots or residences via a narrow parcel of land to provide access to water. Publicly owned access points shall not fall within this definition. 
Quarrying means the removal of rock, slate, gravel, sand, topsoil or other natural material from the earth by excavating, stripping, leveling or any other such process for the purpose of putting the removed material to use off of the premises. 
Rain garden means a shallow depression in the soil into which stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces, i.e., pavement and roofs, are directed. Rain gardens are planted with native Wisconsin grasses and forbs with deep root systems, in compliance with the City of Delafield Lake Nagawicka Rain Garden Planting List, to allow water to infiltrate into the soil. 
Rear yard means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point on the back wall of the principal structure. This yard shall be opposite the street yard or one of the street yards on a corner lot. See also section 52-16. 
Recreational vehicle means any vehicle in excess of 20 feet in length whose primary use is intended for human occupancy in conjunction with recreational activities. 
Regional flood. See Floodplain Zoning Code definitions. 
Residential lake lot means a lot used or zoned for residential purposes and abuts a shoreland area as that term is defined in Wis. Stats. § 59.692(1). 
Restaurant means an establishment where meals are regularly offered for compensation. 
Road means a public or private right-of-way usually affording primary access to abutting property. 
Roadside stand means a structure used or intended to be used solely by the owner or tenant of the property on which such structure is located for the sale of products raised on such property. 
Rooming. See Boarding. 
Sand or gravel pits. See Quarrying. 
Service road. See Street, frontage. 
Service station. See Automobile service station. 
Setback means a distance specified in this chapter, measured horizontally on a lot from and at right angles to the front lot line or the right-of-way line of an existing or proposed street or from a base setback line, whichever results in the greater front yard depth. (See also Yard, front.) 
Setback line, base, means a base line from which the building setback distance is measured. See section 52-16(a). 
Shall, as used herein, is mandatory. Same for must. 
Shorelands means lands within the following distances from the ordinary high water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or flowage and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. 
Sign means a name, identification, image, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, project, place, activity, facility, service, event, attraction, person, institution, organization or business and which is visible from any street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park or other public property. Customary displays of merchandise or objects and material, without lettering, placed behind a store window are not signs or parts of signs. 
Sign area means the entire area within a circle, triangle or parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. 
Sign, on-premises, means a sign which advertises only goods, services, facilities, events, or attractions available on the premises where located or identifies the owner or occupant or directs traffic on the premises. All other signs are off-premises signs. 
Stable means a building for the shelter and feeding of horses. Note: Since a site plan will be required for new stables in all residential districts, the size and location of new stables will be subject to plan commission review and site plan approval. 
Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of a floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement or cellar having one-half or more of its height above grade shall be deemed a story for purposes of height regulation. The space under any roof, except a flat roof, if designed to be occupied for residential or commercial purposes, shall be counted as a full story. 
Story, half, means the space under any roof, except a flat roof, which, if occupied for dwelling purposes, shall be construed to be a full story for the purposes of this chapter. 
Street means all property dedicated or intended for public or private street purposes or subject to public easements therefor. 
Street, frontage or service road means a street generally contiguous and generally parallel to a restricted access traffic artery and affording vehicular access between such artery and private lands. 
Street line means a dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
Structure means any erection or construction, such as buildings, towers, masts, poles, booms, signs, decorations, carports, machinery and equipment, having a permanent location on the ground. 
Structure, accessory, means a detached structure subordinate to the principal structure on the same lot as the principal structure and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal structure. 
Structure, legal nonconforming, means a building, structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendments thereto, but which does not conform in one or more respects to the regulations of this chapter or amendments thereto. 
Structure, minor, means any small, movable accessory erection or construction, such as birdhouses, tool houses, pet houses, play equipment, arbors, walls and fences under four feet in height. 
Structure, principal, means the building containing the primary use of a property. 
Structure, temporary commercial, means a movable commercial structure, including, but not limited to, vendor carts, seasonal produce stands, and holiday sales tents, used for the temporary shelter or protection of goods or services for sale for a specific period of time determined by the plan commission. 
Structure, temporary construction, means a movable accessory structure not designed for human habitation or occupancy, but for the temporary protection of goods or property during construction of the principal structure. Such temporary period of use shall in no case exceed one year, unless a specific time extension is granted by the plan commission. 
Sustained yield forestry means the management of forested lands to provide annual or periodic crops of forest products. 
Tourist room means a room owned and managed for use by transient tourists owned and operated by a bed and breakfast establishment licensed under Wis. Admin. Code ch. HSS 197 and for which a conditional use permit has been granted by the city. The tourist room shall be operated as part of the bed and breakfast operation and shall be located within 800 feet of the licensed bed and breakfast establishment. 
Townhouses means a group of single-family dwellings, also called row houses, having an unpierced common wall between each adjacent section and the end units having side yards. 
Unimproved slope means the existing topographic condition in situ, for a period of no less than 24 months prior to new construction. 
Unnecessary hardship means that circumstance where special conditions which were not self-created affect a particular property and make strict conformity with restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of section 52-111(y). 
Use, accessory, means a use subordinate to and customarily incidental to the permitted principal use of the property or buildings and located upon the same lot as the principal use. 
Use, principal, means the main or primary use of property, buildings or other structures as specified and permitted by the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Utilities means public and private facilities, such as water wells, water and sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, power and communication transmission lines, electrical, power substations, static transformer stations, telephone and telegraph exchanges, microwave radio relays and gas regulation stations, sewage disposal plants and city incinerators. 
Variance means a departure from the terms of this chapter as applied to a specific building or parcel of land, which the board of appeals may lawfully permit, and not in strict conformity with the regulations of this chapter for the district in which such building, structure or parcel of land is located, provided the public safety, health and welfare is secured. 
Vending cart. See Structure, temporary commercial. 
Vision clearance means an unoccupied triangular space at the street corner of a corner lot, which is bounded by the street lines and a setback line connecting points specified by measurement from the corner on each street line. 
Wetland alteration means any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area. 
Wetlands means those geographical areas covered with shallow and sometimes temporary or intermittent waters and commonly referred to as marshes, swamps and bogs. 
Yard means an open space on the same lot with a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for vegetation. The street yard and rear yard extend the full width of a lot. 
Yard, front, means a yard extending the full width of a lot that produces a direct and unencumbered space between the right-of-way and the buildable portion of the lot, the depth of which shall be the setback required by this chapter for the district in which such lot is located (see also Setback). 
Yard, side, means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard, being the minimum horizontal distance between a building and the side lot line. 
(Code 1997, § 17.24; Rep. and Recr. #411; Cr. #512; Cr. #602; Am. #602; Am. #620; Cr. #653; Am. #719 ) 
( Ord. No. 759 , § 1, 12-2-2019; Ord. No. 769 , § 2, 2-17-2020)  
Sec. 52-12. - Compliance and use restrictions. 
(a)  No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure or part thereof shall be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered, except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(b)  No accessory structure shall be permitted until a building permit is issued for the principal structure. 
(c)  When an accessory structure is a part of, or is substantially attached to the principal structure, the yard requirements of the principal structure shall be applied to the accessory building. 
(Code 1997, § 17.11; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #719 )  
Sec. 52-13. - Building location requirements. 
(a)  Building must be on a lot. Every building hereafter erected, structurally altered or relocated shall be placed on a lot as herein defined. 
(b)  Only one principal residence building on a lot. 
(1)  Except as specifically otherwise provided herein for planned developments, only one principal residence building shall be permitted on a lot. 
(2)  The plan commission may grant an exception to permit more than one principal building on a lot where such grant would not be contrary to the spirit or intent of this chapter or to the regulations applicable to the specific district and provided that a sufficient lot area is provided and the buildings so located as to individually meet the setback, lot size, yard and open space requirements of the district in which located. 
(Code 1997, § 17.12; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-14. - Antenna systems. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Materials. Antennas, counterpoise and lead-in conductors shall be of hard copper, bronze, aluminum alloy, copper clad steel or other high strength, corrosion resistant material. Soft drawn or medium drawn copper may be used for lead-in conductors where the maximum span between points of support is less than 35 feet. 
(2)  Supports. Outdoor antennas and counterpoise and lead-in conductors shall be securely supported. They shall not be attached to poles or similar structures carrying electric light and power wires of more than 250 volts. Insulators supporting the antenna or counterpoise conductors shall have sufficient mechanical strength to safely support the conductors. Lead conductors shall be securely attached to the antenna. 
(3)  Contact avoidance. To avoid the possibility of accidental contact, outdoor antennas and counterpoise and lead-in conductors from an antenna to a building shall not cross over electric light or power circuits. Where proximity to electric light and power service conductors of less than 250 volts cannot be avoided, the installation shall provide a clearance of at least two feet. Antennas and counterpoise conductors shall not cross under electric light or power conductors. 
(4)  Grounding and screening. Metal structures supporting antennas shall be grounded permanently and effectively and provided with the following minimal screening: evergreens, a minimum of 6 feet high at the time of planting, eight feet in circumference at a radius of eight feet to ten feet from the dish support. If the location will not permit the above, the building inspector shall define adequate screening in harmony with the improvements already located on the premises. 
(5)  Proximity. No metal structure supporting an antenna shall be more than ten feet from the building which it serves in the reception of electrical signals and impulses. Such structure shall conform to all setback and offset requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(b)  Specific. Dish antennas/earth satellite stations are accessory uses (see section 52-11 for the definition of antenna). Subsection (a) of this section shall apply to dish antennas/earth satellite stations as far as applicable. In addition, the following restrictions shall apply to the installation of dish antennas/earth satellite stations. 
(1)  No dish antenna shall be installed or erected in the city without a permit from the building inspector. The minimum building permit fee as determined by the common council by separate resolution shall accompany all applications for a permit. 
(2)  The building inspector shall review the application and, if the application is complete, contains all required information and satisfies the following size, height, location and installation requirements, the building inspector shall issue the permit. The building inspector may refer an application for a dish antenna to the plan commission if there are special circumstances which, in the building inspector's opinion, require plan commission consideration, including, but not limited to, screening, color, location, height, visual impact and construction requirements. The building inspector shall refer all applications for permits in commercial and industrial districts to the plan commission. 
(3)  Roof dish antennas are not permitted. 
(4)  Dish antennas shall comply with the following size, height, location and installation requirements: 
a.  Dish antennas shall have a maximum diameter of no more than ten feet. 
b.  Dish antennas shall have a maximum total height of no more than 12 feet. 
c.  Not more than one dish antenna shall be permitted on a residential lot. The number of dish antennas per lot for commercial or industrial parcels shall be set by the plan commission. 
d.  Dish antennas shall be permanently mounted in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for installation. All installations shall meet a minimum wind load design velocity of 80 miles per hour and all electrical installations in connection with such units, including grounding of the system, shall be in accordance with city electrical code requirements. 
e.  Portable or trailer mounted dish antennas are not allowed. 
f.  Dish antennas shall be located and designed to reduce their visual impact on surrounding properties, and the building inspector may require adequate screening and unit color that harmonizes with such screening and the improvements already located on the premises. 
g.  Dish antennas shall be allowed in rear and side yards; however, in side yards they may not be any closer to the street line than the established setback of the principal building or structure. 
h.  Side and rear yard setbacks shall be equal to or greater than the required side and rear yard setbacks for the principal structure within the respective zoning district, but not less than the total vertical height of the dish antenna. 
(5)  Any installation of a dish antenna that cannot meet the size, location, or installation requirements set forth above may be authorized only by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with the procedures outlined for variance appeals in this section. 
(6)  When any dish antenna is no longer functional and ceases to be used by the property owner or occupant, such system shall be removed upon written order of the building inspector. 
(Code 1997, § 17.125; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-15. - Grade and drainage requirements. 
(a)  Street grade. Every building erected, structurally altered or relocated shall be at a grade which shall reasonably assure proper drainage in relation to the grade of existing streets and driveways. 
(b)  Restriction on filling and/or cutting of land and change of topography. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(5) of this section, no land shall be filled or cut within the city, nor shall the existing drainage or topographic characteristics of land within the city be changed without the owner of such land first obtaining from the plan commission a permit allowing for such filling, cutting or change in drainage or topographic characteristics. Such permit shall be applied for and considered by the plan commission. The application for such permit shall include a site plan showing all existing and proposed improvements on the property and topography map showing the topography of the land both before and after the implementation of the proposed change in the topography of the land. All slopes shall be protected against erosion, such protection measures to be approved by the city engineer. No change shall be made in the existing topography of any land that would alter the existing drainage or topography in any way so as to adversely affect highways, sidewalks or the adjoining property, except with the written consent of the owner of the affected property and approval of the plan commission and common council. The applicant shall pay all fees required by section 52-297. The granting of such permit shall be by majority vote of the plan commission and shall be conditioned on compliance with subsections (b)(2) through (4) of this section. 
(2)  The fill or change in topography shall not alter the existing drainage characteristics of the parcel in any way that would divert additional drainage waters onto any highway, sidewalk, or abutting parcel. 
(3)  Any slope resulting from the fill or change in topography shall not exceed the normal angle of slippage of the material involved and also shall not exceed a slope of a ratio greater than four horizontal to one vertical within 20 feet of any boundary line of the parcel. 
(4)  The fill shall not be deposited on any land within the conservancy zoning district. 
(5)  The fill shall not be deposited on any land designated as wetlands by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or the city, except that this subsection does not apply to land lying between the average high water mark and the bulkhead line for Lake Nagawicka. 
(6)  Land may be filled or topography changed on a parcel within the city without need of the owner obtaining a permit from the building inspector if the fill involves the addition of not more than 30 cubic yards of dirt or other fill material to the parcel within the past five years or the change in topography involves the moving of not more than 30 cubic yards of dirt or other fill material from one place to another on the parcel within the past five years. 
(c)  Adequate drainage required. No principal building shall be erected, structurally altered or relocated on land that is not adequately drained at all times nor which is subject to periodic flooding. 
(Code 1997, § 17.13; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-16. - Setback and yard requirements. 
(a)  Building setbacks. Base setback lines from which the building setback shall be measured are hereby established for all streets and highways in the city as follows: 
(1)  All building setbacks required herein shall be measured from the street or highway right-of-way line or ordinary high water mark. 
(2)  All building setback lines shall be parallel to and measured at right angles from the street or highway right-of-way line. 
(3)  No building shall be hereafter erected, altered or placed so that any portion or projection thereof is closer to the base setback line than the setback distance hereinafter specified for the district in which such building is located, except as a permitted yard projection. 
(4)  No structures of any kind, except necessary highway and traffic signs, public utility lines and necessary underground appurtenances to public utilities, fences, rural mailboxes and those signs permitted in a residence or agricultural district, shall be hereafter erected, altered or placed within the base setback area. 
(5)  Additions to and improvements and replacements of existing structures may be made within the setback areas, provided the degree of nonconformity is not substantially increased thereby and subject to the approval of the board of appeals. 
(6)  In cases where the highways for which setback lines are established by this chapter are located on municipal boundaries, such establishment shall apply only within the city. 
(7)  On corner lots of record as of the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the effect of the setback regulations shall not reduce the buildable width of such corner lot to less than 30 feet for its entire length inclusive of offset, providing the lot has a width of not less than 50 feet. Also see section 52-174. 
(b)  Yard requirements. 
(1)  No building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered so that any portion or projection thereof is closer to any lot line than the minimum yard requirements hereinafter specified by the regulations for the district in which a building is located, except as a permitted yard projection. Where a lot abuts upon a public alley, the yard requirements shall be measured from the alley right-of-way line abutting a lot. 
(2)  Where a lot abuts a district boundary line, the yard requirements in the district of less restrictive use shall be not less than that required for the district of more restrictive use. 
(3)  In the case of multiple-family or commercial use structures, the side yard requirements may be modified as follows: two or more buildings on adjoining lots may be erected with common or directly adjoining walls provided the requirements of the Wisconsin Administrative Code relative to such construction are complied with and provided that at both ends of such "row" type buildings the applicable yard requirements shall be complied with. 
(4)  Each lot hereafter created shall exhibit a front yard in accordance with the provisions of this chapter which creates a direct relationship between the principal structure and the public right-of-way, unless approved by the plan commission. 
(c)  Maintenance and use of setback, side yard, and rear yard areas. All required setback or side and rear yard areas shall be landscaped and kept clean and free from accumulations of debris or refuse and shall not be used for the storage or display of equipment, products, vehicles, or any other material. 
(d)  Yard projections. Only the following architectural features may project into required yards and courts as follows: 
(1)  Into any required front yard or side yard adjoining a side street lot line, cornices, canopies, awnings, eaves or other architectural features may project a distance not to exceed two feet, six inches. 
(2)  Fire escapes may project into a required front or side yard a distance not exceeding three feet. 
(3)  An uncovered stair and necessary landings may project into a required front or side yard a distance not to exceed six feet, provided such stair and landing shall not extend above the main entrance level of the building, except for a railing not exceeding three feet, six inches in height. 
(4)  Bay windows, balconies and chimneys may project into a required front or side yard a distance not exceeding three feet, provided that such features do not occupy in the aggregate more than one-third of the length of the building wall on which they are located. 
(5)  Yard projections listed above may project into any required side yard adjoining an interior side lot line a distance not to exceed one-fifth of the required minimum width of such side yard, but not to exceed three feet in any case. 
(6)  Yard projections listed above may project into any required rear yard the same distance they are permitted to project into a front yard. 
(e)  Fences, walks and hedges. 
(1)  Legislative purpose. It is the intent of the city to establish and maintain substantial open space around structures for generous light, air, convenience of access, safety from fire and the enhancement of property values. Owners and occupants are encouraged to maintain their lawns, trees, shrubs and flowers as to achieve desired lot definition and privacy and to avoid the division of open areas by artificial means, such as the use of solid fences, that result in wailed in yards. 
(2)  Permit required. No person shall, after August 10, 1984, erect, construct, alter, or enlarge a fence without submitting a survey and obtaining a permit from the building inspector. 
(3)  Exceptions. No permit shall be required for: 
a.  Decorative fences that are 50 percent open and four feet or less in height, such as picket fences, split rail fences and cyclone type fences. 
b.  Fences required under the swimming pool or tennis court ordinances that are part of the approved swimming pool or tennis court plan. 
c.  Decorative fences do not include any wire systems other than a cyclone fence. 
(4)  Privacy or patio fences. A fence designed to provide privacy for a patio not over six feet high, above grade, shall be allowed, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  A building permit is obtained from the building inspector; 
b.  Such fence is located in the rear yard and within the allowable principal building location, unless an exception is granted by the plan commission; 
c.  The finished side of such fence is faced toward the neighboring properties. 
d.  All other privacy fences must be approved by the plan commission. 
(5)  Business or industry fences. Fences required of business or industry for screening purposes under other sections of this Municipal Code shall require a permit after processing under parts (b) and (f) hereof. 
(6)  Construction. Fences shall be constructed so as to have the decorative side facing the neighboring property and/or street and the supportive side facing the inside of the property on which the fence is constructed. 
(7)  Maintenance. Fences shall be kept and maintained in good, sound, and presentable condition at all times. Fences not so maintained that become an eyesore or otherwise adversely affect property values in the neighborhood shall be removed upon order of the building inspector. The order shall provide 20 days minimum for such removal. Such orders shall be appealable to the administrative review board under section 2-270 of this Municipal Code. 
(8)  Vision clearance. See 52-174 of this chapter, vision clearance at intersections for corner lots. 
(f)  Retaining walls. Owners and occupants are encouraged to so grade and landscape their property as to preserve the natural terrain or, in the alternative, to create a natural appearance and to avoid the construction and maintenance of retaining walls. 
(1)  Permit required. No person shall after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived erect, construct, alter or enlarge a retaining wall without obtaining a permit from the building inspector. 
(2)  Exceptions. No permit shall be required for: 
a.  Edgings less than six inches in height of metal, stone, brick, concrete, timber, or other materials around driveways, patios, gardens, flower beds, plantings, or trees. 
b.  Decorative walls not in excess of 18 inches in height and located at least five feet from the lot line used around gardens, plantings, trees, patios or driveways and constructed of natural stone, brick or timbers. 
(3)  Permit processing. 
a.  The building inspector may issue a permit for a retaining wall that is not more than three feet in height, not within the minimum setback or offset area, and is of material, form and color that is structurally sound and harmonious with its surroundings. 
b.  The plan commission shall consider permit applications for all other retaining walls, i.e.: 
1.  Referrals from the building inspector made on the basis that the material, form, color, or structural appearance may have an adverse effect on property values in the neighborhood. 
2.  Those designed to be more than three feet high or proposed to be located in setback and/or offset areas. 
(4)  Standards. Plan commission approval shall be based on the following standards: 
a.  In the offset area, the difference in grade between lots is better controlled by a retaining wall. 
b.  In the setback area where the terrain makes a slope to the road impractical. 
c.  Plans showing that the retaining wall will be structurally sound and so constructed that it will properly contain and support the ground and pavements, walks and other nearby structures. 
d.  The location and height shall be harmonious with the principal structure and consistent with the legislative purpose hereof. 
e.  On corner lots the retaining wall shall not obstruct with the vision setback area. 
f.  In any case where a retaining wall is proposed to be within the setback and/or offset area, notification of the proposal and plan commission review date shall be sent to the adjacent property owners. 
(5)  Slopes. In the grading or landscaping of properties, whether residential or commercial, slopes in excess of a ratio of one foot rise per four lineal feet shall be prohibited. 
(6)  Maintenance. Retaining walls shall be kept and maintained in good, sound and presentable condition at all times. Retaining walls not so maintained that become an eyesore or otherwise adversely affect property values in the neighborhood shall be removed upon order of the building inspector. The order shall provide 20 days minimum for such removal. 
(Code 1997, § 17.14; Rep. and Recr. #411; Cr. #512; Am. #603; Rep. & Recr. #719 ) 
( Ord. No. 769 , § 1, 2-17-2020)  
Sec. 52-17. - Height regulations. 
(a)  Maximum height restricted. In any district no building or structure shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered to a height in excess of that hereinafter specified by the regulations for that district. 
(b)  Exceptions. The following shall be excepted from the height regulations of all districts: 
(1)  Chimney and flues, transmission lines, towers and poles of public utilities, except as provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Subject to the recommendation of the plan commission and approval of the common council, items such as, but not limited to, the following: cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, penthouses, stacks, scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, spires, wireless or broadcasting towers, masts, aerials and necessary mechanical appurtenances and new intermunicipal transmission lines, towers and poles of public utilities, windmills, solar energy collector devices and accessory farm buildings. 
(c)  Increase permitted. Subject to the approval of the plan commission, the maximum height of any principal building may be increased by not more than ten feet, providing all yard requirements and setbacks are increased by two feet for each foot by which such building exceeds the height limit of the district in which it is located. 
Exception: An increase in building height, above the first floor elevation, shall not be permitted in the CBD-1 district. 
(Code 1997, § 17.15; Rep. and Recr. #411) 
( Ord. No. 756 , § 1, 11-4-2019)  
Sec. 52-18. - Building area regulations; floor area. 
(a)  Any building intended in whole or part for residential purposes shall provide a minimum floor area as hereinafter specified by the regulations for the district in which such building is located. Such minimums are stated in terms of the minimum total floor area required for a building and that portion of the total which must be provided on the first floor level. Such minimum total shall be increased by 200 square feet for any building not having a basement at least 300 square feet in area. 
(b)  The total floor area of all buildings on a lot shall not exceed the maximum permitted under the floor area ratio (FAR) as hereinafter specified by the regulations for the district in which the building is located. In computing floor area ratios, the gross floor area shall include all levels of both principal and accessory buildings, inclusive of interior balconies and mezzanines, finished basements, garages, elevator shafts, stairwells at each story, floor space used for mechanical equipment with structural headroom of 7.5 feet or more, penthouses, and usable attic space providing structural headroom of 7.5 feet or more. See definition of "floor area" in section 52-11. 
(Code 1997, § 17.16; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-19. - Lot area requirements. 
(a)  No building shall be erected on a lot of less area than hereafter specified by the regulations of the district in which such building is located, except as in section 52-199. 
(b)  No lot shall be reduced by any means to create a lot of less than the required size or so that the existing yard requirements, setbacks, open space or lot area would be reduced below that required by the regulations for the district. 
(c)  The minimum lot size for residential and commercial lots not served by public sanitary sewer shall be five acres. The minimum lot size for lots in sewered areas shall be as specified by the regulations of the district in which such lots are located. Lots used for government facilities, utilities, and essential services are exempted from the five-acre minimum lot size requirement. The plan commission may grant an exception for land outside the sanitary sewer service area, as delineated by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission, that is not anticipated to be serviceable by public sanitary sewer in the foreseeable future. 
(Code 1997, § 17.17; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-20. - Open space. 
(a)  No building shall be erected, structurally altered or placed on a lot so as to reduce the usable open area of such lot to less than that hereinafter specified by the regulations for that district. 
(b)  To be usable such open area shall be of such topography, size and shape as will reasonably provide light, air, access, drainage and septic facilities where required. Garden, crop, pasture and wooded land may be included in computing such open area. 
(c)  No part of the open space provided for any building shall be included as part of the open space required for another building, except as hereinafter provided for planned developments. 
(Code 1997, § 17.18; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-21. - Street access requirements. 
(a)  No building shall be erected or placed on a lot or tract which does not abut on a public street, except that subject to the approval of the plan commission, a building without frontage on a public street may be permitted to be so erected, provided the tract in question has access to a public street by permanent easement at least 30 feet in width. If such easement serves more than two separate occupancies, it shall be 60 feet in width. Except further that access to island properties may be waived as provided in and pursuant to section 52-144. 
(b)  Except, however, that the erection or attachment of a garage, carport, utility room, tool shed or boathouse shall be permitted on a lot, parcel or tract of land upon which at the effective date of the enactment hereof, a principal building exists which does not conform with the access requirements of this section. Any such appurtenant building hereafter erected on such lot, parcel or tract shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use and shall be promptly removed when the principal building on such lot, parcel or tract is or may be required to be removed. 
(Code 1997, § 17.19; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-22. - Navigable water frontage and access restrictions. 
(a)  No lot abutting a navigable water may be created unless the lot width, as measured at the required building setback from the ordinary high water mark, has at least 150 feet of frontage. This restriction shall not apply to: 
(1)  A conditional use permit issued in conjunction with a planned development in accordance with article IX of this chapter. 
(2)  Public access points. 
(b)  Joint or common ownership of a water fronting lot for the purpose of providing water access to lots not immediately abutting the water, pyramiding, shall not be permitted. 
(c)  The common council, after receiving a recommendation from the plan commission, may grant a special exception to the restrictions contained in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1997, § 17.20; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #712 )  
Sec. 52-23. - Pier length and placement. 
Pier length shall be measured from the ordinary high water mark and shall comply with Wis. Stats. § 30.12, Structures and deposits in navigable waters. 
(Code 1997, § 17.205; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #719 )  
Sec. 52-24. - Private swimming pools. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall install, construct, enlarge, alter or remodel a swimming pool as herein defined, which pool is not within a permanent, fully enclosed building, unless such pool is constructed in accordance with this chapter and pursuant to a building permit issued by the building inspector. 
(b)  Application for building permit. Application for a building permit for such pool shall show, in addition to such information as is usually required, the dimensions of the pool, details of construction, a description of construction materials thereof and details of fencing if fencing is required. A building permit shall be required only for swimming pools as hereinafter defined and no building permit shall be required for wading pools. 
(c)  Definitions. A swimming pool is defined as an artificial structure, excavation or improvement of a natural pool or pond, which is larger than ten feet, either in diameter or side measurement, is capable of being filled with water to a depth of 24 inches or more at its deepest point and is designed and intended to be used for swimming or bathing whether the same be installed, constructed or erected above or below ground elevation and whether such pool be temporary or permanent. A wading pool is defined as a pool which measures less than ten feet as its longest dimension and is capable of being filled with water to a depth of less than 24 inches at its deepest point. 
(d)  Re-erection of swimming pool. If a swimming pool has been dismantled or removed for any reason, it may be re-erected at its original location without a building permit. 
(e)  Pool exclusively for private use. Each privately owned swimming pool and wading pool shall be used solely by residents of the property on which it is located and by bona fide gratuitous guests of such residents and no such pool shall be operated commercially. 
(f)  Distance and area requirements. 
(1)  Every swimming pool, whether in-ground or above-ground, shall be subject to setback and offset requirements of the district in which such pool is to be located. A swimming pool may be erected or constructed on any lot or parcel of land without regard to minimum area or minimum width requirements of the district. 
(2)  No pool shall be sited closer than six feet from any building or fence other than a fence surrounding such pool and in the event a fence is erected surrounding such pool, an unobstructed areaway of not less than four feet shall be provided between the pool and such fence. 
(g)  Fencing. Except as hereinafter provided, every swimming pool, whether heretofore or hereafter erected, shall be completely enclosed before filling the same, by a secure fence or wall not less than four feet above ground elevation. Such fence or wall shall be provided with a self-closing and self-latching gate or door with the latch located at the top of the gate or door or made inaccessible to small children in any other manner approved by the administrator. No such fence or wall shall be required in the case of above-ground pools, whose walls are perpendicular to the ground and are not less than four feet high, provided that the ladder or steps leading up to the pool is hinged at the top thereof and capable of being raised out of the reach of small children. 
(h)  Undesirable construction. If any swimming pool proposed to be erected or which is hereafter erected will be or is a nuisance, hazard or otherwise undesirable, either to the public or surrounding properties, the issuance of a building permit therefor may be withheld. In the case of an existing pool, the administrator may order its removal or proper renovation with the right of the owner to appeal such decision to the plan commission. 
(i)  Electrical connections. All electrical connections to any swimming pool shall be properly grounded so that no electrical current can be discharged into any part of such pool or surrounding fence. No electric wires or other electrical conductor shall be strung over any swimming pool. 
(Code 1997, § 17.21; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-25. - Boathouses. 
(a)  Use permitted. Boathouses as defined in section 52-11 and in Wis. Stats. § 30.01(1d), are permitted in any district abutting a public or private body of water in which a single-family dwelling is permitted by right, subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein and Wis. Stats. § 30.121. The interior of such boathouse must be designed and used exclusively for the storage of a boat and may also be used for the storage of marine and accessory items used by the occupants of the lot. Such boathouse shall be placed on a permanent foundation extending below the frost line or a concrete slab and shall contain at least 200 square feet in area to be considered a boathouse. Where a property line abuts the ordinary high water mark of a navigable waterway and a boathouse is desired, but may be within the 100-year floodplain, such structure may be allowed subject to the five-foot shore setback provision. 
(b)  Lake protection. All new, or rebuilt boathouses affecting 50 percent of structural area require that all stormwater runoff from the boathouse and impervious surfaces within ten feet of the boathouse be directed to a rain garden or other water quality device or system, that provides the same level of environmental benefit as a rain garden, approved by the city engineer. Installation of rain gardens shall be in accordance with the following City of Delafield Lake Nagawicka Planting List (hereafter referred to as "rain garden plant list") as well as adhere to the most current Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources recommended planting guidelines and design standards. The rain garden must be maintained as long as the boathouse exists. 
RAIN GARDEN PLANT LIST 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 
Grasses/Sedges: 
Andropogon gerardii 	Big Bluestem 
Bouteloua curtepindula 	Side-Oats Grama 
Bromus ciliatus 	Fringed Brome 
Calamagrostis canadensis 	Blue Joint Grass 
Carex bebbii 	Bebb's Sedge 
Carex bicknellii 	Copper-Shouldered Oval Sedge 
Carex comosa 	Bristly Sedge 
Carex crinita 	Fringed Sedge 
Carex hystericiana 	Porcupine Sedge 
Carex stipata 	Common Fox Sedge 
Carex vulpinoidea 	Brown Fox Sedge 
Elymus canadensis 	Canada Wild Rye 
Elymus virginicus 	Virginia Wild Rye 
Glyceria canadensis 	Rattlesnake Grass 
Glyceria grandis 	Reed Manna Grass 
Juncus dudleyi 	Dudley's Rush 
Juncus tenuis 	Path Rush 
Juncus torreyi 	Torrey's Rush 
Panicum virgatum 	Switch Grass 
Schizachyrium scoparium 	Little Bluestem 
Scirpus cyperinus 	Wool Grass 
Sorghastrum nutans 	Indian Grass 
Spartina pectinata 	Prairie Cord Grass 
Forbs (Flowering Plants): 
Allium cernuum 	Nodding Onion 
Asclepias incarnata 	Marsh Milkweed 
Aster azureus 	Sky-Blue Aster 
Aster ericoides 	Heath Aster 
Aster novae-angliae 	New England Aster 
Aster puniceus 	Red-Stemmed Aster 
Cassia hebecarpa 	Wild Senna 
Coreopsis palmata 	Prairie Coreopsis 
Desmodium canadense 	Canada Tick Trefoil 
Echinacea pallida 	Pale Purple Coneflower 
Eryngium yuccifolium 	Rattlesnake Master 
Eupatorium maculatum 	Spotted Joe Pye Weed 
Eupatorium perfoliatum 	Boneset 
Helenium autumnale 	Sneezeweed 
Helianthus grosseserratus 	Saw-Tooth Sunflower 
Heliopsis helianthoides 	Early Sunflower 
Hypericum pyramidatum 	Great St. John's Wort 
Liatris pycnostachya 	Prairie Blazing Star 
Liatris spicata 	Marsh Blazing Star 
Lobelia cardinalis 	Cardinal Flower 
Lobelia siphilitica 	Great Blue Lobelia 
Monarda fistulosa 	Wild Bergamot 
Napaea dioica 	Glade Mallow 
Physostegia virginiana 	Obedient Plant 
Pycnanthemum virginianum 	Mountain Mint 
Ratibida pinnata 	Yellow Coneflower 
Rudbeckia hirta 	Black-Eyed Susan 
Rudbeckia laciniata 	Wild Golden Glow 
Rudbeckia subtomentosa 	Sweet Black-Eyed Susan 
Sagittaria latifolia 	Arrowhead 
Silphium laciniatum 	Compass Plant 
Silphium perfoliatum 	Cupplant 
Solidago graminifolia 	Grass-Leaved Goldenrod 
Solidago ohioensis 	Ohio Goldenrod 
Solidago riddellii 	Riddell's Goldenrod 
Solidago rigida 	Stiff Goldenrod 
Verbena hastata 	Blue Vervain 
Vernonia fasciculata 	Ironweed 
Veronicastrum virginicum 	Culver's Root 
Zizia aurea 	Golden Alexanders 
Shrubs: 
Cornus stolonifera 	Red Osier Dogwood 
Physocarpus opulifolius 	Ninebark 
Viburnum opulus 	American High-Bush Cranberry 
Viburnum rafinesquianum 	Downy Arrowwood 
 
(c)  Plant selection. Rain gardens shall utilize no less than 12 native species selected from the rain garden plant list. No less than four of the selected species shall be selected from the grass/sedge portion of the list and shall comprise no less than 40 percent of the total plant or seed composition. The homeowner or contractor shall verify with the nursery/supplier what species work best with the soil and sunlight conditions. 
(d)  Landscape screening. Shrubs species intended to be planted in association with rain gardens must not be planted within the rainwater collection area. Care must be taken so that these shrubs do not out compete or shade the grass and forb species. 
(e)  Habitation prohibited. A boathouse may not be used for human occupancy or habitation. This prohibition expressly forbids the installation of bathroom facilities and other amenities typically found in a primary residence. State law (ch. NR 116, Wis. Admin. Code) prohibits plumbing within the floodplain. 
(f)  Height limitations. No boathouse may contain more than one story and shall not exceed 12 feet in total height if a flat roof, excluding railings, and 18 feet in total height if a mansard, gable, gambrel, hip or pitch roof. 
(g)  Building and lot width. No boathouse may be constructed on any lakeshore lot having less than 40 feet of lot width computed at the ordinary high water mark. The maximum boathouse width for lots ranging from 40 feet to 66 feet shall not exceed 30 percent of the lot width. The maximum boathouse width on lots with a width ranging from 66 feet to 150 feet shall not exceed 20 feet. The maximum boathouse width on a lot with a lot width greater than 150 feet shall not exceed 24 feet. 
(h)  Accessory to a single-family dwelling. No boathouse is permitted unless a single-family dwelling is already present on the lot. Only one boathouse per lot is allowed. 
(i)  Building location. A boathouse shall not be closer than five feet to the ordinary high water mark. On lots with a width less than 150 feet the back wall of the boathouse shall not be more than 30 feet from the front wall. On lots with a width greater than 150 feet the back wall of the boathouse shall not be more than 34 feet from the front wall. A boathouse shall not be located closer than six feet from a side lot line. 
(j)  Flat roof use. Surfaces of boathouses may be used as open recreational living areas, but shall not be permanently enclosed. Canopies, railings and access stairs shall be considered ordinary appurtenances. Deck construction, railings, and canopies may not exceed four feet in height in addition to the 12-foot height limitation for boathouses with flat roofs set forth in subsection (f) of this section. Any railings constructed on a flat roof and/or deck shall be at least 50 percent open. No flat roof boathouses, including the "ordinary appurtenances" permitted above, shall exceed 16 feet total height. 
(k)  Nonconforming boathouses. The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses that extend beyond the ordinary high water mark of any navigable water shall be required to comply with Wis. Stats. § 30.121. 
(l)  Required approvals. All building permit applications for new boathouses, or for the repair, remodeling or for additions to boathouses, shall be filed with the building inspector, who shall submit the application to the lake welfare committee for review. Upon receipt of completed application, the city clerk shall provide written notice to those property owners within 300 feet of the subject property for comments and/or consideration prior to lake welfare committee consideration. The lake welfare committee shall make a recommendation to the plan commission. The plan commission shall consider the location, architectural design, color and material to be used and compatibility with the principal structure, rain water remediation, buildings on adjacent properties, the lakeshore setting, and the neighbors' comments and lake welfare committee recommendations. Specific consideration shall be given to the visual impact of the boathouse from the lake and to any obstruction by the boathouse to an adjacent property owner's view of the lake. 
(m)  Rain water remediation installation. See subsection (b) of this section. Installation and establishment of approved method and/or plant materials shall be completed within six months of boathouse completion and prior to occupancy and final inspection of the boathouse. 
(Code 1997, § 17.22; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #719 ; Rep. and Recr. # 737 )  
Sec. 52-26. - Miscellaneous other general provisions. 
(a)  Manufactured and modular homes. Manufactured and modular homes shall be permitted in any residential district providing all of the lot, yard, and floor area requirements applicable to site-built housing are met and the manufactured or modular home meets the following standards to assure compatibility with other site-built residences in the district in which the homes are located: 
(1)  Manufactured and modular homes must have a pitched roof with overhanging eaves, comparable in appearance to other residential buildings in the district. 
(2)  Manufactured and modular homes must be on a permanent masonry foundation comparable to the foundations or basements of other residential buildings in the district. 
(3)  All wheels, axles, or any other appurtenances associated with transportation must be removed. 
(b)  Outdoor stacking or storing of equipment or materials. 
(1)  General. In any district, no equipment or materials of any kind shall be piled, stacked or stored out of doors, except when it is anticipated that such equipment or materials are to be utilized currently and ancillary to a lawful use of such premises. Except for construction materials used on site, agricultural, quarrying equipment or materials in appropriate districts, and domestic fuels, any material to be used more than 30 days from the time of such piling, stacking or storage shall not be considered as piled, stacked or stored for current use. 
(2)  Restriction in residential districts. No outdoor piling, stacking or storing of equipment or materials used for commercial purposes shall be permitted in any residential district other than equipment or materials associated with currently permitted building construction activity on the site. Any storage of materials, equipment or vehicles associated with a home business or home occupation or nonconforming commercial use in a residential district shall not be allowed except as where allowed by an approved plan of operation or other expressed action of the plan commission. 
(c)  House trailers. No trailer shall be used for the purpose of habitation in excess of seven days aggregate in any 365-day period without first obtaining an occupancy permit from the city building inspector to be issued upon payment of a fee of $5.00 for each such permitted occupancy nor shall any such trailer be used in any event for the purpose of permanent habitation, defined as more than 45 consecutive days or more than 60 aggregate days habitation in any 365-day period. Occupancy of such trailer by any person for any of the normal incidents of human habitation during any part of a day shall constitute a day's habitation. No person shall at any time conduct any business out of any trailer or mobile store or office, except as the same may be licensed pursuant to the peddlers license ordinance. 
(d)  Recreational vehicle parking. Recreational vehicles shall not be permanently parked or stored in the front yard in any residential or rural estate district. 
(e)  Keeping of horses. The keeping of horses is permitted in agricultural, rural estate and residential districts, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A minimum lot area of three acres is required in any rural estate or residential district. 
(2)  One horse per acre of lot area may be kept. 
(3)  Site plan required for barn or stable in conjunction with a residential dwelling. Barns or stables under this section shall be subject to section 52-110(9). 
(Code 1997, § 17.23; Rep. and Recr. #411; Am. #420)  
Sec. 52-27. - Outdoor lighting. 
(a)  Purpose, applicability and goals. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to improve the health, safety and general welfare of all zoning districts by restricting the night-time emission of light rays which are the source of light trespass and/or unnecessary glare; and/or are detrimental to the safety and/or security of persons, property or vehicular traffic; and/or are detrimental to the traditional aesthetic values of the city; and/or unnecessarily restrict persons from the peaceful enjoyment of their property. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all outdoor luminaries used, installed, replaced, altered, moved or repaired in all zoning districts after the effective date of this section, except as this applicability is specifically expanded or reduced herein. 
(3)  The goal of this section is to have all outdoor luminaries in all zoning districts to be located, sized and/or downward directed unless upward illumination is allowed by this section so that the light emitted from the luminaries does not constitute light trespass as defined herein. Downward directed shall mean that the luminaire is shielded in such a manner that light rays emitted by the luminaire, whether directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are restricted to regions below an angle 15 degrees beneath the horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. Light rays shall be shielded so as not to be visible from beyond the boundaries of the property. 
(b)  Effect on other codes. The provisions of this section are intended to supplement other applicable codes and requirements. Compliance with all applicable provisions of building, zoning, electrical and other codes must be observed. In the event of a conflict between the requirements of this Code and other requirements, the more stringent requirement shall apply. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Footcandle means a standard unit of illumination. 
Light shield means any attachment which interrupts and blocks the path of light emitted from a luminaire or fixture. 
Light trespass means light emitted by a luminaire that shines beyond the boundaries of the property on which the luminaire is located with an intensity greater than one half foot candle at a point four feet above the ground at the property's boundary line and/or at a point four feet above the surface of the water and 150 feet from that property's shoreline when measured on the water. 
Luminaire means the complete lighting system, including lamp and the fixture. 
Private driveway means any way: 
(1)  Serving not more than three lots; 
(2)  Used primarily for ingress and egress to and from said lots by motor vehicles; and 
(3)  For which ingress and egress right is established by private easement and/or private ownership. 
Private road means any street, highway, road or other way that is privately owned, that is used primarily for ingress and egress to and from lots by motor vehicles, and that is not a private driveway as defined herein. 
Public street means any street, highway, road or other way owned by or dedicated to the City of Delafield or governmental entity and used primarily for public travel in motor vehicles. 
Residentially-zoned neighborhood means any area in the City of Delafield zoned R-1, R-1A, R-L1, R-L2, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, or R-7. 
(d)  Requirements. 
(1)  Light trespass. All outdoor luminaires shall be located, sized, shielded and/or directed in such a manner that they do not constitute light trespass as defined herein. 
(2)  Safety. No outdoor luminaire may be operated in such manner as to constitute a hazard or danger to persons, or to safe vehicular or boating operation. 
(3)  Illuminating elevated objects. In the case of state and national flags, statues, entrance way markers, or other top-of-pole mounted objects which cannot be illuminated with downward directed lighting, upward directed lighting may be used only in the form of one or two narrow-cone spotlights which confines the illumination to the object of interest, and provided that the lighting is restricted to an angle of not less than 75 degrees up from horizontal. 
(4)  Pole fixtures. Outdoor light pole fixtures shall not exceed a maximum height of 30 feet. 
(e)  Special exemptions. The following are exempt from the requirements of this section, to the extent described as follows: 
(1)  Temporary exemption. Request for temporary exemption from the provisions of this section may be submitted to the city administrator in written form describing the reason for the request and the nature of the request. If approved and granted in writing by the city administrator, such exemption shall be in force for not more than 30 days. Request for a maximum of a 30-day renewal may be made in a similar manner. The city administrator may terminate any temporary exemption for any reasonable cause, including, but not limited to, concerns about safety or light trespass. 
(2)  Low voltage. All low-voltage landscape or accent lighting and holiday lighting are exempt from the requirements of this section, except for the requirements of subsections (d)(1) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  Security. Motion detector security lights, which are normally off and which are activated on for less than four minutes occasionally when motion is detected, are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(4)  Public and private roads. Outdoor luminaries used to provide illumination for public streets and private roads are exempt from the requirements of this section except as described in this section. 
(Code 1997, § 17.235; Rep. and Recr. #411; Am. #491)  
Secs. 52-28—52-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SITE PLAN AND APPEARANCE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 52-58. - Intent. 
Site plan and appearance approval is required for certain types of land uses permitted in this chapter. The approval of a site plan is required for the following reasons: 
(1)  To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(2)  To enhance the values of property throughout the city. 
(3)  To avoid and prevent deterioration of the general appearance of buildings, structures, landscaping, and open areas. 
(4)  To encourage and promote an efficient use of the land. 
(5)  To assure that site development takes into account the efficient provision of vehicular and pedestrian access, public utilities, stormwater management facilities, and other elements of public infrastructure and public facilities. 
(6)  To encourage and promote acceptability, attractiveness, cohesiveness, and compatibility of new buildings, development, remodeling and additions. 
(7)  To preserve and protect the appearance and aesthetic quality of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 17.25; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-59. - Site plan and appearance approval requirements. 
(a)  No person shall commence any use, erect any structure or obtain a building permit without first obtaining the approval of a site plan and appearance review submittals by the plan commission as set forth in this section and no use shall be carried on and no structure erected or enlarged, except as shown upon an approved site plan and appearance review submittals. 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy shall be granted until all improvements shown on an approved site plan and appearance review submittals have been completed in accordance therewith, provided that upon a finding by the administrator that certain improvements cannot be completed due to seasonal or other factors beyond the control of the developer and that temporary occupancy prior to completion will involve no health or safety hazard, he may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy bearing an expiration date, which date shall allow reasonable time for completion, upon posting a cash bond equivalent to the sum estimated by the administrator to be needed to complete all required improvements, conditioned on completion of all required improvements prior to the date of expiration of the temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Acceptance of a temporary certificate of occupancy implies consent to application of the bond money to completion of any required improvements not completed prior to the expiration date of the temporary certificate of occupancy and forfeiture of any portion thereof not so applied, but no action or inaction by the city in respect to any required improvement shall serve to extend the time of validity of any temporary certificate of occupancy or excuse any violation of this chapter. 
(d)  A temporary certificate of occupancy may, however, be extended in time and from time to time for good cause shown and any such extension shall operate to extend for the same period the time for completion under the terms of the bond. 
(Code 1997, § 17.26; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-60. - Exemptions from site plan and appearance approval requirements. 
The following structures and uses are exempt from the site plan and appearance approval requirements: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and permitted accessory structures. 
(2)  Minor exterior alterations such as painting, re-siding, re-roofing, window replacement and other repairs to the exterior of a structure that do not alter the color, size, shape, architectural character or illumination of the property. 
(3)  Signs that replace existing sign panels without changing the dimensions or character of the sign and type or intensity of lighting or illumination. 
(4)  Structures on farms over ten acres in size in the A-1 or AE-1 district directly related to the operation of the farming business. 
(5)  In the Historic Downtown Delafield District, colors of all non-masonry structures, signs, and site amenities shall be compatible to the adopted Historic Downtown Delafield District color palette. All color changes may be approved by city administrator or the administrator's designee. 
(Code 1997, § 17.27; Rep. and Recr. #411; Am. #445; Cr. #521; Resc. #616; Am. #719 )  
Sec. 52-61. - Required form of and information on site plan and appearance approval applications. 
Every site plan and appearance approval application shall be submitted to the administrator along with two full, complete signed copies of all items required on application and listed below, as well as property owner and applicant signatures. Additionally the all of the same shall be submitted to the city clerk-treasurer in digital (i.e., PDF) format. 
(1)  The boundary dimensions of the area included in the site plan and the lot area of the land included in the site plan. 
(2)  Existing and proposed grades, drainage systems, and structures with topographic contours at intervals not exceeding two feet. The topographic contours shall extend a minimum of 25 feet outside the property boundaries. 
(3)  The shape, size, location, height, and floor area of all structures and the floor area and finished ground and basement floor grades. 
(4)  Location and species of all trees over four inches in diameter at a height of five feet from the ground. 
(5)  Natural features such as wood lots, drainage ways, streams, and lakes or ponds and manmade features such as existing roads and structures, with indication as to which are to be retained and which removed or altered. 
(6)  Adjacent properties and their uses shall be identified. 
(7)  Proposed streets, driveways, parking spaces, sidewalks, and other pedestrian or vehicular circulation facilities, with indication of direction of travel for one-way streets and drives and inside radii of all curves. The width of streets, driveways, and sidewalks and the total number of parking spaces shall be shown. 
(8)  Architectural plans and general floor plans shall be provided for all new buildings. These drawings and plans should show sufficient detail to indicate the architectural design of the proposed buildings, but all design details are not required at this stage. 
(9)  Landscape plan showing all new plantings and retained existing plant materials. The landscape plan shall include the number, species, time of installation, and size of materials at installation. 
(10)  A colored rendering of the front elevation of the principal buildings showing colors and materials. 
(11)  The location, general design, and dimension of all signs, including ground signs, wall signs, roof signs, and directory signs. 
(12)  The location, height, design, and power of all exterior lighting. 
(13)  The size and location of all existing and proposed public and private utilities on the site. 
(14)  A vicinity sketch showing the location of the site in relation to the surrounding street system. 
(15)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner, developer and designer. 
(16)  For residential projects, the number and size of dwelling units, anticipated resident population, and the anticipated population under 18 years of age. 
(17)  For nonresidential projects, the amount of floor area, the number of anticipated employees, and number of parking stalls. 
(18)  Any other information necessary to establish compliance with this chapter and other applicable city ordinances. 
(Code 1997, § 17.28; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #674)  
Sec. 52-62. - Criteria for site plan and appearance review. 
The purpose of these criteria is to establish a checklist of those items that affect the physical aspect of the city's environment that the plan commission will use in reviewing site plan and appearance permit applications. These criteria are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation, or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles that can result in creative solutions that will develop satisfactory visual appearance within the city, preserve taxable values, and promote the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(1)  Landscape and site treatment. 
a.  Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to beauty and do not detract from the utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. 
b.  Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, improve appearance, screen parking areas and miscellaneous structures, provide wildlife habitat, provide shade, and enhance the streetscape. 
c.  Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials and by coordination with landscaping on adjacent developments. 
d.  Plant materials shall be selected on the basis of size at maturity, hardiness, tolerance for site-specific environmental conditions, screening value, wildlife habitat values, and all season appearance. 
e.  Use of plants that are indigenous to the area shall be encouraged. 
f.  Nonnative plants that are considered a nuisance or "invader" species, such as purple loosestrife, honeysuckle, and buckthorn shall not be used as plant materials. 
g.  Plant specimens shall be of sufficient size and quality to provide screening and landscape benefits within three growing seasons from the time of planting. Trees planted in traffic islands and in other areas where they could be subject to disturbance or other factors that could affect growth, should be at least two inches in diameter and eight feet high at the time of planting. Evergreens should be a minimum of six feet high at the time of planting. Shrubs should be balled and burlapped and a minimum of 18 inches high at the time of planting. 
h.  Irregular clusters of vegetation are generally preferable to isolated specimens or regularly spaced rows of plantings. 
i.  In locations where they will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor traffic, plants shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices. 
j.  Planting in parking lot islands is required to break up large expanses of parking stalls. Parking lots of over 24 vehicles shall have a minimum of one tree island not less than 180 square feet for each 24 parking stalls or an equivalent number of perimeter plantings or tree rows that are designed as part of an overall landscape plan acceptable to the plan commission. 
k.  Large parking areas shall be treated with decorative screens consisting of building wall extensions, plantings, berms, or other innovative means so as to screen parking areas. 
l.  Screening of service yards and other places that tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of these. Screening shall be equally effective in winter and summer. Screens shall be compatible and harmonious with the landscaping and site treatments on neighboring properties. 
m.  In areas where general planting will not prosper, other materials such as fences, walls, and paving of wood, brick, stone, gravel, and cobbles shall be used. Carefully selected plants shall be combined with such materials where possible. 
n.  Prohibition of disturbing steep slopes. Steeply sloped terrain with a natural grade of 25 percent or more may not be regraded, built upon or otherwise disturbed. The plan commission may grant an exception to this requirement where the area proposed for disturbance is an isolated area and providing such disturbance is necessary for the development to occur and does not alter the overall topographic character of the site. The total area granted such an exception may not exceed 20,000 square feet for the entire site. 
o.  Compliance with chapter 16, article III. All site plans must comply with the requirements of chapter 16, article III, pertaining to construction site erosion control and stormwater management. All site plans approved by the plan commission shall be subject to compliance with chapter 16, article III. 
(2)  Building design. 
a.  Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of appearance of a project shall be based on quality of its design and relationship to surroundings; however, architects and builders are encouraged to consider architectural styles and traditions appropriate to the area of the city. 
b.  Buildings shall be compatible with neighboring properties with respect to size, scale, proportion, and materials. 
c.  Buildings shall not be so out of character or incompatible with respect to neighboring properties that they would adversely affect the market values of property in the city. 
d.  Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of buildings and the design in which they are used. In developments with multiple structures, all structures shall be constructed with the same materials or those that are architecturally harmonious. 
e.  Materials shall be of durable quality. 
f.  In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall be compatible with each other and harmonious to their surroundings. 
g.  Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets shall be proportionally related to one another. 
h.  Principal building colors and color accents used on trims, fascia, and signage shall be coordinated and harmonious. 
i.  Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware shall be fully screened with materials that are coordinated with the colors of the principal building. 
j.  Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards, and exterior work areas shall be screened on all sides. Screening materials shall be coordinated with and harmonious with the overall architectural character of the principal building. 
k.  Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide for visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting of individual buildings may be used to prevent monotonous appearance. 
(3)  Signs. 
a.  Signs shall be compatible with respect to size, proportions, materials and color with nearby buildings and surroundings. 
b.  A sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates. 
c.  The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates. 
d.  The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign face. 
e.  Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises and shall not compete for attention. 
f.  Developers of projects, such as shopping centers or business buildings, in which individual signs for separate occupancies are permitted by ordinance, shall submit a comprehensive set or list of specifications that shall provide design review guidelines that would be administered for future signs in the project. 
g.  Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation "logos" shall conform to the criteria for all other signs. 
(4)  Miscellaneous structures, lighting, street furniture, and utility service. 
a.  Miscellaneous structures, street furniture, and lighting shall be designed to be part of the architectural character, concept, and style of the primary structure. Materials shall be compatible with respect to size, proportion, materials, and colors of the primary structure. 
b.  Lighting in connection with parking areas and miscellaneous structures shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with building design. 
c.  Exterior lighting shall be designed and located to minimize its illumination and glare as seen from neighboring properties and public rights-of-way. 
d.  Where feasible, utility service and associated hardware shall be installed underground. Where placement underground is not feasible, utility service and hardware shall be located and designed to be as unobtrusive as is feasible. 
e.  Exterior lighting shall be designed and directed so that existing and proposed residential areas will not be affected by the illumination. Illumination shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle measured at the lot line. 
(5)  Tree preservation. The purpose of this section is to provide standards to preserve the city's character as a natural, wooded community by maintaining property values through the improvement and preservation of the natural environment of the city through tree preservation and site plan regulation. It is the intent of the city to preserve and protect the natural resources of the city by reducing the amount of soil erosion in the city that is the result of tree removal; to protect the quality of the waters of the state and the city; to protect and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the city through the preservation of trees and promote aesthetically attractive development. 
a.  Tree inventory required. Applicants for site plan review shall be required to provide a plan map and inventory showing existing trees on those portions of the site that will be disturbed. The inventory shall include identification of all trees over four inches in diameter, measured at a height of 4.5 feet from the ground (referred to as "diameter at breast height" or "dbh"), from the following list of tree species, (hereinafter referred to as "protected tree species.") The inventory shall include reference to any listed tree that applicants believe to be damaged, diseased or dying. 
PROTECTED TREE SPECIES 
 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 
Deciduous Trees 
Red maple 	Acer rubrum 
Sugar maple 	Acer saccharinum 
American beech 	Fagus grandifolia 
Pin oak 	Quercus palustris 
White oak 	Quercus alba 
Swamp white oak 	Quercus bicolor 
Burr oak 	Quercus macrocarpa 
Red oak 	Quercus rubra 
Butternut 	Juglans cinerea 
Pignut hickory 	Carya glabra 
Shagbark hickory 	Carya ovata 
Horse chestnut 	Aesculus hippocastanum 
Black cherry 	Prunis serotina 
Black walnut 	Juglan nigra 
Basswood 	Tilia americana 
River birch 	Betula nigra 
Black spruce 	Picea mariana 
Blue spruce 	Picea pungens glauca 
Scotch pine 	Pinus sylvestris 
Eastern red cedar 	Juniperus virginiana 
White spruce 	Picea glauca 
Red pine 	Pinus resinosa 
Eastern white pine 	Pinus strobus 
American arborvitae 	Thuga occidentalis 
 
b.  Sampling method. If existing tree cover is determined by the city arborist to be too dense, too extensive, or impractical for a conventional inventory, mitigation requirements may be derived from scientific sampling. Sampling quadrates shall be measured and inventoried per the direction of the city arborist for each unique community or microclimate exhibited in the subject property. Data derived from sampling shall replicate the requirements described in subsection (5)a of this section. 
c.  Tree protection. In developing a site plan and locating buildings, driveways and parking areas, applicants for site plan reviews shall be required to preserve, to the greatest extent feasible, all protected tree species. The plan commission shall consider the tree inventory and the applicant's efforts to protect and preserve existing trees, and the feasibility of preserving all protected tree species in their review of the site plan. 
d.  Clear cutting prohibition. "Clear cutting" is herein defined as the act of complete removal of all vegetation, including, but not limited to, trees, from a lot or parcel, whether developed or undeveloped, as those terms are defined in section 52-11. The clear cutting of any lot or parcel within the municipal boundaries shall be prohibited except as provided for in this section. Clear cutting does not include the removal of exotic invasive plant species as those species are determined and defined by the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources Manual of Control Recommendations for Ecologically Invasive Plants, as amended. 
e.  Tree removal limitations. Subject to the provisions of this section, removal of trees four inches dbh or greater shall be permitted as follows: 
1.  On proposed lots less than 20,000 square feet, up to 80 percent of said trees per lot may be removed, except in the C-1 and SW-1 zoning districts; 
2.  On proposed lots 20,000 square feet to 39,999 square feet, up to 60 percent of said trees per lot may be removed, except in the C-1 and SW-1 zoning districts; 
3.  On proposed lots 40,000 square feet to 87,119 square feet, up to 40 percent of said trees per lot may be removed except in the C-1 and SW-1 zoning districts; 
4.  On proposed lots 87,120 square feet or greater, up to 20 percent of said trees per lot may be removed, except in the C-1 and SW-1 zoning districts; 
5.  In the C-1 and SW-1 zoning districts, up to ten percent of said trees per proposed lot may be removed. 
Issuance of a building permit/erosion control permit shall constitute an approval of the land disturbance subject to any terms and conditions contained therein and placed on the applicant by the commission as well as the applicant's strict conformance with the regulations of this chapter. 
f.  Tree/vegetation removal. 
1.  Removal outside the approved area of disturbance. No trees or vegetation shall be removed outside the approved area of disturbance except as specifically exempted in this section. 
2.  Removal inside the approved area of disturbance. Except as exempted in this section, to the maximum extent feasible, significant trees and vegetation inside the limits of disturbance shall be maintained. Significant trees removed from within the area of disturbance shall be replaced as set forth in subsection (5)h of this section. 
3.  Removal within the shoreland areas. Within a strip paralleling any navigable body of water and extending 50 feet inland from all points along the ordinary high water mark of the shoreline, tree cutting and removal of existing vegetation shall be limited in accordance with the following provisions: 
(i)  No more than 30 percent of the length of a strip (measured along the ordinary high water mark as that term is defined in section 52-11) shall be clear-cut to the depth of the strip. 
(ii)  Cutting of this 30 percent pursuant to subsection (5)f.3(i) of this section, shall not create a clear-cut opening in the strip greater than 30 feet wide (as measured along and parallel to the ordinary high water mark as that term is defined in section 52-11). 
(iii)  Any paths, roads, or passages within the strip shall be so constructed and surfaced so as to control erosion in compliance with the terms and conditions of chapter 16, article III, pertaining to construction site erosion control and site stormwater management. 
(iv)  The plan commission may allow exceptions for the accommodation and/or provision of essential fire and police services. 
g.  Special cutting plans. As an alternative to subsection (5)f.3 of this section, a special cutting plan allowing for greater cutting than that allowed under this chapter may be permitted by the plan commission by issuance of and compliance with a conditional use permit issued under article V of this chapter. 
1.  Plan requirements. An application for a conditional use permit under this section shall include a site plan, including the following information: 
(i)  Location of all structures; 
(ii)  Location of parking and driveway; 
(iii)  Existing and proposed topography; 
(iv)  Existing tree inventory; 
(v)  Identification of proposed tree replacement. 
2.  Approval criteria. The plan commission may grant a conditional use permit only upon a finding that such special cutting plans will not cause undue erosion or destruction of the scenic beauty, and will not substantially reduce shielding from the water, structures and/or parking areas impacted or immediately adjacent to the special cutting plan area. The plan commission may condition granting such a permit upon a guarantee by the applicant of tree planting by the lot owner per an approved planting plan. 
h.  Tree replacement. Where an existing tree over four inches in diameter of a species identified as a protected tree species is to be removed, tree mitigation shall occur, and a replacement of an equivalent amount of tree caliper inches, as measured by tree diameter or size at the time of planting, shall be required. In those instances, mitigation may be satisfied, but may not be limited, by: 
1.  On-site replacement, documented in a landscape plan submitted to and approved by the city arborist or the plan commission; 
2.  Off-site replacement, to be determined by the city arborist in accordance with this subsection (5)h, when site conditions are determined by the city arborist to be inappropriate for required mitigation quantities or plans; 
3.  Fees in lieu of tree mitigation or replacement as provided by subsection (5)i of this section; or 
4.  A combination of mitigation alternatives as determined and prescribed by the city arborist and approved by the plan commission. 
Replacement trees shall be clearly identified on the landscaping and site plans and shall be of a type and species suitable for the site as determined by the city arborist or plan commission. All new replacement canopy trees shall be a minimum of 2.5-inch caliper, as measured six inches from the top of the nursery-stock root ball. Conifers, ornamental trees and shrubs over six feet in height, as measured from the top of the root ball, at the time of planting shall be credited as 2.5-inch caliper trees. 
i.  Fees in lieu of tree replacement. 
1.  Where, in the opinion of the plan commission, replacement plantings or other mitigation efforts that are required by this section, would not be feasible, the plan commission may require the applicant to pay a fee equal to $150.00 per caliper inch of the tree that is removed or proposed to be removed. Valuation of trees removed or proposed to be removed may be reduced per the city forester, based on analysis of health and condition of trees to be replaced. In determining valuations and fees in lieu of replacement the plan commission shall take into consideration nursery stock prices in effect at the time of valuation. In the discretion of the plan commission the valuation per caliper inch may be modified to account for fluctuating commodity prices. 
2.  All fees collected as fees in lieu of replacement shall be deposited in the City of Delafield Tree and Brush Removal Fund and earmarked for landscaping and tree planting in public street rights-of-way and on other city-owned property. 
j.  Penalty for unauthorized tree removal. If it is determined by the city building inspector, city arborist, or city administrator that a violation of this section has occurred, or there has been unauthorized tree removal, with the exception of the removal of dead or diseased trees as determined by the city arborist, the forfeiture for said unauthorized removal shall be three times the amount determined pursuant to subsection (5)i of this section. The value of each and every unauthorized removed tree shall be determined by the city arborist. Each and every act of unauthorized tree removal shall be deemed a separate offense for which a forfeiture may be assessed. 
(Code 1997, § 17.29; Rep. and Recr. #411; Cr. #443; Cr. #455; Rep. #455; Cr. #474; Am. #474; Am. #491; Rep. & Recr. #537; Am. #656; Am. # 723 )  
Sec. 52-63. - Design guidelines for special design review districts. 
In addition to the general criteria for site plan appearance review described in section 52-62(2), the plan commission shall apply additional guidelines for review of applications within design review districts. A certified copy of the design review districts map shall be adopted and approved with the text as part of this section, shall bear upon its face the attestation of the city clerk, and shall be available to the public in the office of the city clerk-treasurer. 
(1)  Downtown Delafield District design guidelines. The following criteria shall be met when changes are proposed to an existing site plan, unless waived by the plan commission: 
a.  The Downtown Delafield District boundary shall encompass all structures on both sides of the streets and all corners of the intersections within the boundary further described: 
Commencing at Stocks Drive and Genesee Streets, north to Wells Street, west to Dopkins Street, north to the Bark River, east along the river to Genesee Street, north to St. John's Street, south to the Bark River, east to Oneida Street, south to Milwaukee Street, east to Oneida Street, south to Wells Street, west to Genesee Street and south to Stocks Drive. 
b.  All buildings designed for retail use shall have storefront windows and display areas constituting at least 40 percent of the first floor facade. 
c.  All nonresidential uses that are new structures, or modifications, or additions to existing structures shall be required to demonstrate compatibility with surrounding architecture and exhibit traditional influence indicative of architectural styles and detailing found in the Delafield region at the time of city incorporation. Predominant architectural styles in the downtown district are Colonial, Neo-classical, Federal, Victorian and Greek Revival. New structures should incorporate such features as: 
1.  Pitched roofs; 
2.  Ornamental spires and rooftop ornamentation; 
3.  Use of horizontal wood siding or similar manmade material that replicates wood with four- to five-inch laps; 
4.  Use of white or other colors compatible with the approved Historic Downtown Delafield District color palette. 
d.  All buildings with occupied floors above the ground floor shall have window openings on the street facades displaying an organized rhythm of window openings. 
e.  New construction shall maintain the compatible overall size, height, scale, and orientation of other buildings on the same block. 
f.  Owners of existing structures shall be encouraged to maintain original materials similar to those used originally on historic structures. If vinyl, aluminum, or other similar modern siding materials are used on historic buildings, the style shall be four- to five-inch lap. Concrete block, artificial stone and artificial brick veneers shall be prohibited. 
g.  No new backlit signs or awnings shall be permitted. If sign lighting is needed, the preferred lighting is either ground lighting or mounted arm lighting. Existing legal nonconforming backlit signs and backlit awnings shall be considered grandfathered. 
h.  Preferred signage areas include traditional sign panels above storefront windows, signage painted or applied to windows, small unlit projecting signs, and signage placed on traditional canvas awnings. 
i.  Signage shall be oriented to the pedestrian versus the automobile. 
j.  Maximum size for a flush wall mounted sign shall be 25 square feet. 
k.  The preferred form of parking in the downtown area is the "parking courtyard," which places the parking areas on the interior or rear of the blocks rather than along the street frontage. 
l.  Parking lots fronting on public streets or on residential zoned areas shall be screened from the streets and sidewalk or adjoining residential property either by walls or plantings or both. If walls are used, then the material shall be compatible with the walls of the existing adjacent buildings. Walls shall be at least 24 inches high. 
m.  Electronic message, both external and internal displays, shall be prohibited in the Downtown Delafield Design District. 
(2)  Southshore Redevelopment District design guidelines. 
a.  All structures shall be compatible in scale and massing with existing residential structures in the Southshore Redevelopment District. 
b.  Garages and carports shall face onto side yards or rear yards. 
c.  No backlit signs, including backlit awnings, shall be permitted. 
d.  Parking areas or parking lots designed for more than four vehicles shall be separated from the public rights-of-way by a decorative screen that is compatible and harmonious with the architectural character, concept, and style of the principal structure and adjoining structures. 
e.  The location and design of structures and landscaping shall preserve and protect vistas of the lake from the public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Highway Interchange District design guidelines. 
a.  Use of prefabricated metal panels or untextured concrete block exterior siding shall not be permitted as the primary building material on the facades of any structures visible from U.S. 94, STH 16 or STH 83. Textured or patterned concrete block and metal panels, exposed trusses, or other ornamentation is acceptable when used on architecturally designed buildings where such materials are used as an architectural element on a building of overall superior quality. 
b.  All commercial structures visible from Interstate Highway 94 or Highway 16 should have at least a 70 percent masonry facade or other quality materials of comparable durability and aesthetic character. In computing facade surface area, glass window and door openings shall be excluded from the facade surface calculations. 
c.  All equipment or truck parking, outside storage areas, loading bays, and trash receptacles shall be screened from view from all public rights-of-way and existing and proposed residential areas. 
d.  Landscaped terrace areas, decorative screens or berms shall be constructed as buffers separating parking areas for over 24 vehicles from major highways and frontage roads. All landscaped terrace areas separating parking areas from major highways and frontage roads shall be at least 15 feet in width. 
e.  Parking lots for over 24 vehicles shall have a minimum of one tree island of not less than 180 square feet for each 24 parking stalls or an equivalent number of perimeter plantings or tree rows that are designed as part of an overall landscape plan acceptable to the plan commission. 
(Code 1997, § 17.30; Rep. and Recr. #411; Am. #534; Am. #603) 
( Ord. No. 732 , § 2, 3-19-2018)  
Sec. 52-64. - Maintenance and upkeep criteria. 
Maintenance and upkeep are an integral aspect of the quality of the overall appearance of the city. Both buildings and sites require regular maintenance to retain a good appearance. Improper or inadequate maintenance and upkeep result in a bad appearance and decrease taxable values. Therefore, it is necessary that maintenance be a concern of the plan commission. The building inspector shall enforce adequate maintenance and upkeep of all property under the jurisdiction of this section. 
(1)  Site maintenance and upkeep. 
a.  Landscape materials, other than plantings, that have deteriorated or been damaged or defaced, shall be properly repaired or replaced. 
b.  Plant materials that have deteriorated or died shall be replaced with healthy plantings of appropriate size to be harmonious with original design or the area redesigned with other treatment to provide an attractive appearance. 
c.  Plantings shall be kept watered, fed, cultivated, and pruned as required to give a healthy and well-groomed appearance during all seasons. 
d.  Parking areas shall be kept in good repair, properly marked, and clear of all litter and debris. 
e.  Vacant property shall be kept free of refuse and debris and shall have the vegetation cut periodically during the growing season. 
f.  Lawns and other landscaped areas shall be kept mowed and trimmed. 
(2)  Building maintenance and upkeep. 
a.  Buildings and appurtenances, including signs, shall be cleaned and painted in a color harmonious with the original design or repaired as required to present a neat appearance. 
b.  Deteriorated, worn, or damaged structures or portions of structures shall be rebuilt or replaced. 
c.  Illumination elements of buildings and signs shall be kept in good repair so as to maintain the effect for which they were designed. 
(Code 1997, § 17.31; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-65. - Site plan and appearance review administration. 
(a)  Regulatory powers of the commission over new construction and remodeling. No permit required by applicable ordinances of the city for the erection, construction, alteration or repair of any building or structure on public lands or within any zoning district, excluding single-family and two-family residences and which involves new construction or major exterior alterations, shall be issued by city officials except upon the granting of a site plan and appearance certificate of approval by the plan commission. If the building inspector determines that only a minor exterior alteration is involved in the work for which the permit is sought, no certificate of approval is required hereunder. 
(b)  Procedure for site plan and appearance certificate of approval application review and approval. 
(1)  Application. An applicant for any construction permit that requires a site plan and appearance certificate of approval shall apply to the plan commission for such certificate on forms provided by the administrator and shall provide two full, complete signed copies of all items required on application and as specified in section 52-61, as well as property owner and applicant signatures. Additionally the all of the same shall be submitted to the city clerk-treasurer in digital (i.e., PDF) format. 
(2)  Schedule plan commission meeting. Upon receipt of such application, the administrator shall schedule a meeting of the plan commission to be held within 45 days of the date of application, at which the applicant shall be given an opportunity to make a presentation and any interested party shall be given the opportunity to comment. 
(3)  Staff application review conference. Any applicant or prospective applicant for any permit that requires a site plan and appearance certificate of approval shall have a preliminary review conference with the administrator and city planning staff. At such conference, the staff shall review the preliminary exterior drawings, sketches or photographic examples, landscape and site plans and materials on a specific project and provide the applicant with guidance in the development of a plan which would be consistent with requirements and purposes of this section. 
(4)  Preliminary plan commission conference. Any applicant or prospective applicant for any permit that requires a site plan and appearance certificate of approval may file a written request for a preliminary conference with the plan commission. Such conference with the commission shall be held at the next scheduled commission meeting. At such conference, the commission shall give consideration to preliminary exterior drawings, sketches or photographic examples, landscape and site plans and materials on a specific project and provide the applicant with guidance in the development of a plan which would be consistent with requirements and purposes of this section. 
(5)  Plan commission meeting. The plan commission may approve, deny or make recommendations as to changes in the site plan and exterior design features, which in the judgment of the commission would tend to achieve the general purpose of this section. If approval is granted contingent upon plan changes, revised documentation must be submitted in digital (i.e., PDF) format to both the city clerk and city engineer within 30 days of the approval. 
a.  The plan commission shall issue a certificate of approval if it finds that: 
1.  The applicant's plans are substantially consistent with this section; 
2.  The proposed exterior design features of the development are suitable and compatible with the character of neighboring buildings and structures and the character of the neighborhood; 
3.  The exterior design features of the development will not be detrimental to the harmonious and orderly growth of the city; and 
4.  The exterior design features of the development will not cause a substantial depreciation in the property values or taxable values in the neighborhood. 
b.  The plan commission shall render its decision at the meeting and shall notify the administrator and the applicant thereof. If the commission denies the issuance of a certificate of approval to the applicant, no permit shall be issued on the application, except by express direction of the common council, upon appeal as provided below. 
(6)  Follow-up by the building inspector. 
a.  Upon the granting of a certificate of approval, one copy of the exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans, renderings and materials upon which the certificate was granted shall be retained by the city clerk and a second copy shall be retained by the building inspector, whose responsibility it shall be to determine, as the project is in progress and finally upon its completion, that there have been no deviations therefrom. Such deviations shall constitute a violation of this section, in which event the building inspector may stop work on the project in the same manner as for a violation of a chapter of this Code. Work may not be resumed until such deviations are corrected. 
b.  The person to whom a certificate of approval has been granted shall comply with the requirements of the certificate and obtain such inspections as may be necessary in order to assure compliance. The building inspector shall give notice of any deficiencies found to exist. Failure to correct any deficiencies within ten days after notification of such deficiency shall constitute a violation of this section. 
c.  When, by reason of nonavailability of planting materials or other valid circumstances, it becomes necessary to vary any of the provisions under which a certificate has been granted and, in the opinion of the building inspector, such variation shall be aesthetically equal to or better than the original provisions and will not conflict with the intent of this section, the building inspector shall have the power to grant such variation. To the extent that the building inspector exercises the above power, he shall submit a written report of the circumstances to the commission. 
d.  Before any occupancy permit may be issued authorizing the use of any improvements constructed under the provisions of this section, a final inspection of the premises must be obtained. An occupancy permit will not be issued unless the completed work is found to be in compliance with plans approved by the commission and under which the certificate of approval was issued, except as provided in subsection (b)(6)f of this section. 
e.  If it should become impossible by reason of weather, strike or any other circumstance beyond the control of the person, firm or corporation to whom the certificate has been granted to complete all work required before occupancy or start of use, a temporary occupancy permit may be granted upon either depositing with the city a cash escrow sufficient to guarantee completion of the work, or upon the execution of an agreement in a form satisfactory to the city attorney which shall bind the applicant to comply with the terms, provisions and conditions of the certificate as soon as circumstances permit. Refunds of any cash escrow may be made only in a lump sum upon final inspection and approval by the building inspector. 
f.  If the person to whom the certificate of approval has been granted fails to complete the improvements above and a cash escrow amount has been deposited for more than 12 months from the date of deposit, the city shall be authorized to use all or such part of such deposit as may be required to complete the work in accordance with drawings submitted and approved by the plan commission and under which a certificate and other permits have been granted. The above time limit may be extended by the building inspector if it is in the public interest to do so. In such event, the party to whom the certificate was issued shall only be entitled to the refund of that portion, if any, of the cash deposit that remains in escrow after completion of the work entailed. The party to whom the certificate was issued, and the successors and assigns thereof, shall have a continuing obligation to maintain the exterior design features as approved, and failure to do so, within ten days after notification by the building inspector of such failure to maintain, shall constitute a violation of this section. 
g.  Improvements in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be in compliance with this section, but such improvements shall be continuously maintained in a state of good repair. The building inspector shall have the same powers and authority to effectuate the proper maintenance of preexisting improvements as that person has with regard to improvements for which a certificate has been issued. 
(7)  Appeal to the council. If the plan commission denies a certificate of approval or amendment thereto or fails to timely act as provided above, the applicant shall have the right to appeal directly to the common council. Such appeal shall be made in writing and filed within 30 days of the failure of the commission to act. The common council shall consider and decide such appeal within 30 days after the filing thereof. Upon such appeal, all records and findings concerning the applications shall be submitted to the common council by the building inspector. Thereupon, the common council may: 
a.  Adopt the decision of the plan commission. 
b.  Overrule or modify the decision of the plan commission and direct the issuance of a certificate. 
c.  Or, if the plan commission has failed to timely act as provided above, direct or deny issuance of a certificate. 
d.  Amendments to a certificate of approval may be obtained by application in the same manner as provided for an original certificate. 
(8)  Performance bond or letter of credit. The city may require a performance bond, letter of credit, or other assurance from the developer guaranteeing that all grading, erosion control, stormwater facilities, landscaping and restoration, and other site improvements required as a condition of site plan and appearance approval will be installed. Said bond or letter of credit shall be for 110 percent of the estimated cost of installation based on cost estimates approved by the city engineer. Such performance bond or letter of credit shall be retained by the city until all improvements are accepted and approved by the city engineer. 
(9)  Erosion control. Erosion controls approved by the city engineer must be in place, inspected, and approved prior to issuance of any building permits or granting a permit for preliminary grading or site preparation. Erosion controls must meet the guidelines of the "Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook." 
(10)  As-built plans. Following completion of construction of required site improvements, developers shall provide the city with as-built plans for stormwater improvements, grading, and landscaping. As-built plans shall be submitted on Mylar, signed and sealed by a professional engineer and/or land surveyor of the state. Additionally, as-built plans shall be submitted to the city engineer in digital format (i.e., PDF) and in AutoCAD dwg format. 
(11)  Penalty. Except as otherwise provided herein, any person found in violation of any provision of this section or any other rule or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1997, § 17.32; Rep. and Recr. #411; Recr. #444; Recr. #587; Am. #587; Am. #674)  
Secs. 52-66—52-88. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLANS OF OPERATION 
 
Sec. 52-89. - Plans of operation. 
(a)  Plan of operation review and approval requirements. 
(1)  No person shall operate a commercial enterprise, industry, home business, church, school, nonprofit organization, or other nonresidential use without first obtaining the approval of a plan of operation from the plan commission as set forth in this section, and no nonresidential activity shall be engaged in or carried on, except as approved in the plan of operation permit. 
(2)  As businesses or institutions requiring a plan of operation add additional employees, change the nature of the product or service, or extend the hours of operation beyond those shown on the plan of operation approval an amended plan of operation shall be required. 
(b)  Temporary plan of operation permits. That the city administrator may have the authority to issue a temporary permit until the next official plan commission meeting is held. 
(c)  Plan of operation permit exemptions. The following public uses are exempt from plans of operation permit requirements: 
(1)  Municipal offices. 
(2)  Public schools. 
(d)  Required information for a plan of operation permit. All plans of operation shall be submitted to the administrator on forms supplied by the city. The applications for plan of operation permits shall show the following information: 
(1)  Name, type, and address of the business or institution. 
(2)  Name and address of property owner. 
(3)  Name and address of the manager, if other than the owner. 
(4)  The proposed hours of operation. 
(5)  The number of full-time and number of part-time employees. 
(6)  Plot plan for multitenant buildings. 
(e)  Criteria for plan of operation approval. The following criteria will be used by the plan commission in reviewing applications for plan of operation permits: 
(1)  Proximity to residential neighborhoods and the potential for disturbing and disrupting residential uses. 
(2)  Adequacy of the principal building and other structures on the site for the proposed activity. Plan of operation permits will only be issued to businesses to be conducted in permanent structures. Temporary plan of operation permits may be issued, at the discretion of the plan commission, for temporary structures or facilities not on a permanent foundation, such as wheeled trailers, vendor carts, and season stands. 
(3)  Availability of adequate parking to meet the needs of employees and customers. 
(4)  Adequacy of street access. 
(f)  Hours of operation. 
(1)  Authority. Based upon the impact on residential areas in proximity to commercial uses and the cost of police protection and other public services necessary to adequately serve the business with extended hours of operation, the common council finds that it is necessary to limit hours of operation for all businesses. 
(2)  Hours allowed. The plan of operation required by this section shall contain a proposal for hours of operation. No business may be open with lit signage to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. except for the following uses: 
Gasoline stations 	24-hour operation allowed 
Gasoline stations with incorporated food marts (under 5,000 square feet) 	24-hour operation allowed 
Hotels and motels 	24-hour operation allowed 
Restaurants and drinking establishments 	As permitted by Wisconsin Statutes governing sale of alcohol beverages 
 
(3)  Setback from residences. All 24-hour operations approved by the city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall conform to a 200-foot setback from any abutting residential property line. 
(Code 1997, § 17.33; Rep. and Recr. #411; Am. #514)  
Secs. 52-90—52-106. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 52-107. - Establishment. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided into the zoning districts described in this article. 
(1)  District boundaries. Boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map, City of Delafield, Wisconsin." Such boundaries shall be construed to follow corporate limits; U.S. public survey lines; and centerlines of streets, highways, alleys, easements and railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended, unless otherwise noted on the zoning map. 
(2)  Boundaries of conservancy districts. Boundaries of conservancy districts as drawn on the official zoning map are intended to represent the edge of wetlands, swamps, marshes and floodlands or the high water line along a stream or watercourse and the boundaries of public parklands. Modification of the conservancy district boundaries to exempt lands from this classification may be permitted if a property owner presents documentation that the land or a portion of it does not contain soil types which are poorly drained, very poorly drained or wet alluvial land according to the Soil Survey for Waukesha County prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service. 
(3)  Boundaries of shoreland-wetland districts. 
a.  The Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District includes all wetlands in the city which are five acres or more in size and are shown on the final wetland inventory map that has been adopted and made a part of this chapter in section 52-111(ac)(9) and which are: 
1.  Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high water mark of navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Ponds or flowages in the city shall be presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the department of natural resources' publication "Surface Water Resources of Waukesha County" or are shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been made a part of this chapter in section 52-111(ac)(9). 
2.  Within 300 feet of the ordinary high water mark of navigable rivers or streams or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter in section 52-111(ac)(9). Floodplain zoning maps adopted in section 52-111(ac)(9) shall be used to determine the extent of floodplain areas. 
b.  Determinations of navigability and ordinary high water mark location shall initially be made by the administrator. When questions arise, the administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the department for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high water mark. 
c.  When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland district boundary shown on the official zoning maps and the actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the department to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as mapped is in error. If department staff concur with the administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a land use or building permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors shown on the official zoning maps, the administrator shall be responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period. See sections 52-292 to 52-296. 
d.  Under Wis. Stats. § 144.26(2m), notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative rule, wetland zoning ordinances required under Wis. Stats. § 62.231, and ch. NR 117, Wis. Admin. Code, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if: 
1.  Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river. 
2.  Those parts of the drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching. 
3.  Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use. 
e.  Wetlands lying between bulkhead lines and the ordinary high water mark or which have been filled prior to adoption of the shoreland-wetland provisions of this chapter and the final wetland maps are not regulated by the shoreland-wetland provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Boundaries of residential lake districts. Boundaries of residential lake districts as drawn are intended to include subdivisions which immediately abut a lake or stream. A lot in a residential lake district subdivision shall not be subdivided so as to create an additional lot or lots which do not abut the lake or stream without prior permission of the plan commission. 
(5)  Vacation. Vacation of public streets and alleys shall cause the land vacated to be automatically placed in the same district as the abutting side to which the vacated land reverts. 
(6)  Zoning of annexed land. 
a.  Temporary zoning. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.021(7), the common council shall refer to the plan commission for recommendation as to temporary zoning classification any land being considered for annexation and shall include in the annexation ordinance a provision designating a temporary zoning district classification for such area. 
b.  Permanent zoning. As soon as practical after the annexation is final, the zoning classification for such annexed area shall be established by zoning amendment. 
(7)  Environmental corridor boundary. 
a.  Purpose and intent. Environmental corridor boundary, as mapped or intended to be mapped, includes primary or secondary environmental corridors as defined in the comprehensive plan, and is intended to be used to preserve, protect, enhance, and restore significant woodlands, upland wildlife habitat areas, scenic overlooks, slopes exceeding 12 percent, and upland wooded areas. Areas designated as being within the environmental corridor may be used for limited residential purposes; provided, however, that residential densities in such areas may not exceed one unit per five acres for all parcels or portions of parcels that lie within the environmental corridor boundary, exclusive of the C-1 conservancy areas. Where questions arise as to the exact location or boundary of an environmental corridor boundary, the extent and location of such corridors shall be field delineated in conjunction with SEWPRC standards for PEC and finally approved by the zoning administrator or his/her designee. 
b.  Density and lot size. 
1.  In determining the density allowed for any proposed development which includes lands within the environmental corridor boundary one dwelling unit may be permitted for each five acres of land, in either private or common ownership, located entirely within the environmental corridor boundary area; provided, however, that the minimum residential lot size shall be determined in accordance with the underlying zoning district. 
2.  Lots or parcels may be created which include lands located partially within the environmental corridor boundary, provided that the building envelope is located outside the environmental corridor boundary, and provided further that no earth altering activity shall be allowed within the environmental corridor boundary. These restrictions shall be noted on the face of any certified survey map or subdivision plat which create lots which include lands located partially within the environmental corridor boundary. 
c.  Preservation of open space. 
1.  For parcels lying entirely within an environmental corridor boundary, no open space requirement shall apply. However, all area of disturbance, earth altering activity and vegetative removal, including building sites patio space, lawn area and driveways, shall not exceed 15 percent of five acres (32,600 square feet). 
2.  For parcels that lie partially within the environmental corridor boundary, the allowable area of disturbance shall be limited to that portion of the lot outside of the environmental corridor unless otherwise permitted by a building envelope on the certified survey map, subdivision plat or other document. The maximum allowable land disturbance within the environmental corridor boundary shall be proportional to the area of lot that falls within the defined boundary. Only 15 percent of the area within the environmental corridor boundary unique to each lot may be disturbed. 
(8)  Wetland setback. In all districts, a minimum setback shall be employed to protect and prevent deterioration of existing wetland assets. The wetland setback shall conform to the minimum interior side yard identified in the district bulk regulations. 
(Code 1997, § 17.35; Rep. and Recr. #411; Cr. #619; Am. #719 )  
Sec. 52-108. - Zoning map. 
(a)  A certified copy of the zoning map shall be adopted and approved with the text as part of this chapter, shall bear upon its face the attestation of the mayor and city clerk and shall be available to the public in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Changes thereafter to the districts shall not be effective until entered and attested on this certified copy. 
(Code 1997, § 17.36; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-109. - Permitted uses in all districts. 
In all districts, no building or premises shall be used and no building shall hereafter be erected, moved or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Railroad rights-of-way and passenger depots, not including switching, storage, freight yards or siding. 
(2)  Churches, rectories, parsonages, parish houses and synagogues as conditional uses, subject to the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 17.37; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-110. - Permitted accessory uses in all residential districts. 
Accessory uses shall be on the same lot as the principal use. The following accessory uses are permitted: 
(1)  Private garages, one attached and/or one detached private garage per dwelling unit, no larger than 1,200 square feet in area. 
(2)  Utility buildings and accessory buildings, no larger than 240 square feet in area. No more than one permitted per lot. 
(3)  Lodging or boarding for not more than two lodgers or more than two boarders per dwelling unit who are not members of the family. 
(4)  Model homes. 
(5)  Home occupations, provided that such occupation is incidental to the use of the premises for residential purposes and does not affect any substantial change in the character of the premises or of the neighborhood, that no article is sold or offered for sale on the premises, except such as is produced by such occupation, and that no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family living on the premises. Not more than 25 percent of the total floor area of a dwelling unit shall be occupied by a home occupation. 
(6)  Signs as indicated in section 52-230. 
(7)  Boathouses; one per residential lake lot. 
(8)  Private piers complying with Wis. Stats. § 30.12, pertaining to structures and deposits in navigable waters. 
(9)  This section is intended to address the matter of buildings larger than utility buildings and accessory to the use of lots for residential purposes, for storage of noncommercial personal property or for housing livestock. Such structures are permitted only if the use thereof is customarily incidental to the permitted use of the premises. 
a.  Stables, barns, coops or sheds greater than 1,200 square feet meeting the above requirements shall be permitted in residential and agricultural districts, subject to the following limitations and requirements: 
1.  Site plan approval is required pursuant to sections 52-58, 52-59, and 52-61 through 52-65. 
b.  No stable, barn, or shed falling within the requirements of this section and on a lot of less than three acres in size shall be used for housing livestock other than chickens as described herein. 
c.  Appropriate deed restrictions may be required by the plan commission in order to preclude the further land division of parcels of land upon which accessory structures meeting the above requirements have been constructed in order to preclude land division which would create a parcel with such a building located thereon and which would be of an overall area that would violate the provisions of subsection (9)a of this section. 
(10)  The keeping of chickens is permitted in all single-family residential districts provided that the lot area exceeds one acre. 
a.  A maximum of five adult chickens per acre, not to exceed 20 adult chickens, may be kept for non-commercial use. 
b.  All chickens must be provided adequate shelter with appropriate ventilation. 
c.  Chickens must be allowed to roam in a confined pen outside of the shelter. 
d.  All feed must be stored in sealed containers to prevent attracting vermin. 
e.  Only female hens may be kept. 
f.  Male roosters, or any chickens that crow, are not permitted. 
(Code 1997, § 17.38; Rep. and Recr. #411; Cr. #648; Am. #648; Rep. & Recr. # 679 ; Am. #719 ; Rep. #719 )  
Sec. 52-111. - Zoning districts. 
(a)  C-1 Conservancy District. 
(1)  Intent. The C-1 Conservancy District is intended to preserve, protect and enhance the ponds, streams, islands, wetlands and public parklands in the city. This district has been applied to wetland areas and other high value resource lands in accordance with the city's comprehensive plan. Filling, dumping and drainage are prohibited as are buildings and structures, except as may be permitted below. All structures shall be set back 50 feet from the ordinary high water mark. The boundaries of conservancy districts have been established as outlined in section 52-107. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses: 
a.  The harvesting of any wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds. 
b.  Sustained yield forestry. 
c.  Dams and hydroelectric power stations. 
d.  Utility conduits and lines. 
e.  Nonresidential buildings used wholly in conjunction with the raising of animals, fowl or fish adapted to wetlands. 
f.  Public parks and buildings and recreational facilities used in conjunction with the operation and maintenance of a park. 
(3)  Conditional uses. If through good site and engineering designs a development can be created which is compatible and harmonious with the natural amenities of the conservancy district area and with surrounding land uses, then a request for a conditional use for such development may be submitted. Such requests shall be accompanied by an overall plan of the entire site showing roads, parking areas, lot lines, easements, the location of tree cover, including the designation of individual trees of four inches in diameter or more, the location of other natural and biological features, such as wetlands and areas of valuable wildlife habitat, drainage ways and location of proposed structures, existing contours and proposed grading, drainage utilities and landscaping in such details as the administrator shall require before it may be reviewed by the plan commission. The approval of such request by the common council shall require a finding that: 
a.  The development will not detrimentally affect or destroy natural features, such as ponds, streams, wetlands and forested areas, but will preserve and incorporate such features into the development's site design. 
b.  The location of natural features and the site's topography have been considered in the design and siting of all physical improvements. 
c.  Adequate assurances have been received so that the clearing of the site of topsoil, trees and other natural features before the commencement of building operations will occur. Only those areas approved for the placement of physical improvements may be cleared. 
d.  The development will not substantially reduce the natural retention storage capacity of any watercourse, thereby increasing the magnitude and volume of flood at other locations. 
e.  The soil and subsoil conditions are suitable for excavation and site preparation and the drainage is designed to prevent erosion and environmentally deleterious surface runoff. 
f.  The development will be free from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust and other particulate matter, odorous matter, fumes, water pollution and other objectionable influences. 
g.  The petitioner will be substantially damaged by being required to place the intended development outside the conservancy district. 
h.  A financial plan to guarantee the completion of the project shall be submitted to and approved by the common council prior to commencing work on any such project. 
i.  The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources has indicated in writing that they have no objection to the proposed project. 
(b)  A-1 Agricultural and Residential Holding District. 
(1)  Intent. The A-1 Agricultural and Residential Holding District is intended to maintain and preserve existing large-scale farming operations and provide for small farm units located in areas which are predominantly agricultural in character. It is also intended to provide a holding zone for large parcels of land which are intended for rezoning for a more dense residential development at a future date. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses: 
a.  Single-family dwellings. 
b.  Single-family dwellings in conjunction with an agricultural operation. 
c.  Ordinary farm uses, including dairying, truck farming and livestock and poultry raising, provided not more than one head of livestock nor more than 20 fowl are kept for each acre of lot area, except that the keeping of hogs, male goats or fur bearing animals shall not be permitted on less than 20 acres. 
d.  Accessory uses and buildings normally associated with an agricultural operation. 
e.  Signs not to exceed 12 square feet in area, displaying the name of a farm or farm organization. 
f.  Nurseries, greenhouses, hatcheries and horticulture. 
g.  Roadside stands, subject to the following: 
1.  Off-street parking for a minimum of four vehicles shall be provided. 
2.  No such stand shall be closer than 30 feet to the base setback line or closer than 20 feet to any other lot line nor more than 100 square feet in ground area. 
(3)  Accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(4)  Conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be three acres. 
(6)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 200 feet. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet. 
(8)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(9)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(10)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 50 feet. 
(11)  Minimum setback from ordinary high water mark. Minimum setback from ordinary high water mark shall be 50 feet. 
(12)  Height regulations. 
a.  Residences. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Farm buildings. 60 feet maximum. 
c.  Other buildings. Fifteen feet maximum, 20 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(13)  Minimum building floor area. See section 52-18. 
a.  Total one family. 1,200 square feet in floor area. 
b.  First floor. 900 square feet. 
c.  Site plan requirement. None. 
(14)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 90,000 square feet. 
(c)  A-1E Exclusive Agricultural District. 
(1)  Intent. The A-1E Exclusive Agricultural District is designed to comply with Wisconsin's Farm Preservation Act and is intended to maintain and preserve existing large-scale farming operations and provide for small farm units of 35 acres or more located in areas which are predominantly agricultural in character. 
(2)  Permitted uses. One-family dwellings in conjunction with an agricultural operation to be occupied by the farmer, one of his relatives or a person working on the farm. 
(3)  Accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(4)  Conditional uses. 
a.  See article V of this chapter. 
b.  Conditional uses must be agriculturally related, religious, other utility, institutional or governmental uses, which do not conflict with agricultural uses and are found to be necessary in light of alternative locations available for such use. 
(5)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 35 acres for uses as in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(6)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 200 feet. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet. 
(8)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(9)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(10)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 50 feet. 
(11)  Height regulations. 
a.  Residences. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Farm buildings. 60 feet maximum. 
(12)  Minimum building floor area. See section 52-18. 
a.  Total one family. 1,200 square feet in floor area. 
b.  First floor. 900 square feet. 
c.  Site plan requirement. None. 
(13)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 90,000 square feet. 
(d)  RE-3 Three-Acre Rural Estate District. 
(1)  Intent. This district is intended to provide for high quality, low-density, single-family development on three-acre lots. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Single-family dwellings and uses indicated in section 52-109 are permitted uses. 
(3)  Permitted accessory uses. See section 52-110. Also, noncommercial barns, stables, and sheds for use only by the resident lot owner are permitted accessory uses, subject to the requirements of section 52-110(9). 
(4)  Permitted conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 200 feet. 
(6)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet. 
(7)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(8)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(9)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet. 
(10)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Residence. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(11)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 90,000 square feet. 
(12)  Minimum building floor area regulations. See section 52-18. 
a.  Total. 1,500 square feet. 
b.  First floor. 900 square feet. 
(e)  RE-2 Two-Acre Rural Estate District. 
(1)  Intent. This district is intended to provide for high quality, low density, single-family development with two-acre lots. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Single-family dwellings and uses indicated in section 52-109. 
(3)  Permitted accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(4)  Permitted conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 87,120 square feet (two acres). 
(6)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 200 feet. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet. 
(8)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(9)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(10)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet. 
(11)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Residence. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(12)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 60,000 square feet. 
(13)  Minimum building floor area regulations. See section 52-18. 
a.  Total. 1,500 square feet. 
b.  First floor. 900 square feet. 
(f)  RE-1 One-Acre Rural Estate District. 
(1)  Intent. This district is intended to provide for high quality, low density, single-family development on one-acre lots. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Single-family dwellings and uses indicated in section 52-109 are permitted uses. 
(3)  Permitted accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(4)  Permitted conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
(6)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 140 feet. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet. 
(8)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 20 feet. 
(9)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(10)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet. 
(11)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Residence. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(12)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 30,000 square feet. 
(13)  Minimum building floor area regulations. See section 52-18. 
a.  Total. 1,200 square feet in floor area. 
b.  First floor. 900 square feet. 
(g)  RL-1 Residential Lake District. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Single-family dwellings and uses indicated in section 52-109 are permitted uses. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(3)  Permitted conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(4)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 40,000 square feet. 
(5)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. On newly created lots abutting the lake, minimum lot width shall be 150 feet. 
(6)  Minimum front street yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet. 
(7)  Minimum setback from the ordinary high water mark. Minimum setback from ordinary high water mark shall be 60 feet. 
(8)  Minimum lake frontage. Minimum lake frontage shall be 100 feet at ordinary high water level. 
(9)  Minimum rear yard when not fronting on lake. Minimum rear yard when not fronting on lake shall be 15 feet. 
(10)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 15 feet. 
(11)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(12)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Principal building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building other than a boathouse. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
c.  Boathouse above ordinary water level. 12 feet or 18 feet. See section 52-25. 
(13)  Maximum floor area ratio. 0.25. 
(14)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 30,000 square feet. 
(15)  Minimum building floor area regulations. See section 52-18. 
a.  Single story. 1,500 square feet in floor area. 
b.  Two story. 1,800 square feet in floor area. 
c.  First floor. 1,200 square feet in floor area. 
(h)  RL-1A Residential Lake District. 
(1)  Intent. The RL-1A Residential Lake District is intended to include subdivisions which immediately abut a lake or stream and are intermediate between RL-1 and RL-2 densities. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(3)  Permitted conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(4)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet. 
(5)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 80 feet. On newly created lots abutting the lake, minimum lot width shall be 150 feet. 
(6)  Minimum front street yard setback. Minimum front street yard setback shall be 50 feet. 
(7)  Minimum setback from the ordinary high water mark. Minimum setback from ordinary high water mark shall be 55 feet. 
(8)  Minimum lake frontage. Minimum lake frontage shall be 80 feet at ordinary high water level. 
(9)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 15 feet. 
(10)  Minimum rear yard when not fronting on lake. Minimum rear yard when not fronting on lake shall be 15 feet. 
(11)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(12)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Principal building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building other than a boathouse. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet maximum peak height. 
c.  Boathouse above ordinary high water level. 12 feet or 18 feet. See section 52-25. 
(13)  Maximum floor area ratio. 0.25. 
(14)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 15,000 square feet. 
(15)  Minimum building floor area regulations. See section 52-18. 
a.  Single story. 1,200 square feet in floor area. 
b.  Two story. 1,500 square feet in floor area. 
c.  First floor. 1,000 square feet in floor area. 
(i)  RL-2 Residential Lake District. 
(1)  Intent. The RL-2 Residential Lake District is intended to include subdivisions which immediately abut a lake or stream. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Single-family dwellings and uses indicated in section 52-109 are permitted uses. 
(3)  Permitted accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(4)  Permitted conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 50 feet. On newly created lots abutting the lake, minimum lot width shall be 150 feet. 
(7)  Minimum front street yard setback. Minimum front street yard setback shall be 25 feet. 
(8)  Minimum setback from the ordinary high water mark. Minimum setback from ordinary high water mark shall be 50 feet. 
(9)  Minimum lake frontage. Minimum lake frontage shall be 50 feet at the ordinary high water mark. 
(10)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be eight feet. 
(11)  Minimum rear yard when not fronting on lake. Minimum rear yard when not fronting on lake shall be eight feet. 
(12)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 25 feet. 
(13)  Maximum building height. Maximum building height shall be as follows: 
a.  Principal building. 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building other than a boathouse. 15 feet. 
c.  Boathouse above ordinary high water level. 12 feet or 18 feet. See section 52-25. 
(14)  Maximum floor area ratio. 0.40. 
(15)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 7,000 square feet. 
(16)  Minimum building floor area regulations. See section 52-18. 
a.  Total. 1,100 square feet in floor area . 
b.  First floor. 900 square feet in floor area . 
(j)  R-1 Single-Family Residence. 
(1)  Intent. This district is intended to provide for high quality single-family developments on approximately three-quarter-acre lots. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Single-family dwellings and uses indicated in section 52-109 are permitted uses. 
(3)  Permitted accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(4)  Permitted conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 30,000 square feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 120 feet. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet. 
(8)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 20 feet. 
(9)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(10)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet. 
(11)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Residence. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(12)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 25,000 square feet. 
(13)  Minimum building floor area regulations. See section 52-18. 
a.  Total. 1,200 square feet in floor area. 
b.  First floor. 850 square feet in floor area. 
(14)  Maximum floor area ratio. 0.20. 
(k)  R-1D Single-Family Residence - Downtown. 
(1)  Intent. This district is intended to protect the predominantly single-family residential character of the neighborhoods in the older part of the city adjacent to the downtown business district. The purposes and intent of the district is similar to the R-1 Single-Family District, except that the R-1D Single-Family - Downtown district recognizes that many of the existing lots in the older sections of the city are smaller than the lot sizes required in the R-1 Single-Family District and the lot size requirements are reduced accordingly. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Single-family dwelling and uses indicated in section 52-109 are permitted uses. 
(3)  Permitted accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(4)  Permitted conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
(8)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 15 feet. 
(9)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 25 feet. 
(10)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet. 
(11)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Residence. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip, and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(12)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 5,000 square feet. 
(13)  Minimum building floor area regulations. See section 52-18. 
a.  Total. 1,200 square feet in floor area. 
b.  First floor. 850 square feet in floor area. 
(14)  Maximum floor area ratio. 0.50. 
(l)  R-2 Single- and Two-Family Residential District. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Single- and two-family residences and uses indicated in section 52-109 are permitted uses. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(3)  Permitted conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(4)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 30,000 square feet. 
(5)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 120 feet. 
(6)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet. 
(7)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 20 feet. 
(8)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(9)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet. 
(10)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Residence. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(11)  Maximum floor area ratio. 0.20. 
(12)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 22,000 square feet. 
(13)  Minimum building floor area regulations. See section 52-18. 
a.  Total. 1,200 square feet in floor area per family unit. 
b.  First floor. 850 square feet per family unit. 
(m)  R-3 Single- and Two-Family Residential District. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Single- and two-family residences and uses indicated in section 52-109 are permitted uses. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(3)  Permitted conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(4)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet. 
(5)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet. 
(7)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 16 feet. 
(8)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(9)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 16 feet. 
(10)  Minimum setback from ordinary high water mark. Minimum setback from ordinary high water mark shall be 50 feet. 
(11)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Residence. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(12)  Maximum floor area ratio. 0.25. 
(13)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 15,000 square feet. 
(14)  Minimum building floor area regulations. See section 52-18. 
a.  Total. 1,100 square feet per family unit in floor area. 
b.  First floor. 850 square feet per family unit in floor area. 
(n)  R-4 Single- and Two-Family Residential District. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Single- and two-family dwellings and uses indicated in section 52-109 are permitted uses. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(3)  Permitted conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(4)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 7,900 square feet. 
(5)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 66 feet. 
(6)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet. 
(7)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be ten feet. 
(8)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 25 feet. 
(9)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be ten feet. 
(10)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Residence. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(11)  Maximum floor area ratio. 0.65. 
(12)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 4,000 square feet per family. 
(13)  Minimum building floor area regulations. See section 52-18. 
a.  Total, two families. 900 square feet in floor area per family. 
b.  Total, one family. 1,000 square feet in floor area. 
c.  First floor. 850 square feet per family unit. 
(o)  R-5a PUD St. John's Single- and Two-Family Residential District. 
(1)  Intent. The R-5a district was previously established specifically to regulate the development of St. John's-On-The-Lake subdivision. This zoning district includes additional regulations which are contained in conditional use documents applicable to St. John's-On-The-Lake subdivision. Additional districts of this type shall not be created elsewhere in the city. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Single- and two-family residences are permitted uses. 
(3)  Permitted accessory uses. As indicated in section 52-110. 
(4)  Permitted conditional uses. See conditional use documents. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet from Genesee Street; 35 feet from all other public streets in the project. 
(6)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 20 feet, except where abutting a more restrictive district, the minimum shall be 30 feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet, except where abutting a more restrictive district, the minimum shall be 30 feet. 
(8)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Residence. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(9)  Minimum setback from shore lot line. Minimum setback from shore lot line shall be 60 feet. 
(10)  Maximum floor area ratio. 0.25. 
(11)  Minimum project site area. Minimum project site area shall be ten acres. 
(12)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 12,000 square feet per each dwelling unit. 
(13)  Open space formula. Open space = (total project area square feet) - (roads + ROW + first floor areas) divided by project density. 
(14)  Minimum building floor area. See section 52-18. 
a.  Single-family. 
1.  Single story. 1,500 square feet in floor area per dwelling unit. 
2.  Two story. 
(i)  First floor: 1,200 square feet in floor area per dwelling unit. 
(ii)  Total: 1,800 square feet in floor area per dwelling unit. 
b.  Two-family. 
1.  Single story. 1,400 square feet in floor area per dwelling unit. 
2.  Two story. 
(i)  First floor: 750 square feet in floor area per dwelling unit. 
(ii)  Total: 1,400 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(15)  Relationship to chapter 44, pertaining to subdivisions. 
a.  Unless specifically waived by the plan commission in part or in whole, the regulations of chapter 44, pertaining to subdivisions, shall apply to this zoning classification and any developments shall apply to this zoning classification and any developments under the terms of this section shall be classified a subdivision irrespective of the definition of "subdivision" contained in chapter 44. 
b.  For the purpose of computing the dedication of sites or their alternate, each dwelling unit shall be considered as a separate residential dwelling unit and the provision of section 52-13 and/or chapter 44, pertaining to subdivisions, shall determine the appropriate ratio. 
(16)  Special provisions. This district is subject to all regulations contained in the conditional use documents applicable to St. John's-On-The-Lake subdivision and on file in the city clerk-treasurer's office. 
(p)  R-6 Multiple-Family Residential District. 
(1)  Intent. The R-6 district is intended to provide for attached multiple-family housing developments. All housing permitted in this district shall be served by public sanitary sewer service, except for housing developments or complexes in districts zoned R-6 at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Only multifamily developments or complexes in R-6 Districts existing prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be reconstructed or enlarged without public sanitary sewer service. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Attached multiple-family dwellings and uses indicated in section 52-109 are permitted uses. 
(3)  Accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(4)  Conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be exclusive of parking area required. 
Efficiency 	2,500 sq. ft. 
1 bedroom 	3,000 sq. ft. 
2 bedroom 	3,500 sq. ft. 
3 bedroom 	4,000 sq. ft. 
 
(6)  Maximum number of units per building. Maximum number of units per building shall be 36, of which not more than one in three may be efficiency units. 
(7)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
(8)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
(9)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 15 feet each. 
(10)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(11)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 50 feet. 
(12)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Residence. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(13)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 500 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(14)  Minimum dwelling unit floor area. See section 52-18. 
Efficiency 	450 sq. ft. 
1 bedroom 	800 sq. ft. 
2 bedroom 	1,000 sq. ft. 
3 bedroom 	1,200 sq. ft. 
 
(q)  R-7-EH Multiple-Family Elderly Housing District. 
(1)  Intent. The R-7-EH district is intended to provide for attached multiple-family housing developments designed specifically for elderly residents and located in areas that are both compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. All housing in this district must either be deed restricted or licensed as an elderly housing facility, as allowed under state and federal fair housing regulations. All new housing permitted in this district shall be served by public sanitary sewer service. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Attached multiple-family dwellings and uses indicated in section 52-109 are permitted uses. 
(3)  Accessory uses. See section 52-110. 
(4)  Conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit is at least 1,200 sq. ft. and shall be as follows: 
Efficiency unit 	1,200 sq. ft. 
1 bedroom unit 	1,250 sq. ft. 
2 bedroom unit 	1,500 sq. ft. plus additional 250 sq. ft. for each additional bedroom above 2. 
 
(6)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
(8)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be 15 feet for each side yard. 
(9)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(10)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 25 feet. 
(11)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Residence. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(12)  Maximum number of units per building. Maximum number of units per building shall be 60 units. 
(13)  Minimum dwelling unit floor area. See section 52-18. 
Efficiency unit 	450 sq. ft. 
1 bedroom unit 	550 sq. ft. 
2 bedroom unit 	850 sq. ft. plus additional 200 sq. ft. for each additional bedroom above 2. 
 
(14)  Minimum open space. Minimum open space shall be 500 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(r)  CBD-1 Central Business Districts. 
(1)  Intent. The CBD-1 district is intended to provide for the continuation, preservation and expansion of the city's central business district. The existing commercial activities are predominantly specialized retail, personal services, professional office, and entertainment. The intent of the CBD-1 district is to allow and encourage the development and redevelopment of the downtown area as a specialized district that maintains the historic character of the area; traditional lot layout and street grid; and traditional architectural design that is unique to Downtown Delafield. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted, provided that they shall be retail establishments selling and storing retail merchandise and operating completely within an enclosed building, except for off-street parking: 
a.  Antique shops. 
b.  Appliance store. 
c.  Art shop. 
d.  Bakeries. 
e.  Barbershops. 
f.  Beauty shops. 
g.  Bed and breakfast establishments (up to eight units). 
h.  Bicycle stores - sales, rental and repair. 
i.  Book or stationery stores. 
j.  Business offices. 
k.  Churches. 
l.  Clinics. 
m.  Clothing stores. 
n.  Clubs, social and fraternal. 
o.  Computer and computer equipment sales and service. 
p.  Confectioneries. 
q.  Craft shops. 
r.  Delicatessens. 
s.  Drugstores. 
t.  Dry goods. 
u.  Essential services. 
v.  Financial institutions. 
w.  Florists. 
x.  Food and grocery stores. 
y.  Fraternities. 
z.  Fruit and vegetable stores. 
aa.  Funeral homes. 
ab.  Furniture stores. 
ac.  General stores. 
ad.  Gift stores. 
ae.  Hardware stores. 
af.  Hobby shops. 
ag.  Ice cream shops. 
ah.  Interior decorator shops. 
ai.  Jewelry stores. 
aj.  Lodges. 
ak.  Lodging establishments (up to eight units). 
al.  Libraries. 
am.  Meat and fish markets. 
an.  Municipal building. 
ao.  Music and radio stores. 
ap.  News and magazine stores. 
aq.  Optical stores. 
ar.  Packaged beverage stores. 
as.  Photographers. 
at.  Photographic supplies and service. 
au.  Printing shops. 
av.  Private clubs. 
aw.  Professional offices. 
ax.  Public utility offices. 
ay.  Restaurants. 
az.  Self-service, pickup laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 
ba.  Shoe stores, sales and repair. 
bb.  Soda fountains. 
bc.  Sporting goods. 
bd.  Studios (music, art, voice, dance). 
be.  Supermarkets. 
bf.  Tailor shops. 
bg.  Taverns. 
bh.  Television sales and repair shops. 
bi.  Tobacco stores. 
bj.  Variety stores. 
bk.  Vegetable stores. 
bl.  Video sales and rentals. 
(3)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
a.  Other accessory uses that are customary in connection with the foregoing permitted uses and are incidental thereto. 
b.  Garages for storage or vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of a business. 
c.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
d.  Residential dwellings located in the same building as a permitted commercial use and located on floors other than the main street level floor. 
(4)  Conditional uses. One- and two-family residential dwellings; multifamily residential dwellings; public and semipublic buildings and uses; automobile service stations; private schools; indoor theaters and entertainment centers; and lodging establishments (eight or more units). 
(5)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 4,500 square feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 45 feet. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback. There is no front yard setback. 
(8)  Minimum side yard. There is no minimum side yard. 
(9)  Minimum corner side yard. There is no minimum corner side yard. 
(10)  Minimum rear yard. There is no minimum rear yard. 
(11)  Minimum setback from ordinary high water mark. Minimum setback from ordinary high water mark shall be 50 feet. 
(12)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Principal building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip, and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height height for gable, gambrel, hip, and pitch roofs. 
c.  No building may exceed three floors above grade. 
(13)  Minimum building floor area. See section 52-18. 
a.  None for buildings used solely for commercial purposes. 
b.  2,000 square feet for new buildings used for both residential and commercial purposes. 
(14)  Off-street parking requirements. There are no off-street parking requirements. 
(15)  Special provision. In a building used for both commercial and residential purposes, the main street floor must be exclusively commercial. A residential dwelling unit shall not contain less than 750 square feet. 
(s)  CBD-2 Central Business District. 
(1)  Intent. The CBD-2 district provides a transition zone adjacent to the CBD-1 Central Business District. While the predominant uses in the CBD-2 district are residential, the area is in the process of changing to a mixture of commercial and residential uses. The intent of the CBD-2 district is to permit conversion of existing residential buildings to commercial uses and to permit the construction of new commercial buildings, providing the commercial development does not detract from or devalue residential properties in the district. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.  All uses permitted in the CBD-1 district. 
b.  One- and two-family residences. 
(3)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
a.  Other accessory uses which are customary in connection with the foregoing permitted uses and are incidental thereto. 
b.  Garages for storage or vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of a business. 
c.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
(4)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses are as follows: 
a.  Multifamily residential dwellings, public, and semipublic buildings and uses, and lodging establishments (eight or more units). 
b.  See article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 4,500 square feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 45 feet. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be ten feet except where a parcel adjoins the side lot line of another parcel fronting on the same street with a lesser setback, in which case the minimum front yard setback shall be the same as the setback of the adjoining parcel with the least setback. 
(8)  Minimum side yard. Minimum side yard shall be ten feet except where a side yard abuts a parcel under the same property ownership, the side yard requirement may be waived by the plan commission. The plan commission may also grant a waiver where the adjoining property owner enters into a written recordable agreement adjusting the minimum side yard setback on the adjoining parcel by an amount equivalent to the amount of waived setback. 
(9)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be ten feet. 
(10)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be ten feet. 
(11)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Principal building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(12)  Minimum building floor area. See section 52-18. 
a.  None for buildings used solely for commercial purposes. 
b.  Two thousand square feet for new buildings used for both residential and commercial purposes. 
c.  Buildings used solely for residential purposes: 
1.  First floor. 900 square feet. 
2.  Total. 
(i)  Single-family dwelling unit: 1,000 square feet. 
(ii)  Two-family or more dwelling units: 750 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(13)  Off-street parking requirements. 
a.  See sections 52-174 through 52-178. In the CBD-2 district, the plan commission may allow a landowner to meet the parking requirement by providing the required parking stalls either on site, on another privately owned site owned by the same property owner, provided such stalls are within 800 feet of the site. 
b.  The plan commission may allow a landowner to meet the parking requirement by paying a downtown parking fee set and established by the city. Such fees shall be determined by the city based on the cost of providing public parking stalls and may be changed periodically as the cost to the city for providing parking stalls changes. 
(14)  Floor area ratio (FAR). The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) is 0.50. In the CBD-2 district, a landowner may apply privately owned off-site land utilized for meeting the parking requirements of section 52-111(q) as part of the land area for the purpose of computing the FAR. 
(t)  CBD-3 Special Campus District. 
(1)  Intent. The CBD-3 district is intended to allow integrated mixed-use development under single ownership within a campus setting adjacent to the CBD-1 district. Any development in the CBD-3 district other than the identified permitted use must occur as a planned development - conditional use under the terms and conditions of article IX of this chapter. The intent of this zoning is to create a district that will enable flexibility in terms of the specific types of land uses, but will assure that any development will occur within the context of the central business district or an integrated development plan and will be consistent with the overall pattern of development in the city. 
(2)  Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the CBD-1 district are permitted in the CBD-3 district in addition to the uses indicated in section 52-109, provided they conform to the geometric standard as set forth in subsection (s)(5) through (14) of this section. 
a.  Antique shops. 
b.  Appliance store. 
c.  Art shop. 
d.  Bakeries. 
e.  Barbershops. 
f.  Beauty shops. 
g.  Bed and breakfast establishments (up to eight units). 
h.  Bicycle stores - sales, rental and repair. 
i.  Book or stationery stores. 
j.  Business offices. 
k.  Churches. 
l.  Clinics. 
m.  Clothing stores. 
n.  Clubs, social and fraternal. 
o.  Computer and computer equipment sales and service. 
p.  Confectioneries. 
q.  Craft shops. 
r.  Delicatessens. 
s.  Drugstores. 
t.  Dry goods. 
u.  Essential services. 
v.  Financial institutions. 
w.  Florists. 
x.  Food and grocery stores. 
y.  Fraternities. 
z.  Fruit and vegetable stores. 
aa.  Funeral homes. 
ab.  Furniture stores. 
ac.  General stores. 
ad.  Gift stores. 
ae.  Hardware stores. 
af.  Hobby shops. 
ag.  Hotel. 
ah.  Ice cream shops. 
ai.  Interior decorator shops. 
aj.  Jewelry stores. 
ak.  Lodges. 
al.  Lodging establishments (up to eight units). 
am.  Libraries. 
an.  Meat and fish markets. 
ao.  Municipal building. 
ap.  Music and radio stores. 
aq.  News and magazine stores. 
ar.  Optical stores. 
as.  Packaged beverage stores. 
at.  Photographers. 
au.  Photographic supplies and service. 
av.  Printing shops. 
aw.  Private clubs. 
ax.  Professional offices. 
ay.  Public utility offices. 
az.  Restaurants. 
ba.  Self-service, pickup laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 
bb.  Shoe stores, sales and repair. 
bc.  Soda fountains. 
bd.  Sporting goods. 
be.  Studios (music, art, voice, dance). 
bf.  Supermarkets. 
bg.  Tailor shops. 
bh.  Taverns. 
bi.  Television sales and repair shops. 
bj.  Tobacco stores. 
bk.  Variety stores. 
bl.  Vegetable stores. 
bm.  Video sales and rentals. 
Other permitted uses may be allowed if determined by the plan commission to be substantially similar to the above and subject to the approval by the common council. All other uses must be approved as planned development - conditional uses as described in sections 52-263 through 52-266. 
(3)  Permitted accessory uses. Residential dwellings located in the same building as a permitted commercial use and located on floors other than the main street level floor are permitted accessory uses. 
(4)  Conditional uses. All other uses must be approved as planned developments - conditional uses as described in article IX of this chapter provided they conform to the geometric standard as set forth herein. 
(5)  Minimum land area. Minimum land area shall be two acres (87,120 square feet). 
(6)  Required conditions of planned developments. 
a.  Maximum floor area ratio (FAR). Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.50. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio. The total surface area of all principal and accessory buildings, hard surfaced parking areas, driveways, private streets, sidewalls, and other impervious surfaces shall not exceed 80 percent of the total land area. 
c.  Minimum landscaped open space. At least 20 percent of the land area shall be landscaped open space. To the maximum extent possible, such open space shall include existing wooded areas and individual mature trees on the site at the time of development. 
d.  Land use compatibility. 
1.  Planned developments permit a variety of land uses and allow applicants flexibility in land use planning. However, all land uses within a planned development in the CBD-3 district must be internally compatible. 
2.  The evaluation of land use compatibility shall specifically include: hours of operation, traffic, parking, lighting, noise impact, architectural character and appearance. 
e.  Setbacks and yard requirements. 
1.  Planned developments in the CBD-3 district must meet the following setback and yard standards with respect to public rights-of-way and adjoining neighboring properties: 
(i)  Minimum front yard: 30 feet. 
(ii)  Minimum corner side yard: 30 feet. 
(iii)  Minimum side yard: ten feet. 
(iv)  Minimum rear yard: ten feet. 
2.  Setbacks for yards that are internal to the development and do not adjoin public streets or land outside of the planned development may deviate from the setback and yard requirements. 
3.  An exception to the front and corner side yard setbacks may be granted by the city where the planned development utilizes an existing structure with a lesser setback where an adjoining building on the same block face has a lesser setback and the use of lesser setback on the planned development would be more consistent with the prevailing architectural character and appearance of the block. 
(u)  B-1 Local Business and Residence District. 
(1)  Intent. The B-1 district is intended to establish and preserve areas for convenience shopping and service needs which are located in close proximity to residential areas while minimizing the undesirable impact of such uses on the neighborhoods which they serve. This district requires amenities, such as increased open space, off-street parking and loading facilities, to make the commercial uses compatible with the character of adjacent residential districts. The district also permits dwelling units for the owner or proprietor or apartments to be located in a commercial building. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses: 
a.  Generally recognized retail business that supply commodities on the premises for persons residing in adjacent residential areas, such as, but not limited to, groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware, including restaurants and taverns. 
b.  Personal service establishment which performs services on the premises, such as, but not limited to, repair shops (watches, radio, television, appliances, shoes), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barbershops, photographic studios and self-service laundries. 
c.  Dry cleaning establishments or pickup stations dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry cleaning plants serving more than one retail outlet shall be prohibited. 
d.  Business establishments that perform services on the premises, such as, but not limited to, banks, loan companies, insurance offices and real estate offices. 
e.  Professional services, including medical clinics (outpatient only) and offices of doctors, dentists and similar or allied professions. 
f.  Sales and service establishments, including only plumbing, heating and electrical showrooms and shops operating entirely within an enclosed building. 
g.  Post office and similar governmental office buildings serving persons living in the adjacent residential area. 
h.  Residential dwelling units in a commercial building for the owner or proprietor or rental apartments in a commercial building, both in accord with the following regulations: 
1.  In a single-story structure, the residential units shall be located to the rear of the commercial portion of a building and not more than 25 percent of a building's total floor may be used for residential purposes. 
2.  In a multistory structure, the residential units shall be located only above the ground floor and not more than 50 percent of a building's total floor area may be used for residential purposes. There shall be no mixture of commercial and residential uses on any floor in a multistory building containing residential units. 
i.  Single-family residences. 
j.  Essential services. 
k.  Other uses similar to the above uses, subject to the recommendation of the plan commission and approval by the common council. 
l.  Only accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses are permitted. 
(3)  Required conditions. 
a.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold on premises where produced. 
b.  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, except for occasional outside storage. 
(4)  Conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Signs. See article VIII of this chapter. 
(6)  Lot area requirements. In the B-1 district, there shall be provided a minimum lot area of 5,000 square feet for each business establishment located on a lot. In addition, for each dwelling unit located on a lot, there shall be provided additional lot area as follows: 
Dwelling Type 	Additional Lot Area 
Per Dwelling Unit 
Efficiency unit 	2,500 
1 bedroom unit 	3,000 
2 bedroom unit 	4,000 
 
(7)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. The minimum lot width does not apply to residential uses existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(8)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be ten feet, except where abutting a residential district, the side yard adjacent to the residential district shall be 25 feet. However, there shall be no separation required between integrated buildings comprising a group of businesses. 
(9)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
(10)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(11)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be ten feet. 
(12)  Minimum setback from ordinary high water mark. Minimum setback from ordinary high water mark shall be 50 feet. 
(13)  Maximum floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.50. 
(14)  Maximum building height. Maximum building height shall be as follows: 
a.  Principal building. 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(15)  Minimum residential dwelling unit floor area. See section 52-18. 
Efficiency unit 	450 square feet 
1 bedroom unit 	800 square feet 
2 bedroom unit 	1,000 square feet 
 
(16)  Special provisions. The minimum lot width may be waived by the plan commission on lots with less than the minimum required width which were platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(v)  B-1-A Business and Limited Residence. 
(1)  Intent. The B-1-A district is intended for existing areas of combined business and residential use with the residential use being limited to one residential dwelling unit for the owner or proprietor of a business establishment. It is not intended to create additional districts of this type elsewhere in the city. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.  Only the following are permitted: 
1.  Art studio. 
2.  Bakery, not over six employees. 
3.  Barbershop. 
4.  Beauty parlor. 
5.  Bank or savings and loan office. 
6.  Book or stationery store. 
7.  Clinic. 
8.  Confectionery store. 
9.  Delicatessen. 
10.  Drugstore. 
11.  Essential services. 
12.  Florist shop. 
13.  Gift shop. 
14.  Grocery. 
15.  Hardware store. 
16.  Interior decorator. 
17.  Ice cream store. 
18.  Jewelry store. 
19.  Meat and fish market. 
20.  Music and radio store. 
21.  Notion or variety shop. 
22.  Parking lot. 
23.  Pharmacy. 
24.  Photographer. 
25.  Professional office or studio. 
26.  Radio and television sales, service and repair shop. 
27.  Real estate office. 
28.  Restaurant. 
29.  Shoe store. 
30.  Soda fountain. 
31.  Tailor or dressmaking shop. 
32.  Tavern. 
33.  Taxidermists. 
34.  Tobacco shops. 
35.  Travel bureaus and ticket offices. 
36.  Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors. 
b.  One residential dwelling unit for the owner, proprietor or caretaker located in the same building as the business establishment. The number of residential dwelling units per building shall not exceed the number of business establishments. 
c.  Other uses similar in character to the above retail and service businesses, subject to the recommendation of the plan commission and approval by the common council. 
d.  Single-family homes. 
e.  Only accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses are permitted. 
(3)  Required conditions. 
a.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. 
b.  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, except for occasional outside storage. 
(4)  Conditional uses. Uses indicated in article V of this chapter are conditional uses. 
(5)  Signs. Sign regulations are as indicated in article VIII of this chapter. 
(6)  Lot area requirements. In the B-1-A district, there shall be provided a minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet for each business establishment (see definition) located on a lot. In addition, for each residential dwelling unit located on a lot, an additional lot area of 10,000 square feet shall be provided. 
(7)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. See subsection (v)(15) of this section. 
(8)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be ten feet, except where abutting a residential district, the side yard adjacent to the residential district shall be 25 feet. 
(9)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
(10)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(11)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet. 
(12)  Maximum floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.50. 
(13)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Principal building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet maximum peak height. 
(14)  Minimum residential dwelling unit floor area. 800 square feet. See section 52-18. 
(15)  Special provisions. The minimum lot width may be waived by the plan commission on lots with less than the minimum required width, which were platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(w)  B-2 Local Business District. 
(1)  Intent. The B-2 district is intended to establish and preserve areas for convenience shopping and service needs that are located in close proximity to residential areas while minimizing the undesirable impact of such uses on the neighborhoods which they serve. This district requires amenities, such as increased open space and off-street parking and loading facilities, to make the commercial uses more compatible with the character of adjacent residential districts. Residential uses are not permitted. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses: 
a.  All uses permitted in the B-1 district, except for residential dwelling units. 
b.  Other uses similar to the above uses, subject to the recommendation of the plan commission and approval by the common council. 
c.  Only accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses are permitted. 
(3)  Required conditions. 
a.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold on premises where produced. 
b.  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, except for occasional outside storage. 
(4)  Conditional uses. Uses indicated in article V of this chapter and motels are conditional uses. 
(5)  Signs. Sign regulations are as indicated in article VIII of this chapter. 
(6)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet, which shall include sufficient area for the principal structure, its accessory structures, all required off-street parking and loading areas and the required yards. 
(7)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 120 feet. See subsection (w)(14) of this section. 
(8)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be ten feet, except where abutting a residential district, the side yard adjacent to the residential district shall be 25 feet. However, there shall be no separation required between integrated buildings comprising a group of businesses. 
(9)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
(10)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(11)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet. 
(12)  Maximum floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.50. 
(13)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Principal building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet maximum peak height. 
(14)  Special provisions. The minimum lot width may be waived by the plan commission on lots with less than the minimum required width, which were platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(x)  B-3 Local and Highway Business District. 
(1)  Intent. The B-3 district is intended to establish and preserve areas for local business use, which are located along major highways and near limited access highway interchanges. No residential uses are permitted. 
(2)  Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the B-2 district are permitted in the B-3 district and, in addition, the following uses shall be permitted: 
a.  Amusement establishments including bowling alleys, gymnasiums, swimming pools, skating rinks, indoor tennis, and handball facilities and indoor theaters. 
b.  Animal hospitals without outdoor runs or pens. 
c.  Auction rooms without outdoor sales and storage. 
d.  Blueprinting and photostating establishments. 
e.  Cocktail lounges. 
f.  Garden supplies and equipment. 
g.  Greenhouses and nurseries. 
h.  Hotels. 
i.  Laboratories, medical and dental. 
j.  Motels. 
k.  Offices, professional, public and business. 
l.  Pet shops without outdoor kennels. 
m.  Printing establishments, limited to 2,000 square feet of floor area per establishment. 
n.  Research establishments and laboratories (nonmanufacturing). 
o.  Schools, commercial, trade, technical, private or public. 
p.  Taxidermists. 
q.  Television and radio broadcasting studios. 
r.  Drive-through windows for restaurants. 
(3)  Other permitted uses. Other permitted uses are uses similar to the above and subject to the recommendation of the plan commission and approval by the common council. 
(4)  Conditional uses. Uses indicated in article V of this chapter are conditional uses. 
(5)  Signs. Sign regulations are as indicated in article VIII of this chapter. 
(6)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet, which shall include sufficient area for the principal structure, its accessory structures, all required off-street parking and loading areas and the required yards. 
(7)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 120 feet. 
(8)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be ten feet, except where abutting a residential district, the side yard adjacent to the residential district shall be 25 feet. However, there shall be no separation required between buildings comprising a group of businesses. 
(9)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
(10)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(11)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet. 
(12)  Maximum floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.50. 
(13)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Principal building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roof. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet maximum peak height. 
(14)  Special provisions. No building customarily used for night operation shall have any opening other than stationary windows or required fire exits within 200 feet of any residential district and any space used for loading or unloading commercial vehicles in connection with such an operation shall not be within 100 feet of any residential district. 
(y)  B-4 General Business District. 
(1)  Intent. The B-4 district is intended to accommodate a wide variety of business uses. The district can accommodate separate buildings on individual sites and integrated groups of business establishments served by a common parking area. Residential uses are not permitted. 
(2)  Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the B-2 and B-3 districts are permitted in the B-4 district and, in addition, the following uses shall be permitted: 
a.  Bakeries, commercial. 
b.  Building materials and products sales and storage yards. 
c.  Cold storage locker plants. 
d.  Exterminating shops. 
e.  Feed and seed stores. 
f.  Garages for storage, repair and servicing of cars and trucks, including body repair, painting, engine rebuilding and upholstery work, but excluding motorcycles and snowmobiles. 
g.  Laundries and dry cleaning operations, commercial. 
h.  Printing and newspaper publishing. 
i.  Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution operations. 
(3)  Other permitted uses. Other permitted uses are uses similar to the above and subject to the recommendation of the plan commission and approval by the common council. 
(4)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
a.  Garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of a business. 
b.  Off-street parking and loading areas and parking structures. 
(5)  Conditional uses. 
a.  The conditional uses indicated in article V of this chapter may be permitted in the B-4 district. In addition, permitted manufacturing uses listed in the M-1 Industrial District may be considered "light manufacturing" uses and these uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the B-4 district, except for cartage and express facilities and food and meat processing plants. 
b.  Light manufacturing, as defined elsewhere in this chapter, may be permitted as a conditional use, provided that the use is compatible with adjacent existing or planned land uses and the following conditions are established and complied with to regulate the conditional use: 
1.  Complete site and operational plans as described in sections 52-61 and 52-137 shall be submitted to the plan commission for their review in conjunction with the conditional use request. These plans shall fully describe the proposed light manufacturing operation. The plans shall include data and information on the degree of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, fumes and other operating characteristics including, but not limited to, number of employees, parking arrangement, outdoor storage plans and a written plan of operation. 
2.  The light manufacturing use shall not create a degree of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, fumes or other operating characteristics, which would be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood area. This determination shall be based upon a technical review of the operational plans by the building inspector, who shall report the findings to the plan commission in writing. 
3.  All light manufacturing uses shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
4.  All outdoor storage of equipment or materials used in conjunction with the principal use shall be completely enclosed behind a wall or fence. 
5.  Any outdoor parking of trucks or other vehicles used in conjunction with a light manufacturing use shall be limited to vehicles of not over 1.5 tons' capacity when located within 75 feet of a residential district boundary. 
(6)  Signs. See article VIII of this chapter. 
(7)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet, which shall include sufficient area for the principal structure, its accessory structures, all required off-street parking and loading areas and the required yards. 
(8)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 120 feet. 
(9)  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be ten feet, except where abutting a residential district, the side yard adjacent to the residential district shall be 25 feet. 
(10)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
(11)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(12)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet. 
(13)  Maximum floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.50. 
(14)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Principal building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet maximum peak height. 
(15)  Special provisions. No building customarily used for night operation shall have any opening other than stationary windows or required fire exits within 200 feet of any residential district and any space used for loading or unloading commercial vehicles in connection with such an operation shall not be within 100 feet of any residential district. 
(z)  B-5 Office and Research Commercial District. 
(1)  Intent. The B-5 district is intended to establish an exclusive high quality commercial area for offices and similar compatible commercial operations that have similar operating characteristics. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Only the following are permitted: 
a.  Automobile parking lots. 
b.  Banks and financial institutions. 
c.  Business office equipment sales and service establishments. 
d.  Essential services. 
e.  General headquarters offices. 
f.  Medical and dental centers, clinics, hospitals, medical laboratories. 
g.  Printing, blueprinting, and duplication limited to 2,000 square feet per establishment. 
h.  Professional, public, and business offices. 
i.  Research establishments and laboratories. 
j.  Sales offices or servicing headquarters with provision for storage of vehicles for salesmen or servicemen. 
k.  Other uses similar to the above uses, subject to the recommendation of the plan commission and approval by the common council. 
(3)  Conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(4)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
a.  Essential services. 
b.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
c.  Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses. 
(5)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 40,000 square feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 120 feet. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
(8)  Minimum side yard. Minimum side yard shall be 20 feet. 
(9)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(10)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet. 
(11)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Principal building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(12)  Maximum floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.50. 
(aa)  B-6 Commercial Holding Zone. 
(1)  Definitions. The following terms have the meanings indicated: 
Entire property holding means all contiguous holdings in common ownership. Properties divided by a public street right-of-way are considered contiguous. 
General development plan (PD-GDP) means the first phase of approval in the planned development process which shows the entire property holding. The PD-GDP must show the general location of buildings or building envelopes, common spaces, parking and drive areas, conceptual stormwater drainage plan and principal landscape features. If the development is proposed to occur in phases, the sequence of development should be indicated. It is recognized that PD-GDPs are often submitted prior to the identification of the ultimate land user or the specific land use. The intent of the GDP is to be conceptual. A public hearing is required for a GDP. 
Specific implementation plan (PD-SIP) means the second phase of approval is a detailed plan, also referred to as a PD-SIP, which must show detailed information for that portion or phase of the project proposed for approval. Frequently PD-SIPs are submitted for only those portions of the total project shown in the PD-GDP which are planned for immediate development. Subsequent phases of development are shown in separate detailed plans prepared at the time of development. If as a result of more detailed planning or engineering at the PD-SIP stage changes need to be made in the PD-GDP, applicants can submit PD-GDP amendments. The submittal and review requirements of PD-GDP amendments are the same as those for the initial PD-GDP. 
(2)  Intent. Any development other than the identified permitted uses of this district must occur as a planned development - conditional use under the terms and conditions of this chapter or successor provisions. The intent of this zoning is to create a district which will enable flexibility in terms of the specific types of land uses, but will assure that any development occurring in this area will be planned and designed within the context of a business district or integrated planned development. 
(3)  Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the B-2 and B-3 districts are permitted in the B-6 district and in addition to uses indicated in section 52-109, provided they conform to the geometric standard as set forth in subsections (x)(6) through (14) of this section and as described in subsection (aa)(5)b of this section, and the following: 
a.  Amusement establishments including bowling alleys, gymnasiums, swimming pools, skating rinks, indoor tennis, and handball facilities and indoor theaters. 
b.  Animal hospitals without outdoor runs or pens. 
c.  Art studio. 
d.  Auction rooms without outdoor sales and storage. 
e.  Bakery, not over six employees. 
f.  Bank or savings and loan office. 
g.  Barbershop. 
h.  Beauty parlor. 
i.  Blueprinting and photostating establishments. 
j.  Book or stationery store. 
k.  Clinic. 
l.  Cocktail lounges. 
m.  Confectionery store. 
n.  Delicatessen. 
o.  Drive-through windows for restaurants. 
p.  Drugstore. 
q.  Essential services. 
r.  Florist shop. 
s.  Garden supplies and equipment. 
t.  Gift shop. 
u.  Greenhouses and nurseries. 
v.  Grocery. 
w.  Hardware store. 
x.  Hotels. 
y.  Interior decorator. 
z.  Ice cream store. 
aa.  Jewelry store. 
ab.  Laboratories, medical and dental. 
ac.  Meat and fish market. 
ad.  Motels. 
ae.  Music and radio store. 
af.  Notion or variety shop. 
ag.  Offices, professional, public and business. 
ah.  Parking lot. 
ai.  Pet shops without outdoor kennels. 
aj.  Pharmacy. 
ak.  Photographer. 
al.  Printing establishments, limited to 2,000 square feet of floor area per establishment. 
am.  Professional office or studio. 
an.  Radio and television sales, service and repair shop. 
ao.  Real estate office. 
ap.  Research establishments and laboratories (nonmanufacturing). 
aq.  Restaurant. 
ar.  Schools, commercial, trade, technical, private or public. 
as.  Shoe store. 
at.  Soda fountain. 
au.  Tailor or dressmaking shop. 
av.  Tavern. 
aw.  Taxidermists. 
ax.  Television and radio broadcasting studios. 
ay.  Tobacco shops. 
az.  Travel bureaus and ticket offices. 
ba.  Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors. 
Other permitted uses may be allowed if determined by the plan commission to be substantially similar to the above and subject to the approval by the common council. 
(4)  Other uses. All other uses must be approved as planned developments - conditional uses as described in article IX of this chapter provided they conform to the geometric standard as set forth herein. 
a.  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet, which shall include sufficient area for the principal structure, its accessory structures, all required off-street parking and loading areas and the required yards. 
b.  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 120 feet. 
c.  Minimum interior side yard. Minimum interior side yard shall be ten feet, except where abutting a residential district, the side yard adjacent to the residential district shall be 25 feet. However, there shall be no separation required between buildings comprising a group of businesses. 
d.  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
e.  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
f.  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet. 
g.  Maximum floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.50. 
h.  Maximum building height. 
1.  Principal building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roof. 
2.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet maximum peak height. 
i.  Maximum impervious surface ratio. The total surface area of all principal and accessory buildings, hard-surfaced parking areas, driveways, private streets, sidewalks and other impervious surfaces shall not exceed 65 percent of total land area. 
(5)  Required conditions of planned developments. 
a.  Floor area ratio (FAR). The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.50. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio. The total surface area of all principal and accessory buildings, hard surfaced parking areas, driveways, private streets, sidewalks and other impervious surfaces shall not exceed 65 percent of total land area. 
c.  Minimum landscaped green space ratio. 
1.  At least 20 percent of the land area, exclusive of land required for stormwater management and parkland dedication and exclusive of wetlands and slopes over 25 percent shall be landscaped open space. To the maximum extent possible, such open space shall include existing wooded areas and individual mature trees on the site at the time of development. 
2.  The plan commission may allow all or a portion of the stormwater management area to be counted toward the 20 percent landscaped green area requirement under the following conditions: 
(i)  The stormwater management area is a permanent water feature designed with sufficient flow of water and aeration to maintain aesthetic quality. 
(ii)  There is sufficient landscaping to assure that the stormwater management area will be an aesthetic asset to the development and the community as a whole. 
3.  The plan commission may allow all or a portion of the area with steep slopes over 25 percent grade to be counted toward the 20 percent landscaped green area requirements under the following conditions: 
(i)  The proposed development will include restoration of degraded slope areas. 
(ii)  The use of the steeply sloped land will be integrated into the landscape plan and overall architectural concept of the project. 
4.  The above exceptions may only be granted at the PD-SIP stage of the review and approval process based on selected site and architectural plan submittals. 
5.  In the event that a planned development is divided into more than one lot and parcel, each parcel shall have at least ten percent of its area in landscaped green space as defined by this subsection (aa)(5)c. 
d.  Prohibition on construction on steep slopes. Steeply sloped terrain with a natural grade of 25 percent or more may not be regraded or built upon. 
e.  Public street right-of-way. 
1.  All planned developments must have public street rights-of-way which are consistent with city design standards as set forth in chapter 44, article VI. Any right-of-way requirements recommended by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation for frontage roads or key intersections must be shown on planned development plans. Waukesha County must approve right-of-way widths for all county trunk system roads which will be under county jurisdiction. 
2.  In those situations where more than 80 feet right-of-way is required for a public street, the developer may be allowed to credit that portion of the public street right-of-way over 80 feet toward meeting the open space and landscaped green space provisions of this subsection (aa). 
f.  Land use compatibility. 
1.  Planned developments permit a variety of land uses and allow applicants flexibility in land use planning. However, all land uses within a planned development in the B-6 zoning district must be compatible with other land uses within the proposed development and compatible with the land uses on adjoining properties. 
2.  The evaluation of compatibility between residential and commercial uses should specifically include: 
(i)  Lighting impact. 
(ii)  Screening of parking areas, outside storage and loading areas. 
(iii)  Preserving privacy. 
(iv)  Noise impact. 
(v)  Hours of operation. 
g.  Setbacks and yard requirements. 
1.  Planned developments shall meet the following setback and yard standards with respect to yards adjoining neighboring properties which are not part of the planned development and yards adjoining public street rights-of-way: 
(i)  Minimum front yard: 30 feet. 
(ii)  Minimum corner side yard: 30 feet. 
(iii)  Minimum interior side yard: ten feet, unless abutting residential, in which case it shall be 25 feet. 
(iv)  Minimum rear yard: 30 feet. 
2.  Setbacks for yards that are internal to the development and do not adjoin public streets or land outside of the planned development may deviate from the setback and yard requirements. 
h.  Stormwater management. Planned developments shall have an integrated stormwater management plan that considers potential runoff from all of the land within the proposed planned development. Stormwater retention and/or detention basins should be constructed in areas which reflect natural drainage patterns. Stormwater drainage facilities shall meet the minimum requirements set forth in section 44-224. 
(ab)  M-1 Limited Industrial District. 
(1)  Intent. The M-1 district is intended to accommodate wholesale and warehouse activities and industrial operations whose external physical effects are restricted to the area of the districts and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. The M-1 district is structured to permit along with any specified uses the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly, and/or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared material. It is the intent of this subsection (ab) that the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form to be used in an industrial operation at another location not be permitted. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses: 
a.  Building materials sales and storage yards. 
b.  Cartage and express facilities. 
c.  Cleaning, pressing and dyeing. 
d.  Cold storage locker plants. 
e.  Commercial bakeries. 
f.  Commercial greenhouses. 
g.  Commercial laundries. 
h.  Contractors' offices, shops and yards. 
i.  Cosmetic manufacturing, processing and packaging. 
j.  Electrical appliances manufacturing. 
k.  Electronic devices manufacturing. 
l.  Essential services. 
m.  Farm machinery sales and repair. 
n.  Food processing, except cabbage. 
o.  Food lockers and meat processing plants. 
p.  Garages for servicing and repair of cars, trucks and other equipment and machinery. 
q.  Instrument manufacturing. 
r.  Jewelry manufacturing. 
s.  Laboratories. 
t.  Leather fabrication, not including tanning. 
u.  Machine shops. 
v.  Manufacture and bottling of nonalcoholic beverages. 
w.  Manufacture, fabrication, packaging and assembly of products from furs, glass, leather, metals, paper, plaster, plastics, textiles and wood. 
x.  Municipal service buildings. 
y.  Packaging and packing of confections. 
z.  Pharmaceuticals processing. 
aa.  Painting. 
ab.  Storage and sale of machinery and equipment. 
ac.  Warehousing operations. 
ad.  Wholesaling operations. 
(3)  Other permitted uses. All uses permitted in the B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-4 districts are permitted in the M-1 district and, in addition, any uses substantially similar to those listed in subsection (ab)(2) of this section subject to the recommendation of the plan commission and approval by the common council. 
(4)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
a.  Garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of a business. 
b.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
c.  Office, storage, power supply and other uses normally auxiliary to the principal industrial operations. 
(5)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses are as indicated in article V of this chapter. 
(6)  Signs. Sign regulations are as indicated in article VIII of this chapter. 
(7)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 43,560 square feet. 
(8)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 150 feet. 
(9)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet, except where opposite a residential or agricultural district, then 100 feet minimum. 
(10)  Minimum side yard. Minimum side yard shall be ten feet, except where abutting a residential or commercial district, the side yard shall be a minimum of 25 feet. Minimum interior side yard setback adjoining a railroad right-of-way shall be ten feet. Loading platforms may be located in a side yard where abutting a rail line. 
(11)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(12)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet. Minimum rear yard on lots adjoining a railroad right-of-way shall be ten feet. Where adjoining a residential district, there shall be no parking allowed in the 30 feet adjacent to the residential district and the 30 feet adjacent to the residential district shall be landscaped and seeded with perennial grass. 
(13)  Maximum floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.50. 
(14)  Maximum building or structure height. 
a.  Principal building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs. 
(ac)  SW-1 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this subsection (ac) is to preserve, protect and enhance the ponds, streams, islands and wetlands in the city. This subsection (ac) is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23, 62.231, 87.30 and 144.26, and Wis. Admin. Code § NR 117.01. The boundaries of shoreland-wetland districts have been established as outlined in section 52-107. This district has been established to: 
a.  Maintain the stormwater and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands. 
b.  Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into waters of the city or state. 
c.  Protect fish spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands and other fish and aquatic habitat. 
d.  Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland wetland area. 
e.  Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth-moving activities. 
f.  Minimize expenditures of public moneys for costly flood control projects. 
g.  Reduce rescue and relief efforts generally undertaken at the expense of the taxpaying public. 
h.  Prevent business interruptions which usually result in the loss of local incomes. 
i.  Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers. 
(2)  Compliance; other permits. Any development in shoreland-wetlands shall be in full compliance with the terms of this subsection (ac). It is the responsibility of the applicant to secure all other necessary permits from appropriate federal, state and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. 
(3)  Municipality regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, the city and county are required to comply with this subsection (ac) and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13), or Wis. Admin. Code § NR 117.02(1) apply. The construction reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.12(4)(a) applies. 
(4)  Greater restrictions. 
a.  The more restrictive of either the C-1 Conservancy District, SW-1 Shoreland-Wetland District or floodplain district regulations in chapter 16, article II, shall apply when a property is located in more than one zoning district. See Wis. Stats. §§ 61.351(4)(b) and 62.231(4)(b). 
b.  This subsection (ac) is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this subsection (ac) imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this subsection (ac) shall prevail. 
(5)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this subsection (ac) shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the municipality and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of this subsection (ac) is required by a standard in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116 or NR 117, and where the subsection provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116 or NR 117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this subsection (ac) is derived or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this subsection (ac). 
(6)  Permitted uses. Under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 117.05(2), the city may permit, authorize as a conditional use, or prohibit the following uses of shoreland-wetlands. The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, and the provisions of other local, state, and federal laws, if applicable: 
a.  Activities and uses that do not require the issuance of a zoning permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs: 
1.  Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling, and boating. 
2.  The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits, and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops. 
3.  The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning, and harvesting of timber. 
4.  The pasturing of livestock. 
5.  The cultivation of agricultural crops. 
6.  The construction and maintenance of duck blinds. 
b.  Uses that do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and that may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below: 
1.  The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected. 
2.  The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems where permissible under Wis. Stats. § 30.20, to restore preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is permissible under Wis. Stats. ch. 30, and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks, where possible. 
3.  The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance. 
4.  The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and walkways, observation decks and trail bridges not requiring pilings, excavating or filling for such construction. 
5.  The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district, provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the shoreland wetland listed in subsection (ac)(8) of this section. 
6.  The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement, or reconstruction. 
c.  Uses that are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit and that may include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below: 
1.  The construction and maintenance of roads that are necessary for continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted under this subsection (ac)(6), provided that: 
(i)  The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland. 
(ii)  The road is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in subsection (ac)(8) of this section. 
(iii)  The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross sectional area practical to serve the intended use. 
(iv)  Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only. 
(v)  Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road. 
(vi)  The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and walkways, observation decks, and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance. 
2.  The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings, provided that: 
(i)  The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows, or other wetland or aquatic animals. 
(ii)  The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland. 
(iii)  The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area. 
(iv)  Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for the building is allowed. 
3.  The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas; outdoor education areas; historic, natural and scientific areas; game refuges and closed areas; fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects; game bird and animal farms; wildlife preserves; and public boat launching ramps, provided that: 
(i)  Any private development allowed under this subsection (ac)(6)c.3 shall be used exclusively for the permitted purpose. 
(ii)  Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed. 
(iii)  The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted under this subsection (ac)(6)c.3 are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in subsection (ac)(6)c.1 of this section. 
(iv)  Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values. 
4.  The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines and water, gas and sewer lines and related facilities and the construction and maintenance of railroad lines provided that: 
(i)  The transmission and distribution lines and related facilities and railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland. 
(ii)  Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed. 
(iii)  Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in subsection (ac)(8) of this section. 
5.  Repair or expansion of nonconforming structures within the boundaries of shoreland-wetland zoning is not limited because of the SW-1 zoning, but is regulated by article VII of this chapter. Nonconforming boathouse repair shall conform with Wis. Stats. § 30.121. 
(7)  Prohibited uses in shoreland-wetlands. 
a.  Any use not listed in subsection (ac)(6) of this section is prohibited, unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this subsection (ac) in accordance with subsections (ac)(6) and (8) of this section. 
b.  The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high water mark of any navigable waters are prohibited. 
(8)  Rezoning shoreland-wetland. 
a.  Rezoning of a shoreland-wetland shall require amendment of the final Wisconsin wetland inventory map adopted in subsection (ac)(9) of this section pursuant to procedures established in subsection (ac)(10) of this section. In order to ensure that any amendment will be consistent with the shoreland protection objectives of Wis. Stats. § 144.26, the city shall not rezone a wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following: 
1.  Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity; 
2.  Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland; 
3.  Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters; 
4.  Shoreline protection against soil erosion; 
5.  Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds; 
6.  Wildlife habitat; or 
7.  Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and habitat or endangered species. 
b.  Upon notification of a proposed amendment as required by subsection (ac)(10) of this section, if the district office of the department determines that a proposed rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (ac)(8) of this section, the department shall so notify the municipality of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed amendment. 
c.  If the department notifies the city planning agency in writing that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (ac)(8) of this section, that proposed amendment, if approved by the city, shall not become effective until more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the council approval was mailed to the department, as required by subsection (ac)(10) of this section. If, within the 30-day period, the department notifies the council that the department intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the city under Wis. Stats. § 62.231(6), the proposed amendment shall not become effective until that ordinance adoption procedure is completed or otherwise terminated. The record of the council decision on the proposed amendment shall advise the petitioner of the provisions of this subsection. 
(9)  Zoning maps. The maps designated below are hereby adopted and made part of this subsection (ac). They are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
a.  United States Geological Survey Quadrangle Maps, most recent revision. 
b.  Wisconsin Wetland Inventory maps for Township 7 North, Range 17 East, stamped "FINAL" on July 7, 1988, and for Township 7 North, Range 18 East, stamped "REVISED" on February 6, 1989. 
c.  Floodplain zoning maps titled "Floodway Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, City of Delafield, Wisconsin, Waukesha County," and dated August 15, 1983, including the flood insurance study and corresponding profiles from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated February 15, 1983. 
d.  Comprehensive zoning base maps titled "City of Delafield Official Zoning Map" and dated July 9, 1978, with changes and amendments. 
(10)  Amending shoreland-wetland zoning regulations; procedures. The common council may supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations contained in this subsection (ac) according to section 52-294, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2., and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 116 and 117, and the following: 
a.  The shoreland-wetland district amendment provisions of subsection (ac)(8) of this section apply. 
b.  A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the department within five days of the submission of the proposed amendment to the city planning agency. 
c.  All proposed text and map amendments or conditional use requests shall be referred to the city planning agency and a public hearing shall be held as required by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2., following publication of a Class 2 notice as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 985. The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten days prior to such hearing. 
d.  A copy of the decision on each amendment shall be provided to the department district office within ten days of the decision. 
(11)  Annexed areas. The zoning of annexed lands shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 59.97(7) and § 59.971(7). Annexed lands are designated on the city's official zoning map. The Waukesha County shoreland and floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this subsection (ac) and are on file in the office of the city administrator and city clerk. 
a.  Annexed floodplains. The Waukesha County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the city for all areas annexed by the city until the city adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116. 
b.  Annexed shorelands. The Waukesha County shoreland zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation remain in effect administered by the city for all shoreland areas annexed by the city after May 7, 1982. 
(12)  Conditional use permits. The provisions of section 52-136 shall apply to this subsection (ac). 
(13)  Enforcement and penalties. The penalty provisions of section 52-296 shall apply to this subsection (ac). Any development or use established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection (ac) is derived in violation of this subsection (ac) by any person, firm, association, corporation (including building contractors or their agents) shall be deemed a violation. The administrator shall refer violations to the plan commission and the city attorney who shall prosecute such violations. Every violation of this subsection (ac) is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the city, state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30(2). 
(ad)  P-1 Public and Semipublic Use District. 
(1)  Intent. The public and semipublic use district is intended to accommodate structures, principally of a public or nonprofit institutional nature and rendering as their principal activity recognized public services, such as churches, hospitals, rest homes, public and private academic schools and nursery schools, libraries, museums, post offices, police and fire stations, public and private utilities and other public services, but not including such private commercial enterprises as clinics, business or trade schools or any enterprise other than a franchised utility primarily devoted to the sale of commodities or services. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The following uses are, following the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection (ad) is derived, permitted uses: 
a.  Cemeteries. 
b.  Churches and seminaries. 
c.  Libraries and museums. 
d.  Public administrative office and public service buildings, including fire and police stations, community centers, public emergency facilities. 
e.  Public and private schools, colleges and universities. 
f.  Public utility offices and facilities. 
g.  YMCA, YWCA, Junior Achievement, Boys Clubs of America, Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts. 
(3)  Other permitted uses. Other permitted uses are uses similar to those listed in subsection (ad)(2) of this section, subject, however, to a recommendation of the plan commission and a decision by the common council that the use is similar to those listed in subsection (ad)(2) of this section. 
(4)  Continuation of permitted uses. Any use listed in subsection (ad)(2) of this section, or any use determined to have been similar to those listed in subsection (ad)(2) of this section, that exist on the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection (ad) is derived shall continue to be considered a permitted use within the P-1 Public and Semipublic Use District. 
(5)  Conditional uses. 
a.  See article V of this chapter. 
b.  Conditional uses must be publicly oriented, religious, utility, institutional, hospitals, sanitaria, nursing home, funeral parlor, crematoria, columbarium, or other governmental uses, which do not conflict with neighboring uses and are found to be necessary in light of alternative locations available for such use. 
c.  Any use other than those identified in subsection (ad)(2) of this section or determined to be a permitted use in accordance with subsection (ad)(3) of this section shall be a conditional use subject to section 52-136. 
(6)  Conditional uses. See article V of this chapter. 
(7)  Signs. Sign regulations are as indicated in article VIII of this chapter. 
(8)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 40,000 square feet. 
(9)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 120 feet. 
(10)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
(11)  Minimum side yard. Minimum side yard shall be 20 feet. 
(12)  Minimum corner side yard. Minimum corner side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(13)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet. 
(14)  Maximum building height. 
a.  Principal building. 25 feet maximum, 35 feet if averaging; 45 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip or pitch roofs. 
b.  Accessory building. Ten feet maximum, 15 feet if averaging; 25 feet maximum peak height for gable, gambrel, hip or pitch roof. 
(15)  Maximum floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.50. 
(Code 1997, § 17.39; Rep. and Recr. #411; Am. #113.07; Am. #179; Am. #259; Cr. #442; Rep. #455; Am. #577; Am. #621; Am. #622; Rep. & Recr. #631; Am. #670; Am. #719 ; Rep. #719 ) 
( Ord. No. 754 , § 1, 11-4-2019; Ord. No. 755 , § 1, 11-4-2019; Ord. No. 765 , §§ 1—26, 1-20-2020)  
Sec. 52-112. - Summary of lot area, width, setback and yard requirements. 
TABLE 1 
SUMMARY OF LOT AREA, WIDTH, SETBACK, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS 
Zoning 
District 	Lot 
Area 	Lot 
Width 	Minimum
Lake
Frontage 	Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback 	Minimum
Interior
Side
Yard 	Minimum
Corner
Side
Yard 	Minimum
Rear
Yard 	Maximum
Floor
Area
Ratio 
A-1 	3 acres 	200' 		50' 	30' 	30' 	50' 	None 
A-1E 	35 acres 	200' 		50' 	30' 	30' 	50' 	None 
RE-3 	3 acres 	200' 		50' 	30' 	30' 	30' 	None 
RE-2 	2 acres 	200' 		50' 	30' 	30' 	30' 	None 
RE-1 	1 acre 	140' 		50' 	20' 	30' 	20' 	None 
RL-1 	40,000 sq. ft. 	100' 	100'/150' new 	50' 	15' 	30' 	60'* 	0.20 
RL-1A 	20,000 sq. ft. 	80' 	80'/150' new 	50' 	15' 	30' 	55'* 	0.20 
RL-2 	10,000 sq. ft. 	50' 	50'/150' new 	25' 	8' 	25' 	50'* 	0.30 
R-1 	30,000 sq. ft. 	120' 		50' 	20' 	30' 	20' 	0.15 
R-1D 	10,000 sq. ft. 	100' 		30' 	15' 	25' 	20' 	0.40 
R-2 	30,000 sq. ft. 	120' 		50' 	20' 	30' 	20' 	0.15 
R-3 	20,000 sq. ft. 	100' 		50' 	16' 	30' 	16' 	0.20 
R-4 	7,900 sq. ft. 	66' 		35' 	10' 	25' 	10' 	0.50 
R-5 (PUD) 	See text 	See text 		30' 	30' 	30' 	30' 	0.20 
R-6 	See text 	100' 		30' 	15' 	30' 	50' 	None 
R-7-EH 	See text 	100' 		30' 	15' 	30' 	50' 	None 
CBD-1 	4,500 sq. ft. 	45' 		None 	None 	None 	None 	None 
CBD-2 	4,500 sq. ft. 	45' 		10' 	10' 	10' 	10' 	0.50 
CBD-3 (PUD) 	See text 	See text 		30' 	10' 	30' 	10' 	0.50 
B-1 	5,000 sq. ft. 	100' 		30' 	10' 	30' 	10' 	0.50 
B-1-A 	10,000 sq. ft. 	100' 		30' 	10' 	30' 	30' 	0.50 
B-2 	15,000 sq. ft. 	120' 		30' 	10'/25'** 	30' 	30' 	0.50 
B-3 	20,000 sq. ft. 	120' 		30' 	10'/25'** 	30' 	30' 	0.50 
B-4 	20,000 sq. ft. 	120' 		30' 	10'/25'** 	30' 	30' 	0.50 
B-5 	40,000 sq. ft. 	120' 		30' 	20' 	30' 	30' 	0.50 
B-6 (PUD) 	See text 	See text 		30' 	30' 	30' 	30' 	0.50 
M-1 	43,560 sq. ft. 	150' 		50'/100'** 	10'/25'** 	30' 	30' 	0.50 
P-1 	40,000 sq. ft. 	120' 		30' 	20' 	30' 	30' 	0.50 
*Indicates setback from lakeshore lot line. 
**Indicates when abutting or adjacent to a residential district. 
 
(Code 1997, ch. 17, table 1; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Secs. 52-113—52-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CONDITIONAL USES 
 
Sec. 52-136. - Conditional use approval and permit required. 
No use of buildings or premises classified as a conditional use in this chapter shall be undertaken, extended, changed or continued, except upon recommendation by the plan commission and approval by the common council. The plan commission may authorize the administrator to issue a conditional use permit for conditional uses after review and a public hearing, provided that such conditional uses and structures are in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter and are found to be not hazardous, harmful, offensive or otherwise adverse to the environment or the value of the neighborhood or the community. 
(Code 1997, § 17.40; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-137. - Conditional use permit application procedure. 
(a)  Preliminary staff consultation. A petitioner shall have a preliminary consultation with the administrator and such other city staff and consultants that the administrator deems needed and appropriate to conduct a preliminary review of the application. 
(b)  Preliminary plan commission consultation. A petitioner may meet with the plan commission for a preliminary consultation prior to submitting a conditional use application. The purpose of this preliminary consultation is to review and discuss the proposed request. 
(c)  Application. A request for conditional use shall be made on special forms available in the city clerk's office and submitted in writing to the administrator at least 28 days before the regularly scheduled plan commission meeting. The administrator shall promptly refer such petition to the plan commission for determination. The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as noted in section 52-296(a). 
(d)  Supplemental data and site plan. The conditional use applications shall include and be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect, professional engineer, contractor and all opposite and abutting property owners of record. 
(2)  Description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of employees; hours of operation; and the zoning district within which the subject site lies. 
(3)  A site plan showing all of the relevant information required in article II of this chapter under the site plan requirements. 
(4)  Additional information as may be required by the city plan commission or administrator. 
(e)  Hearing. After receipt of the application form and all additional information, the city clerk shall advertise a public hearing on the request as soon as practical; provided, however, that no such hearing shall be scheduled, advertised or held until the administrator certifies that the application is complete and all data and information is on file with the plan commission and available for public inspection. 
(Code 1997, § 17.41; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-138. - Conditional use review, determination, approval, and amendment. 
(a)  Review. The plan commission shall review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation and circulation, drainage, sewerage and water systems and the proposed operation. 
(b)  Determination. After study and review of the necessary data, the plan commission shall hold a public hearing. The plan commission shall render its decision in writing no later than 90 days from the date of the public hearing. Any further consideration of the petition beyond the 90-day period shall be preceded by another public hearing on the petition. 
(c)  Factors to be considered. 
(1)  The plan commission shall base its determination on the effect of such grant on the health, safety and welfare of the community and of the immediate neighborhood in which such use would be located, including such considerations as compatibility with existing uses, problems of fire and police protection, traffic movement and control, water, sanitation and utilities, impact (aesthetically or otherwise) on surrounding property values, noise, dust, smoke, odor and such other factors appropriate to the granting of a conditional use. 
(2)  The plan commission's decision shall include an accurate description of the use permitted, the property on which permitted and any and all conditions made applicable thereof or if disapproved, shall indicate the reasons for disapproval. All papers in the matter shall become permanent commission records. 
(d)  Approval of the common council. Every conditional use decision rendered by the plan commission, whether granting the conditional use or denying it, shall be placed upon an agenda of a common council meeting within 45 days of the plan commission determination. The common council shall approve, reject or refer back to the plan commission with appropriate instructions. This procedure is not an appeal, and the common council's approval shall be on the record. However, the common council may allow time for parties to present oral or written arguments. The decision of the common council shall be final, and the applicant will be deemed to have exhausted his administrative remedy upon such decision. 
(e)  Conditional use review, determination, approval and amendment. 
(1)  All proposed changes, revisions or additions to the terms or conditions of any existing conditional use shall be submitted to the plan commission in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 52-137. Upon receipt of such an application seeking a change, revision, or addition to any term or condition of a conditional use permit, the plan commission shall schedule a public hearing, and shall provide written notice of the public hearing to the owners of any lands lying within 300 feet of the lands described in the conditional use permit. Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the plan commission shall make such recommendations as the plan commission deems appropriate, and shall forward those recommendations to the common council. Upon receipt of the recommendation, the common council may approve in part or deny the requested change, revision or addition to the terms and conditions of the conditional use permit. 
(Code 1997, § 17.42; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #560; Rep. & Recr. #638)  
Sec. 52-139. - Conditions and requirements. 
(a)  Standard requirements. Except as may be specifically permitted, a conditional use shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter, such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking, loading, traffic, and highway access shall be required of all conditional uses. 
(b)  Conditions. Conditions, such as landscaping, architectural design, type of construction, construction commencement and completion dates, sureties, lighting, fencing, planting screens, operational control, hours of operation, improved traffic circulation, deed restrictions, highway access restrictions, increased yards or parking requirements, may be required by the plan commission upon its finding that these are necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(c)  Modification of regulations. Requirements applicable to uses permitted by right or as accessory uses in any district by the regulations of this chapter may be modified or waived by the plan commission in their application to a conditional use if in the commission's opinion they are not appropriate or necessary to the proper regulation of the conditional use and where such modification or waiver would not in the commission's opinion have an adverse effect upon the surrounding properties. 
(d)  Accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures accessory to a principal conditional use shall be subject to appropriate regulation in the same manner as set forth for the principal conditional use. 
(Code 1997, § 17.43; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-140. - Conditional use permit termination. 
(a)  Where a permitted conditional use is abandoned or does not continue in conformity with the conditions of the original approval; where a change in the character of the surrounding area or of the use itself causes it to be no longer compatible with surrounding areas; or for similar cause based upon considerations of public health, safety or welfare, the conditional grant may be terminated by action of the common council following referral to the plan commission for recommendation and public hearing thereon. 
(b)  The council or plan commission with council approval may establish a termination date for any approval under this section. Such date shall be effective 24 months after the date of such approval, unless otherwise established by the council or plan commission and shall be set forth in the minutes of the council or plan commission. A certified excerpt thereof shall be recorded with the register of deeds where the council or plan commission considers it appropriate. No further notice or hearing shall be required for such revocation to occur. It is the intent of the council that where proposed projects are not substantially underway by such date, the approval shall terminate; however, where substantial progress has been made by such date, the council may extend it. Substantial progress shall be evidenced by the petitioner securing valid building permits for the project. Where appropriate, substantial progress can be defined in a development agreement outlining a percentage of completed construction or project phasing which shall be considered substantial progress for purposes of this section. 
(Code 1997, § 17.44; Rep. and Recr. #411; Am. # 740 )  
Sec. 52-141. - Conditional use mapping and recording. 
(a)  When a conditional use is approved, the building, occupancy and zoning permits shall be appropriately noted and such grant so described. Indication of such grant shall also be made on the official zoning map by appropriate code number or symbol. 
(b)  After approval of a conditional use for a lot or parcel of land, any part of which is located in a designated floodplain area or is zoned RL-1, RL-1A or RL-2, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources shall be notified. Copies of the decision shall be sent to the department of natural resources' southeast district office within ten days after the conditional use has been granted or denied. 
(Code 1997, § 17.45; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-142. - Conditional uses permitted. 
The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses in the districts specified: 
(1)  Legal nonconforming uses. In any district. See article VII of this chapter. 
(2)  Commercial kennels. In the agricultural district, provided that except for animal hospitals, no such use shall be permitted on a lot of less than five acres. A buffer area shall be provided between dog pens and all adjoining lands to minimize the impact of the kennel operation on adjoining lands. 
(3)  Cemeteries and mausoleums for the burial of human remains only. In any district, subject to approval of the common council following recommendation of the plan commission. 
(4)  Noncommercial clubs and outdoor recreational facilities, such as recreational camps, golf courses, bathing beaches and resorts. In any district, subject to the following: 
a.  No such use shall be permitted on a lot or parcel of land less than three acres in area, except that this prohibition shall not apply to lands located in a B-2 Local Business District or less restrictive district, which lands and use thereof shall be governed by area requirements applicable to such districts, nor shall this prohibition apply to yacht clubs, war veterans' clubs or curling clubs, regardless of the district in which such club may be located. 
b.  No building other than one used only for residence purposes shall be closer than 75 feet to the lot line of an adjoining lot in a residential district. 
c.  Off-street parking shall be provided as required by the plan commission adequate to meet the particular needs of the proposed use. 
d.  No such permitted use shall include the operation of a facility, such as a bar or restaurant, except as may be specifically authorized in the grant of a permit. 
e.  The term "outdoor recreational facilities" as used in this section does not include a recreational facility that falls within the definition of a "sport shooting range", as that term is defined in Wis. Stats. § 895.527 nor does the term include any recreational facility involving the discharge of firearms or other projectiles subject to the restrictions and prohibitions contained in section 34-20 of the City Code. 
(5)  Riding academies or commercial stables. In all districts, including agricultural, subject to the following: 
a.  No such use shall be permitted on a lot less than 7½ acres in area. 
b.  No building other than one used only for residence purposes shall be closer than 75 feet to the lot line of an adjoining lot in a residential district, except as set forth below. 
c.  Off-street parking shall be provided as required by the plan commission adequate to meet the particular needs of the proposed use. 
d.  No such permitted use shall include the operation of a facility, such as a bar or restaurant, except as may be specifically authorized in the grant or permit. 
(6)  Planned unit development. In any district. See article IX of this chapter. 
(7)  Public, semipublic and governmental buildings and uses. In any district, subject to the following: 
a.  Public utility poles, towers, water storage tanks, lines and subsurface mains, except that no public hearing shall be required before approval of any such conditional use is granted. Static transformer stations, booster stations and other utility stations, when operating requirements necessitate locating in a residential district in order to serve the neighborhood, may be conditionally authorized provided such installations include no yard or garage for service or storage and provided, further, that the premises upon which such utility station is erected and maintained shall be appropriately landscaped and screened so as to be in harmony with the general appearance of the neighborhood. 
b.  Such use shall conform to the setback, height and double the offset requirements of the district in which it is located. 
c.  The height limitation may be extended to a maximum of 50 feet, provided the minimum required setbacks and offsets be increased two feet for every additional foot of height in excess of the permitted maximum of that district, except that such additional height for public utility towers or poles may be permitted without increase of setback or offset requirements. 
(8)  Telecommunication antennas and towers. In any district. See section 52-145. Section 52-145 shall apply to telecommunication antennas and towers. Section 52-142(7) provides for public, semi-public and governmental buildings and uses which include public and private utilities and other public services as defined in section 52-11. The provisions of section 52-142(7)a through c shall apply unless in conflict with the provisions of section 52-145. 
(9)  Boat sales, service and repairs. In B-1 and less restrictive districts, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Boats, boat motors and marine related equipment must be serviced within a totally enclosed building in B-1 districts. 
b.  Outdoor storage: 
1.  Outside storage areas shall be enclosed by fencing erected and maintained by owner of site and shall be of a type to prevent vandalism of the area. 
2.  Outside storage areas shall be used only for storage of boats and marine-related equipment. 
3.  Outside storage areas shall have hard surface to minimize hazard of grass fires, unless a specific exemption from this requirement is granted by the plan commission and common council. 
(i)  The non-hard-surfaced area shall be totally screened and enclosed and not visible or accessible by the general public. 
(ii)  All non-hard-surfaced areas used for storage shall be surfaced with crushed limestone or other comparable materials and kept free of weeds or other vegetation. 
4.  Owner of site shall be responsible for weed control. 
c.  No other type of motors shall be serviced within the building in B-1 districts, unless specific permission for same is granted by plan commission and common council. 
d.  Recommendations of the fire inspector for property shall be promptly complied with by owner of site. 
e.  Marinas are excluded from this portion of this chapter. 
f.  The plan commission shall have the power to impose such other restrictions as it deems necessary in each individual case. 
(10)  Temporary model home and sales office. In any residential district, subject to the following: 
a.  No such use shall be permitted on a permanent basis. A specific time period shall be established for each temporary model home sales office. After expiration, reestablishment of the conditional use shall require another petition, public hearing and grant of approval. 
b.  The following elements of operation shall be subject to plan commission review and approval: 
1.  Hours of operation. 
2.  Number, size and location of advertising signs. 
3.  Type and location of all other advertising media, including floodlighting. 
4.  Parking facilities. 
5.  Type of sales. 
(11)  Solar energy collection devices and solar panels. In all districts. 
(12)  Automobile service stations and auto washes. In any business or industrial district, provided no gasoline pump or other accessory equipment shall be closer than 30 feet to the street right-of-way line. 
(13)  Outdoor sales lots and affiliated operations. Outdoor sales lots and affiliated operations, such as auto, truck, campers, camping trailers, farm equipment and construction equipment sales operations, where outdoor display and storage is an integral and primary part of the site operation, in the B-4 and M-1 districts. 
(14)  Drive-in restaurants. Restaurants which serve patrons in motor vehicles parked on the premises in the B-2, B-3 and B-4 districts. 
(15)  Planned developments. In any residential or commercial district, the application procedure and regulations for planned developments as a conditional use are contained in article IX of this chapter. 
(16)  Dumps, landfills, incinerators. Municipal earth and sanitary landfill operations in the B-3, B-4 and M-1 districts. 
(17)  Pool halls and dance halls. In the B-3 and B-4 districts. 
(18)  Roof signs. In business and industrial districts. 
(19)  Sales and service of mopeds. In the B-4 or M-1 districts, subject to the following: 
a.  Approval of a site plan showing the location of buildings, signs, parking, lighting, fuel supply, refuse area and outdoor storage facilities. 
b.  Approval of a plan of operation, which indicates hours of operation, method and location for moped demonstrations. 
c.  All sales and service operations shall be done indoors. 
d.  The plan commission may impose other restrictions as it deems necessary in each individual case. 
(20)  Drive-through windows for restaurants. In CBD-1, B-1, B-1-A and B-2 districts. 
(21)  Shoreland-wetland requirements. In addition to conditions required in section 52-111(ac), the following specifications shall be considered without limitation because of specific enumeration: type of shore cover; erosion controls; increased setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking areas and signs; and type of construction. To secure information upon which to base its determination, the plan commission may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a zoning permit, other pertinent information which is necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of the shoreland-wetland provisions of this chapter. 
(22)  Artisan and craft workshops and studios. In the CBD-1, B-1 and B-1-A districts artisan and craft workshops and studios are intended to include facilities for the hand production of arts, crafts, home furnishings and other similar products which are sold on the premises. Production facilities shall be totally contained within a building and the building shall be similar in character, scale and outward appearance to adjoining and nearby retail commercial uses. 
(23)  Adult oriented establishments. In the M-1 Limited Industrial Districts only. Such establishments must conform to the provisions of section 10-3, relating to adult-oriented establishments. 
(24)  Private garages over 1,200 square feet in size. Private garages over 1,200 square feet in size in the any residential district, subject to approval of the common council following recommendation of the plan commission. 
(25)  Accessory buildings over 220 square feet in size. Accessory buildings other than garages, including, utility sheds, stables and barns, over 220 square feet in size in the RE1, RE2, or RE1 Rural Estate Districts, subject to approval of the common council following recommendation of the plan commission. 
(26)  Home business. A home business, with no more than one employee residing outside the residence, in any residential district, subject to approval of the common council following recommendation of the plan commission. 
(27)  Bed and breakfast establishment and tourist rooms. In the all districts bed and breakfasts and tourist rooms licensed under Wis. Admin. Code ch. HSS 197 subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A site plan and a plan of operation shall be approved by the plan commission. The site plan shall include a parking plan. 
b.  Traffic conditions in the neighborhood shall not be adversely impacted by access to the property, traffic generated by the use, or any other aspects of the proposal. 
c.  At least one off-street parking stall shall be provided for each bedroom plus at least one stall shall be located on the site for the operator. 
d.  All requirements set forth in Wis. Stats. § 50.51(b) and Wis. Admin. Code ch. HSS 197 shall be fully complied with. Necessary state permits and licenses shall have been secured. 
e.  The owner of any bed and breakfast shall reside in the establishment. 
f.  Dwelling being considered for conversion to bed and breakfasts shall exhibit unique architectural and historic characteristics. 
g.  Individual rentals shall not exceed five consecutive days in length. 
h.  No retail sales shall occur in a bed and breakfast establishment. 
i.  If the proposed bed and breakfast or tourist room site is located in a residential district, one exterior sign, not exceeding four square feet in area may be erected on the premises. 
(28)  Community and other living arrangements. In all districts, community and other group living arrangements including all community-based residential facilities as defined in Wis. Admin. Code § HSS 3.04 subject to approval of the common council following recommendation of the plan commission. 
(Code 1997, § 17.46; Rep. and Recr. #411; Cr. #479; Am. #646; Am. #719 ) 
( Ord. No. 744 , § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 52-143. - Quarrying and mineral extraction as a conditional use. 
Quarrying and mineral extraction is permitted as a conditional use in any district. The following shall regulate this use: 
(1)  Permit. No quarrying operation shall be undertaken until a quarrying permit has been secured from the common council. Such permit shall be for an initial period deemed appropriate to the specific situation, but not to exceed one year. 
(2)  Application. Application for a quarrying permit shall be made on forms supplied by the administrator and shall be accompanied by: 
a.  A fee as noted in section 52-296(a) to defray the cost of notification and public hearing. 
b.  A description of all phases of the contemplated operation with a description of the machinery and equipment which will be in operation. Where the operation is to include the washing of sand and gravel, the estimated daily quantity of water required, its source and its disposition shall be made a part of the description. 
c.  A legal description of the proposed site with a map showing its location with indications of private access roads, existing or proposed, and of public highways adjacent to the site which will be affected by the operation. 
d.  A topographic map of the area at a minimum contour interval of five feet extending beyond the site to the nearest public street or highway or to a minimum distance of 300 feet on all sides. 
e.  A restoration plan as required below. 
f.  The names and addresses of the owners of all properties within one-half mile of the perimeter of the proposed quarrying operation. 
(3)  Procedure for action on applications. 
a.  Referral to plan commission. The application and all data and information pertaining thereto shall be referred to the plan commission for public hearing, report and recommendation back to the common council within 30 days after the public hearing. 
b.  Public hearing. Within 30 days after an application has been filed, a public hearing shall be held at which all interested parties may be heard. In addition to the normal posting and publishing, notices shall be given by mail or otherwise to all landowners within one-half mile of the perimeter of the proposed quarrying operation at least ten days prior to the date of hearing. Substantial compliance with the notice requirements of this section shall be deemed sufficient. 
c.  Action by common council. The common council shall within ten days after receipt of the recommendation of the plan commission take action to approve or disapprove the application for the proposed quarrying operation. The council shall give particular consideration to the following factors in making its decision: 
1.  The effect of the proposed operation on existing roads and traffic movement in terms of adequacy, safety and efficiency. 
2.  The effect of the proposed operation on drainage and water supply. 
3.  The possibility of soil erosion as a result of the proposed operation. 
4.  The degree and effect of dust, noise, smoke and air pollution as a result of the proposed operation. 
5.  The practical possibility of restoration of the site. 
6.  The effect of the proposed operation on the natural beauty, character, tax base, land value and land uses in the area. 
7.  The most suitable land use for the area with particular consideration to future residential value. 
d.  Additional conditions. Any conditions accessory to the granting of a permit shall be in writing and copies made a part of the permit and a part of the records of the city. 
e.  Renewals. The procedure designated in this subsection shall apply to applications for renewal of a permit. Determination in regard to renewal shall be based particularly on an evaluation of the effect of the continuance of the use with relation to changing conditions in the area. Where renewal is not granted, the reasons for refusal shall be presented to the applicant in writing and made a part of the records of the city. 
(4)  Requirements. 
a.  General requirements. No part of the quarrying operation shall be permitted closer than 1,000 feet nor shall any accessory road, parking area or office building be permitted closer than 500 feet to a district zoned "rural home" at the time of the grant of permit. 
b.  Setback requirements. No part of the quarrying operation other than access roads shall be located closer than 200 feet nor shall any accessory parking area, stockpile or office building be located closer than 100 feet to the base setback line along any street or highway. 
c.  Other location requirements. No part of the quarrying operation shall be permitted closer than 200 feet nor shall any accessory access road, parking area or office building be permitted closer than 50 feet to any property line, except where such line abuts a quarrying or industrial district or abuts an existing quarrying operation, but in no case shall such operation be closer than 20 feet to any property line, except by agreement between abutting quarrying operations or be in conflict with the provisions of this section relating to preservation of topography. 
d.  Operational requirements. 
1.  Fencing or other suitable barrier shall be erected and maintained around the site or around portions of the site where, in the determination of the common council, such fencing or barrier is necessary for the protection of the public and shall be of a type approved by the common council. 
2.  All machinery and equipment used in the quarrying operation shall be constructed, maintained and operated in such manner as to minimize dust, smoke, air pollution, noise and vibration. Access and haulage roads on the site shall be maintained in a dust-free condition by surfacing or treatment as directed by the city engineer. 
3.  Crushing, washing, refining or other processing other than the initial removal of material may be permitted as an accessory use only as specifically authorized under the terms of the permit or as otherwise provided in an industrial district. 
4.  In stone quarries, production or manufacturing of veneer stone, sills, lintels, cut flagstone, hearthstones, paving stone and similar architectural or structural stone and the storing or stockpiling of such products on the site shall be considered a permissible part of the operation, provided such production does not require the use of crushing or other heavy machinery not specifically authorized under the terms of the permit or otherwise specifically permitted in an industrial district. 
5.  Manufacture of concrete building blocks or other similar blocks, the production or manufacture of lime products, production of ready mixed concrete, asphalt or any similar production or manufacturing processes related to the quarrying operation shall not be permitted, except as otherwise provided in an industrial district. 
6.  Washing of sand and gravel shall be prohibited in any operation where the source of water is of doubtful capacity or where the quantity of water required will, in the opinion of the city engineer, seriously affect the supply for other uses in the area. 
7.  Trees, shrubs and other appropriate landscaping shall be provided as promptly as practicable where deemed necessary by the plan commission to screen the operation so far as practical from public view, to enhance the general appearance from the public right-of-way and generally to minimize the damaging effect of the operation on the beauty and character of the surrounding countryside. 
8.  Quarrying operations shall not begin before the hour of 7:00 a.m., shall not continue after the hour of 6:00 p.m., and no operation shall take place on Sundays or legal holidays. During periods of national or local emergency, time and hours of operation may be altered at the discretion of the common council by issuance of a special regulatory order. 
e.  Restorative requirements. 
1.  In order to insure that the area of quarrying operation shall be restored to a condition of practical usefulness and reasonable physical attractiveness, the owner or operator shall prior to the issuance of a permit submit to the plan commission a plan for such restoration, including the following: 
(i)  An agreement with the city whereby the applicant contracts to restore the premises to a condition and within a time satisfactory to the city. 
(ii)  A physical restoration plan showing the proposed contours after restoration, plantings, other special features of restoration and the method by which such restoration is to be accomplished. 
(iii)  A bond written by a licensed surety company, certified check or other financial guarantee satisfactory to the city in an amount sufficient in the restoration agreement. 
(iv)  Such agreement and financial guarantee shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
2.  In the event of the applicant's failure to fulfill such agreement, such bond, check or other financial guarantee shall be deemed forfeited and the proceeds applied to the performance of the restoration. 
3.  Restoration shall proceed as soon as practicable and at the order and direction of the city engineer. However, the owner or operator may at his option submit a plan for progressive restoration as the quarrying operation is being carried on. The required bond in such case may cover progressive stages of the restoration for periods of not less than two years. 
4.  At any stage during the restoration, the plan may be modified by mutual agreement between the common council after referral to the plan commission and the owner or operator. 
5.  Where there is any backfilling, the material used or the method of fill shall not be such as to create a health hazard nor be objectionable because of odor, combustibility or unsightliness. In any case, the finished grade of the restored area, except for rock faces, outcroppings, natural water bodies or areas of proposed building or paving construction, shall be of sufficient depth of earth to support plant growth. 
6.  Within one year after the cessation of the operation, all temporary structures (excepting fences), equipment, stockpiles, rubble heaps or other debris shall be removed or backfilled into the excavation so as to leave the premises in a neat and orderly condition. 
7.  In any restoration procedure which takes place in sand or gravel pits or on other sites where the material is of a loose or friable nature, no slope shall be left which is steeper than a ratio of 1½ horizontal to one vertical. In no case shall any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the material involved. 
(5)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to an operation which is normally incident to a permitted agricultural, residential, commercial or industrial use of the premises other than quarrying; provided, however, the approval of the plan commission shall be required and such operation shall be limited to a maximum period of three months. 
(6)  Application to existing operations. 
a.  Permit. Within 60 days after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, all existing quarrying operations shall register with the city clerk, submitting pertinent data relative to the present operating, including the boundaries of the actual operation and of the ownership. A quarrying permit shall be granted to such existing operation subject to compliance with the operational requirements in subsection (4)d of this section, where they can be reasonably applied under existing circumstances. 
b.  Plan for restoration. There shall be required within one year after adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived the submission of a plan for restoration of the site of any existing quarrying operation as provided in this section, except to the extent that such restoration may, by reason of current conditions, constitute an unreasonable hardship. 
c.  Renewal permit. Annually, after the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, any such existing operation shall be required to make application for a renewal permit the same as for reapplication in the case of a new operation under this chapter, except in a quarrying or general industrial district. 
(Code 1997, § 17.47; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-144. - Use of island properties. 
Any use of an island property which requires the installation of wastewater collection or treatment facilities or potable water facilities or which will result in placement of houses or buildings used for human occupancy, employment or recreation on the island may be permitted as a conditional use in the A-1 Agricultural District or any residential, business, commercial or industrial district. The following provisions shall regulate such use: 
(1)  Permit required. Before any occupation of or any construction begins on an island which will result in the installation or use of any wastewater collection or treatment facilities or potable water facilities, an island use permit shall be obtained from the common council. 
(2)  Application procedure. The procedures of section 52-137 shall apply, except as modified below. In addition to the supplemental data and site plan required by section 52-137, the application shall be accompanied by: 
a.  A plan for regular and emergency access. 
b.  Proposed declarations and waivers as appropriate for the use. 
c.  Copies of the applicable state and county permits for the installation or maintenance of potable water and wastewater collection and treatment facilities. 
d.  Additional information as may be required by the city plan commission, city engineer, building inspector or administrator. 
(3)  Review procedure. 
a.  Public hearing. Within 45 days after an application has been filed, a public hearing shall be held before the plan commission at which all interested parties who are present shall be heard. In addition to the notice requirements of section 52-295 notices shall be mailed to all owners of waterfront lots within 1,500 feet of the perimeter of such island. In the event that onshore lots are included in the island use plans, notice shall also be mailed to owners of lots within 300 feet of such onshore lots. Substantial compliance with the notice requirements of this section shall be deemed sufficient. 
b.  Plan commission. The application and all data and information pertaining thereto shall be referred to the plan commission for public hearing, report and recommendation to the common council. The recommendation shall be made within 35 days after the public hearing. 
c.  Common council. The common council shall within 30 days after receipt of the recommendation from the plan commission approve as recommended, approve with modifications or disapprove the application for island use permit. 
(4)  Requirements. 
a.  General. The structure or use proposed for the island is one which would be permitted in the underlying zoning classification if the parcel were not an island. 
b.  Setback requirements. No part of any structure, except a boathouse, shall be located closer than 75 feet from the normal high water mark of the lake or stream. No part of any boathouse shall be located closer than five feet from the normal high water mark of the lake or stream. If more than one lot exists on the island, the side yard setbacks of the underlying zoning district shall be observed. 
c.  Elevation requirements. No building or structure shall be constructed on any portion of an island in Lake Nagawicka, which has an elevation of less than 891 feet mean sea level. Any structure other than a boathouse shall have its first floor at or above 893 feet. 
d.  Utilities. 
1.  Wastewater collection facilities shall be designed and installed and private on-site wastewater treatment facilities shall be placed on the island and operated so as not to cause pollution of groundwaters or surface waters and shall be in compliance with applicable state, county and city codes. 
2.  A potable water supply shall be installed on the island and shall be located so as not to be subject to flooding and shall be in compliance with applicable state, county and city codes. 
3.  Other utilities shall be installed so as not to be subject to flooding and in a manner acceptable to the city. 
e.  Access. If practicable, island development shall be served by a public or private road of adequate width and bearing capacity so as to allow the provision of emergency services to the island. If such access is not possible, the plan commission may allow such development, provided that adequate assurances have been tendered that the lack of such access is recognized and appropriate declarations, waivers and releases are filed indemnifying and holding the city harmless for any claims based upon the city's inability to provide services due to lack of access. All such declarations, waivers and releases shall be recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. 
(5)  Factors to be considered. In addition to the requirements listed in subsection (4) of this section, the following factors shall be considered by the plan commission and common council in considering an application for an island use permit: 
a.  The ability of the city to provide emergency services to the island property. 
b.  The effect such development or use will have upon the quality of groundwaters and surface waters. 
c.  If more than one lot is on the island, the proposed use's compatibility with other uses on or permitted on the island. 
d.  The ability of the applicant to provide off-street parking for any use established on an island. 
e.  Such other factors as are appropriate to the granting of an island use permit. 
(6)  Conditions that may be applied. 
a.  The following conditions may be applied to an island use permit: 
1.  Any on-site wastewater treatment facility shall be inspected and certified for adequacy of operation. The frequency of such inspections shall be as deemed necessary by the city. 
2.  Fire protection, detection and suppression systems shall be installed so as to minimize the potential for loss due to fire. 
3.  Adequate parking facilities shall be provided on the island or for an island not served by a public or private road, on an onshore private lot which has water access or is adjacent to or near a public access facility. 
4.  Appropriate security measures shall be planned, such as installation of a security alarm system, employment of a watch person or similar measures. 
5.  An approved plan for the disposal of any garbage or rubbish generated by the island use shall be filed with the city. 
6.  An outside lighting plan shall be approved by the plan commission in order to prevent light reflection from the island and/or lake to nearby properties. 
7.  An approved plan for the baffling of generator noise. 
b.  The plan commission or common council may establish other conditions deemed appropriate for the intended use. 
(Code 1997, § 17.48; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-145. - Regulation of cell phone transmission towers. 
(a)  Purpose. 2013 Wisconsin Act 20 modified the regulatory powers of local governments in regard to cell phone towers. The law specifies the manner in which a political subdivision can use zoning to regulate cell phone towers. See Wis. Stats. § 66.0404, which codifies relevant parts of 2013 Act 20, provides the manner in which a city can use zoning to regulate cell phone towers and provides for specific regulations that a political subdivision may not apply. This section sets forth the city's regulatory authority in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0404. 
(b)  Applicability. The city's regulatory power extends to three types of projects, all for the installation of types of cell phone transmission facilities. 
(1)  Projects requiring construction of a new tower 
(2)  Projects requiring substantial modification of an existing tower and facilities, but not construction of a new tower. Projects of this type are referred to as "Class 1 collocation." 
(3)  Projects requiring neither construction of a new tower, nor substantial modification of an existing tower and facilities. Projects of this type are "Class 2 collocation." 
(c)  Definitions. The definitions contained in Wis. Stats. § 66.0404(1) are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(d)  Siting and construction of any new mobile service support structure and facilities or the substantial modification of an existing support structure and mobile service facilities (Class 1 collocation). 
(1)  Conditional use permit required. A conditional use permit is required for the siting and construction of a new mobile service support structure and facility and/or the substantial modification of an existing support structure and mobile service facilities (Class 1 collocation) and is subject only to the conditions set forth in this section. 
(2)  Applications for permits. 
a.  Applications for a permit shall be provided by the office of the city planner. 
b.  Applications shall be completed and filed with the office of the city planner and shall include the following information: 
1.  Name and business address and contact information for the applicant. 
2.  Location of the proposed or affected support structure. 
3.  The location of the proposed mobile service facility. 
4.  If the application substantially modifies an existing support structure, a construction plan which describes the proposed modification to the support structure and the equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling and related equipment associated with the proposed modifications. 
5.  If the application is to construct a new mobile service support structure, a construction plan which describes a proposed mobile service support structure and equipment network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling and related equipment to be placed on or around the new mobile service support structure. 
6.  If the application is to construct a new mobile service support structure, an explanation as to why the applicant chose the proposed location and why the applicant did not choose collocation, including a sworn statement from the individual who has responsibility over the placement of the mobile service support structure, attesting that collocation within the applicants search ring would not result in the same mobile service functionality, coverage and capacity; is technically unfeasible or is economically burdensome to the mobile service provider. 
(3)  Determination of completion. If an applicant submits an application for a permit to engage in an activity described in this section, which contains all the information required under subsection (d)(2)b of this section, the office of city planner shall consider the application complete. If the office of the city planner does not believe the application complete, the office of the city planner shall notify the applicant in writing within ten days of receiving the application, that the application is not complete, the written notification shall specify in detail the required information that was incomplete. An applicant may resubmit an application as often as necessary until it is complete. 
(4)  Referral to plan commission. 
a.  If the application is complete as determined by the office of the city planner, the matter shall be referred to the plan commission for its review. 
b.  Within 90 days of its receipt of a complete application, the plan commission shall complete all of the following or the applicant may consider the application approved, except that the applicant and the plan commission may agree in writing to an extension of the 90-day period: 
1.  Review the application to determine whether it complies with all applicable aspects of the city's building code and, subject to the limitations in this section, zoning ordinances. 
2.  Make a final decision whether to approve or deny the application. 
3.  Notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision. 
4.  If the decision is to deny application, include with the written notification substantial evidence which supports the decision. 
c.  The plan commission may deny an application if an applicant refuses to evaluate the feasibility of collocation within the applicant's search ring and provide the sworn statement described under subsection (d)(2)b.6 of this section. 
d.  If an applicant provides the plan commission with an engineering certification showing that a mobile service support structure, or an existing structure, is designed to collapse within a smaller area than the setback or fall zone area required in a zoning ordinance, that zoning ordinance does not apply to such a structure unless the plan commission provides the applicant with substantial evidence that the engineering certification is flawed. 
e.  The fee for the permit shall be established under the procedure set forth in this Code and shall comply with Wis. Stats. § 66.0404(4)(d)2. 
(e)  Collocation on existing support structures (Class 2 collocation). 
(1)  A permit is required for a Class 2 collocation. A Class 2 collocation is a permitted use but still requires the issuance of a permit. 
(2)  Applications for a permit shall be provided by the office of the city planner. Applications shall be made and filed with the office of the city planner and shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and business address and contact information for the applicant. 
b.  Location of the proposed or affected support structure. 
c.  The location of the proposed mobile service facility. 
(3)  A Class 2 collocation is subject to the same requirements for the issuance of a building permit to which any other type of commercial development or land use development is subject. 
(4)  If an applicant submits an application to the planning department for a permit to engage in a Class 2 collocation and the application contains all of the information required by subsection (e)(2) of this section, the office of the city planner shall consider the application complete. If the required information is not in the application, the office of the city planner shall notify the applicant in writing, within five days of receiving the application, that the application is not complete. The written notification shall specify in detail the required information that was incomplete. An applicant may resubmit an application as often as necessary until it is complete. 
(5)  Within 45 days of its receipt of a complete application, the zoning administrator shall complete all of the following or the applicant may consider the application approved, except that the applicant and the zoning administrator may agree in writing to an extension of the 45-day period: 
a.  Make a final decision whether to approve or deny the application. 
b.  Notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision. 
c.  If the application is approved, issue the applicant the relevant permit. 
d.  If the decision is to deny application, include with the written notification substantial evidence which supports the decision. 
(6)  The fee for the permit shall be established by the common council, from time to time, and shall comply with Wis. Stats. § 66.0404(4)(d)1. 
(f)  Surety. A performance bond shall be required in the amount of $20,000.00 prior to the issuance of a permit under this section to insure that the requirements of this section are maintained by the permittee. 
(Code 1997, § 17.49; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #719 )  
Secs. 52-146—52-173. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - INTERSECTION VISION CLEARANCE, LOADING AREAS, PARKING AND ACCESS 
 
Sec. 52-174. - Vision clearance at intersections. 
(a)  Corner lot. On a corner lot in any district, no obstructions, such as structures, parking or vegetation, shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow to impede vision between a height of two feet and ten feet above centerline grades of any two existing or proposed intersecting minor streets or alley right-of-way lines and a line joining points on such lines located a minimum of 15 feet from their intersection. 
(b)  Arterial and collector streets. In the case of arterial and collector streets intersecting with other arterial or collector streets or railways, the distance establishing the vision clearance space shall be increased to 60 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. This provision shall apply to existing and proposed streets. 
(c)  Exceptions. The plan commission may grant exceptions to the vision clearance requirements in the CBD-1 district where the characteristics of the intersection are such that traffic safety hazards would not be created and the placement of signs or structures within the vision triangle would contribute to the objectives of the CBD-1 district. Such an exception shall be subject to review and approval by the department of public works. 
(Code 1997, § 17.50; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-175. - Loading requirements. 
In all businesses and industrial districts, except CBD-1, adequate loading areas shall be provided so that all vehicles loading, maneuvering or unloading are completely off the public ways and need not back onto any public way. All loading spaces shall be at least ten feet wide and 45 feet long with 14 feet of height clearance. 
(Code 1997, § 17.51; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-176. - Parking requirements. 
In all districts and in connection with every use, there shall be provided at the time any use or building is erected, enlarged, extended or increased sufficient off-street parking stalls for all vehicles in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Adequate access. Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each parking space; driveways shall be at least ten feet wide for one- and two-family dwellings and a minimum of 24 feet for all other uses. 
(2)  Size. Size of each parking space to be provided for a housing project serving elderly persons developed under the provisions of the R-7-EH district shall be not less than 200 square feet, exclusive of the space required for ingress and egress. The size of each parking space for other than a project for elderly persons shall be not less than 160 square feet, exclusive of the space required for ingress and egress. 
(3)  Parking lot location. Parking lot location to be on the same lot as the principal use or with plan commission approval, not over 400 feet from the principal use. No driveway, except in residential districts, shall be closer than 25 feet to a residential district lot line or a street line opposite a residential district. 
(4)  Surfacing. All off-street parking areas shall be graded and surfaced so as to be dust free and properly drained. Any required parking area for more than five vehicles shall have the aisles and spaces clearly marked. Any off-street parking areas for multiple-family, industrial and business uses shall be hard surfaced, paved with asphalt, concrete, or other comparable hard surfaced material, unless an exception to this requirement is granted by the plan commission. 
(5)  Screening. Any off-street parking area other than that provided for a residence which abuts or faces a residence district shall provide a planting screen, landscaped fence or wall at least four feet in height along the side abutting or fronting on a residence district. 
(6)  Offset. No off-street parking area shall include space within ten feet of an abutting residential lot line, except as such parking area may be accessory to a residence. 
(7)  Lighting. Lights provided in any parking area shall be hooded and directed so as to minimize glare and illumination of adjacent residential property or public road. All parking areas are required to be lighted in compliance with the following criteria: 
Maximum average maintained footcandles 	1.5 
Average to minimum footcandle ratio 	3:1 
Maximum to minimum footcandle ratio 	16:1 
 
Maximum allowable light trespass measured at the boundary of the property shall not exceed 1.0 cumulative footcandle where abutting a non-residentially-zoned property. Maximum allowable light trespass measured at the boundary of the property shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle where abutting a residentially-zoned property or public right-of-way. The plan commission may exercise discretion in regard to light trespass into public rights-of-way if it is determined to be beneficial to safe lighting conditions of the adjacent sidewalks. 
(8)  Curbs or barriers. Curbs or barriers in all required parking areas shall be installed so as to prevent the parked vehicles from extending over any lot lines. 
(9)  Floor area defined. For purposes of determining the off-street parking requirements for commercial establishments, "floor area" shall include the gross floor area as defined in section 52-11 and as applied elsewhere in this chapter. 
(10)  Number of parking stalls. 
Use 	Minimum Parking Required 
Automobile repair garages and service stations 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area (exclusive of service bays and pumping stations) 
Athletic fields 	12 spaces for each improved soccer field, baseball or softball diamond or football field 
Churches, theaters, auditoriums, community centers, vocational and night schools, and other places of public assembly 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Public and private secondary and elementary schools 	1 space for each employee, plus 1 space for each 10 students of 16 years of age or more 
Dwellings: 	
1- and 2-family 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Multiple-family 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Elderly multiple-family 	1.5 spaces per dwelling unit 
Fitness clubs, recreation centers, bowling alleys, gymnasiums 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Financial institutions, service businesses, and government offices 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Funeral homes 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Hospitals, treatment centers, nursing homes, and other long-term health care centers 	2 spaces per bed 
Lodges and private clubs 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Manufacturing and processing plants, laboratories, and warehouses 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Medical and dental clinics 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Motels, hotels, tourist rooms and bed and breakfasts 	1.5 spaces per guest room 
Offices 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. feet of gross floor area 
Retail stores 	1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area used for retail purposes 
Restaurants, bars, places of entertainment 	1 space for each 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Warehouses without employees 	1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
 
(11)  Uses not listed. In the case of structures or uses not mentioned, the provision for a use which is similar shall apply and will be determined by the plan commission. 
(12)  Combinations. Combinations of any of the above uses shall provide the total of the number of stalls required for each individual use. 
(13)  Exception for elderly housing. Where in the opinion of the plan commission, an elderly housing development may need less than 1.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit due to the nature of the facility or the fact that many of the residents will not own or drive automobiles, the plan commission may grant an exception to the required 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit. 
(Code 1997, § 17.52; Rep. and Recr. #411; Cr. #455; Am. #474; Am. #491)  
Sec. 52-177. - Driveways. 
All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced or extended after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Islands. Islands between driveway openings shall be provided with a minimum of 12 feet between all driveways and six feet at all lot lines. 
(2)  Openings. Openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall not exceed 24 feet in width at the right-of-way line and 30 feet in width at the roadway, except that in business and industrial districts, the openings may be increased to 30 feet and 36 feet, respectively. 
(3)  Vehicular entrances and exits. Vehicular entrances and exits to drive-in banks and restaurants; motels; funeral homes; vehicular sales, service, washing and repair stations; garages; or public parking lots shall be not less than 200 feet from any pedestrian entrance or exit to a school, college, university, church, hospital, park, playground, library, public emergency shelter or other place of public assembly. 
(Code 1997, § 17.53; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-178. - Highway access. 
(a)  No direct public or private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of the following, except by plan commission approval: 
(1)  Arterial streets intersecting another arterial street within 100 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
(2)  Streets intersecting an arterial street within 50 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
(b)  Access barriers, such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping or other topographic barriers, shall be erected to prevent unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the above specified streets or highways. 
(c)  Temporary access to the above rights-of-way may be granted by the plan commission after review and recommendation by the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be temporary, revocable and subject to any conditions required and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months. 
(Code 1997, § 17.54; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-179. - Parking of trucks and equipment. 
No vehicular equipment of a commercial or industrial nature, shall be parked or stored for more than two consecutive hours and four accumulative hours during any 24-hour period on any lot in any zoning district except business districts or as follows: 
(1)  Agricultural equipment (such as farm tractors, plows, farm plows, seeders, combines, cultivators, trucks owned and used by the farmer in the operation of his farm, etc.) used in a farm operation. 
(2)  One panel van, or pickup truck used in the conduct of a conforming business activity being carried on in a residential or agricultural district. No limitation shall be placed on vans or pickup trucks if they are used for private nonbusiness or noncommercial recreational purposes. 
(3)  A conditional use permit pursuant to section 52-136 may be granted to permit the parking of commercial or industrial types of vehicles in any zoning district. In business districts where such vehicles are necessary to an otherwise permitted business or commercial use, a conditional use permit will not be required and there are no limitations as to the number of such vehicles that may be parked on the property except as may be hereinafter established under the provisions of the applicable zoning district. 
(Code 1997, § 17.545; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Secs. 52-180—52-196. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, LOTS AND PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO THIS CHAPTER 
 
Sec. 52-197. - Existing nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Nonconforming uses. The continued lawful use of a building, premises, structure, or fixture existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall not be prohibited although the use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter. The nonconforming use may not be extended. The total structural repairs or alterations in such a nonconforming building, premises, structure, or fixture shall not during its life exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the building, premises, structure, or fixture unless permanently changed to a conforming use. If the nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 12 months, any future use of the building, premises, structure, or fixture shall conform to this chapter. 
(b)  Restoration of certain nonconforming structures. Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a nonconforming structure or building which is damaged or destroyed may be restored to the size, location and use that existed immediately prior to the damage or destruction, without limitations relating to the cost of repair, reconstruction or improvement if all of the following apply: 
(1)  The nonconforming structure was damaged or destroyed on or after March 2, 2006. 
(2)  The damage or destruction was caused by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation. 
The size of the structure may be larger than the size of the structure immediately prior to the structure being damaged or destroyed if necessary for the structure to comply with applicable state or federal requirements. The determination as to whether applicable state or federal regulations require that the structure be increased in size shall be determined by the building inspector. 
(Code 1997, § 17.55; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #719 )  
Sec. 52-198. - Abolishment. 
If such nonconforming use is discontinued or terminated for a period of 12 months, any future use of the structure, land, or water shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. When a nonconforming use or structure is damaged by fire, explosion, flood, the public enemy or other calamity to the extent of more than 50 percent of its current market value, it shall not be restored, except so as to comply with the use provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 17.56; Rep. and Recr. #411; Del. #437)  
Sec. 52-199. - Existing nonconforming lots. 
Nonconforming lots on record in the county register of deeds office before the effective date or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be used in conformance with the use and developmental regulations of the district in which they are located. The owner of a nonconforming lot may apply to the plan commission for issuance of a special exception to any developmental regulation established by this chapter. The plan commission may grant a special exception, taking into consideration the impact, including, but not limited to, grading and drainage considerations, that the granting of the special exception will have on the adjoining properties in the surrounding neighborhood, and may impose such restrictions or conditions as the plan commission deems necessary for the protection of the adjacent properties, the surrounding neighborhood, and the public interest and welfare. 
(Code 1997, § 17.58; Rep. and Recr. #411; Am. #719 )  
Sec. 52-200. - Changes and substitutions. 
Once a nonconforming use or structure has been changed to conform, it shall not revert back to a nonconforming use or structure. Once the zoning board of appeals has permitted the substitution of a more restrictive nonconforming use for an existing nonconforming use, it shall become subject to all the conditions required by the zoning board of appeals. 
(Code 1997, § 17.59; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-201. - Nonconforming characteristics of residential structures. 
Residential structures which encroach upon setback and other yard requirements, but which met setback and yard requirements at the time of construction, and which comply with the use regulations of the district in which they are located may be structurally altered provided they do not create a greater degree of encroachment or a greater degree of nonconformity. 
(Code 1997, § 17.60; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-202. - Prior permit. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building or part thereof for which a building permit has been issued before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and the construction of which shall have been substantially undertaken on site within six months from the date of such permit. Any use of such building or premises which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which located shall be considered a legal nonconforming use, subject to regulation as such. 
(Code 1997, § 17.61; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Secs. 52-203—52-227. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SIGNS AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING 
 
Sec. 52-228. - Intent. 
The intent of this article is to establish guidelines that will: 
(1)  Promote public safety, welfare, convenience, and enjoyment of travel and the free flow of traffic within the city by reducing distractions and obstructions from signs that adversely affect traffic safety; 
(2)  Allow for an understanding of the rights, requirements, and application process necessary for the application and maintenance of the signage in the city; 
(3)  Discourage excessive visual competition per the existing sign code; 
(4)  Preserve or enhance the natural beauty and unique physical characteristics of the city by promoting compatibility with the surroundings while allowing the expression of the identity; and 
(5)  Protect property values within the city. 
(Code 1997, § 17.64; Rep. and Recr. #411; Cr. #586)  
Sec. 52-229. - Permit required. 
(a)  No sign shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a building permit, except those signs excepted in section 52-230 and those signs provided for in section 52-231(7) and (8) and without being in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The sign shall also meet all the structural requirements of chapter 8, article II. 
(b)  Upon vacation of the premises or use for which a permit is issued, the permittee shall cause the removal of the sign or sign message, as applicable, within 60 days of the date of vacation. 
(c)  If a sign meets all requirements of the city's sign code and the overlying sign program under the conditional use permit for the building on which it is proposed to be constructed if applicable, a permit may be issued by staff after approval by the plan commission. Appeals of the plan commission decisions must go before the common council. 
(d)  All signs not falling under subsection (c) of this section must also receive site plan and appearance review as provided in article II of this chapter. No provisions of this section shall preclude the plan commission from attaching additional restrictions or requirements with respect to size, height, lighting, materials, design, or location of signs as allowed in article II of this chapter. 
(e)  All directional signs not existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be required to undergo plan commission review prior to issuance of a sign permit. 
(Code 1997, § 17.65; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #603; Am. #719 )  
Sec. 52-230. - Signs permitted in residential, agricultural and conservancy districts. 
All signs are prohibited in all residential, agricultural and conservancy districts, except the following: 
(1)  Signs over show windows or doors. Signs over show windows or doors of a nonconforming business establishment announcing without display or elaboration only the name and occupation of the proprietor and not to exceed two feet in height and ten feet in length. 
(2)  Real estate signs. Real estate signs not to exceed eight square feet in area which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which such signs are temporarily located. 
(3)  Name, occupation and warning signs. Name, occupation and warning signs not to exceed three square feet located on the premises. 
(4)  Bulletin boards. Bulletin boards for public, charitable or religious institutions not to exceed eight square feet in area located on the premises. 
(5)  Memorial signs. Memorial signs, tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of metal and affixed flat against a structure. 
(6)  Official signs. Official signs, such as traffic control, parking restrictions, information, notices and directional signs. 
(7)  Subdivision entrance. Subdivision entrance or residential project identification signs not to exceed 20 square feet in area or eight feet in height may be permitted with plan commission approval. Signs permitted by this subsection may be exempt from the setback requirements of the district upon approval by the plan commission. 
(8)  Review needed. When a business or commercial entity is permitted in a residential, agricultural, or conservancy district by conditional use, signage shall be reviewed pursuant to the provisions of section 52-232. 
(9)  Directional signs. 
a.  Businesses. Directional signs which give direction to businesses not conducted on the premises on which the sign is located on may be permitted only when authorized by the plan commission and must comply with specifications in section 52-231(1). Directional signs shall not exceed eight square feet in area. 
b.  Off-premises. Applications for off-premises directional signs shall include a copy of written permission from the owner of the premises on which the proposed sign is to be located. 
c.  Nonconforming business. 
1.  Any business operation which was made nonconforming by the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in 1964, whether or not such business has received a conditional use permit based on that nonconformance, may have off-premises directional signs after recommendation from the plan commission and approval by the common council. Such signs shall comply with section 52-231(1). 
2.  The granting of a permit for such signs shall be at the sole discretion of the common council and approval shall not be available to the applicant as a matter of right. 
(10)  Signs allowed by conditional use. Signage ancillary to an operation permitted by conditional use may be allowed if approved by the plan commission and common council. 
(Code 1997, § 17.66; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #603; Cr. #646)  
Sec. 52-231. - Signs permitted in all business and industrial districts. 
Signs are permitted in business and industrial districts in accordance with the following regulations. In order to provide for uniformity, signage in all business and industrial districts shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Criteria for signs except CBD-1 Central Business District. 
a.  Poles and pole facade colors shall be harmonious to the architectural surroundings. 
b.  Directional signs shall contain city letterhead logo sailboats only, in a rounded cap area at the top center of the sign. Sign area, exclusive of the city logo area, shall not exceed 22 square feet. 
c.  Identification signs for development areas at intersection of STH 83 and main road leading into development shall have full skirt and cap treatment. 
d.  Identification signs shall use the same logo and cap as the pylon sign for each development area. 
e.  Menu board type sign monument sign shall be permitted at entrance to individual business developments within a larger area listing individual tenants in each individual business development. 
f.  No more than one pylon sign shall be permitted on a lot, except as approved by the plan commission conditional use - planned developments CU-PD. 
g.  Directional signs may be reflective or internally illuminated. No floodlights will be permitted. 
h.  Pylon signs may be internally illuminated. 
(2)  Signs permitted in the CBD-1, CBD-2, CBD-3, B-1, and B-1-A districts. On-premises signs are permitted having a total signage area per premises not exceeding two square feet for each foot of street frontage for occupants of the ground floor with a maximum of 50 square feet for each sign and one square foot for each 100 square feet of floor space occupied for occupants of other floors with a maximum of 32 square feet per occupant. Where any ground floor space is shared by more than one occupant, the permitted area shall be divided among them in the same proportion as floor space is occupied by them. Where a premises has more than two occupants and has a name distinct from that of any occupant as in an office building, an additional one square foot for each foot of street frontage with a maximum of 32 feet is permitted for signs advertising only the name of the premises. Where an occupant has an entrance on an alley, an additional ten square feet is permitted for signs mounted on the alley side of the building. Signs shall be subject to the setback rules applicable to buildings in the zoning district where located, except that no setback shall be required in the CBD-1 district. The plan commission may grant an exception to the sign setback requirement where such an exception would not interfere with traffic safety or would be inconsistent with the objectives and purposes of this chapter. 
(3)  Signs permitted in the B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5, B-6 and M-1 districts. On-premises signs are permitted having a total signage area per premises not exceeding six square feet for each ten feet or fraction of frontage or 60 square feet for each acre or fraction of area of the premises, whichever is larger. As an additional alternate method of computing allowable signage per premises, the square footage of all signs may be 1½ times the building frontage. Building frontage shall be determined by the base measure in lineal feet of a building facade. No sign shall have an area exceeding 150 square feet. Where a premises has more than one occupant, the permitted area shall be divided among them in the same proportion as floor space and outdoor sales space is occupied by them. Where a premises has more than two occupants and has a name distinct from that of any occupant as in a shopping center or office building, an additional two square feet of sign area for each ten feet or fraction of street frontage with a maximum of 200 square feet is permitted only for signs advertising only the name of the premises. Signs shall be subject to the setback rules applicable to buildings in the zoning district where located. 
(4)  Expressway district. 
a.  Created. For purposes of this article, there is hereby created a district to be known as the expressway district. The expressway district is an area extending 1,000 feet from the centerline of I-94 and 2,100 feet westerly and 2,400 feet easterly of the centerline of STH 83. 
b.  Expressway district modifications. 
1.  Number. There may be one ground or freestanding sign per premises in addition to other authorized signs. 
2.  Sign area. Ground or freestanding signs shall not exceed 200 square feet in area. 
3.  Where a premises has more than one occupant. Where a premises has more than one occupant and has a name distinct from that of any single occupant, as in a shopping center or office building complex, one ground or freestanding sign shall be permitted per shopping center or office complex, which shall be limited to setting forth the name of the shopping center or office complex. 
4.  Height. Ground or freestanding signs may be increased in height by an amount equal to the differential in grade elevation between the centerline of the nearest lane of travel of I-94 measured at right angles from the centerline and the sign, but in no event shall any ground sign exceed 20 feet above the elevation of the centerline of the traveled lane. 
5.  Other on-premises signs. All other on-premises signs shall conform to the provisions of, and be limited by, the requirements of subsection (2) of this section. 
6.  Special purpose advertising signs, reader boards or menu signs may be permitted upon approval of the plan commission, notwithstanding the total signage area per premises limitations contained in subsection (2) of this section, provided there is only one such sign per premises not exceeding 40 square feet in area. The plan commission shall consider design, construction and location of such signs. 
(5)  Directional signs. 
a.  Directional signs giving direction to businesses not conducted on the premises on which the sign is located shall be permitted in business and industrial districts only when authorized by the plan commission to encourage sign design consistency. Directional signs may be exempt from the setback requirements of the district upon approval of the plan commission. Directional signs displayed in a common location shall be uniform in size, general design and overall appearance. 
b.  Applications for off-premises directional signs shall include a copy of written permission from the owner of the premises on which the proposed sign is to be located. 
(6)  Roof signs. Roof signs shall be permitted as a conditional use in business and industrial districts. The provisions of article V of this chapter relating to conditional uses shall apply to all applications for roof signs so far as applicable. The height of a roof sign, together with the building height, may not exceed the maximum building height restriction for principle buildings in the district in which the sign is located. 
(7)  Real estate signs permitted in the CBD-1, CBD-2, CBD-3, B-1, B-1-A, and B-2 districts. Real estate signs not to exceed 16 square feet in area, which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which such signs are temporarily located. 
(8)  Real estate signs permitted in the B-3, B-4, B-5, B-6 and M-1 districts. Real estate signs not to exceed 32 square feet in area, which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which such signs are temporarily located. 
(9)  Multi-tenant sign programs. 
a.  All planned developments, commercial condominiums, and multi-tenant buildings owned, operated, or managed by a single business entity, including, but not limited to, office parks, industrial parks, office centers, retail centers and office and limited business structures, churches and schools which have a campus, must have a multi-tenant sign program if more than one sign will be erected in conjunction with such building, development or center, as defined in this chapter. 
b.  All multi-tenant sign programs must receive plan commission approval. 
c.  Each individual sign proposed in accordance with an approved multi-tenant sign program must be applied for and permitted separately in accordance with this chapter and in no event shall any recommendation or approval of a multi-tenant sign program be deemed an approval of or a permission to construct any particular sign under that program. All applications for permits for such individual signs must be approved per section 52-229. 
d.  A multi-tenant sign program, as presented to the plan commission, shall include the following components: 
1.  An aesthetically developed theme on color, size, illumination, and style. 
2.  A proposed location of all signs for the building, development or center; where possible, signs shall be centered over tenant spaces. 
3.  The proposed size of individual signs which may be expressed in maximums and minimums for purposes of the proposed sign program, but which must be proposed in exact terms when application is made for such individual signs after approval of the program. 
4.  Categories of signs proposed which may include some or all of the following: 
(i)  Identification signs. 
(ii)  Tenant signs. 
(iii)  Tenant/directory board. 
(iv)  Entrance markers. 
(v)  Traffic directional signs. 
(vi)  Such other signs as requested by the applicant. 
5.  Type of signage proposed (i.e., letter style, lighting, etc.). 
6.  Blueprints, drawings and written policies governing the color, size, style, location and other features of the proposed signs. 
e.  The plan commission, in its discretion, will consider the type and location of the building site, the proposed tenant mix, the size of the development and such other factors as it deems appropriate in evaluating a multi-tenant sign program. 
(10)  Electronic message systems shall be permitted in business zoned parcels directly abutting the rights-of-way of STH 83, USH16, and 1-94 or the associated frontage roads as delineated in the EMC Boundary District. 
a.  Only one electronic messaging system shall be permitted per lot. 
b.  Electronic messaging shall be limited to a maximum of 50 percent of the allowable sign area not to exceed 75 total square feet. 
c.  Light intensity of electronic messaging systems shall be limited to less than 0.3 footcandles above ambient lighting levels at the property boundary. 
d.  Electronic messaging systems shall be limited to a rate of change not less than six seconds. No message shall be segmented. 
(Code 1997, § 17.67; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #603) 
( Ord. No. 732 , § 2, 3-19-2018)  
Sec. 52-232. - Election campaign signage. 
(a)  Signs exempt from permit. 
(1)  Consistent with the purpose and scope of this section, the common council recognizes that certain temporary, necessary or limited-purpose signs may be displayed without obtaining a permit, subject to applicable safety and aesthetic regulations herein. The common council finds that the following signs may be displayed without a permit because they serve a governmental purpose; are permitted or mandated by city ordinance, state or federal law; allow freedom of speech and expression in a timely manner; allow freedom of speech and expression during election periods; or because the size, location or duration of the sign as regulated herein is not significant enough to require review and a permit prior to display of such sign. 
(2)  No permit shall be required for the following signs when displayed according to the following provisions and any other requirements of this Code or applicable law. Exempt signs may not be illuminated unless expressly stated herein or elsewhere in this chapter. 
a.  Election campaign signs. A sign containing a "political message" displayed during an "election campaign period," as those terms are defined in Wis. Stats. § 12.04, shall be exempt from the requirement of obtaining a permit required by this section. All such election signs shall be removed within seven days following the conclusion of the final election campaign. 
b.  Banners, American flags and pennants. Banners, American flags and pennants shall not be permitted to be attached to the signs. 
(b)  Election campaign signs disclaimers required. Every communication which is paid for by political funds must contain a disclaimer or attribution statement identifying the source of the funds paying for the communication. This includes every printed advertisement, billboard, handbill, sample ballot, television or radio advertisement or other communication paid for by political funds. Also, it includes items such as T-shirts, bumper stickers and yard signs. The disclaimer must use the words "Paid for by" (abbreviations shall not be used for this language) followed by the name of the committee or group making the payment or assuming responsibility for the communication and the name of the treasurer or other authorized agent of the committee. When the communication is being paid for through an in-kind contribution, it must bear the disclaimer of the recipient campaign committee. Abbreviations may not be used for the name of a candidate or campaign committee. No disclaimer is required on the following: 
(1)  Personal correspondence not reproduced by machine for distribution. 
(2)  A single personal item which is not reproduced or manufactured by machine or other equipment. 
(3)  Nomination papers even if the papers contain biographical information. 
(4)  Pins, buttons, pens, balloons, nail files and similar small items on which a disclaimer cannot be conveniently printed. 
(5)  Envelopes which have campaign committee identification printed on them. Disclaimers must be included on each separate page of a political communication, including letterhead and enclosures. 
(c)  Placement of signs. The city has sign ordinances regarding the placement of signs. Please refer to section 52-174 for these regulations. 
(Code 1997, § 17.673; Rep. and Recr. #411; Cr. #653)  
Sec. 52-233. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Temporary signs may be authorized in any district for not more than 90 days at a time by written permit issued by staff, authorized upon a finding on the basis of information which shall show the size, shape, content, height, type of construction, location of such signs and period during which the sign will be displayed. The proposed signs must be necessary for the direction of the public and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter. Signs may be allowed upon payment of a fee for each permit and renewal of each sign. Entities with a 501(c)(3) tax exemption or entities that are eligible to apply for a 501(c)(3) tax exemption are exempt from paying a fee. 
(b)  The size of a temporary sign may not exceed the maximum sign size allowable in the zoning district. See sections 52-230 and 52-231. 
(c)  Any sign which is not fastened, anchored and resting on a permanent foundation shall be considered a portable sign and shall not be permitted in any district, unless approved by written approval by staff and issued a portable sign permit pursuant to section 52-239. 
(Code 1997, § 17.68; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #646)  
Sec. 52-234. - Sign placement regulations. 
(a)  Wall signs. Wall signs placed against the exterior walls of buildings shall not extend more than 12 inches outside of a building's wall surface. 
(b)  Projecting signs. Projecting signs fastened to, suspended from or supported by a building shall not extend more than six feet into any required yard, more than three feet into any public right-of-way, be less than eight feet from all side lot lines and be less than eight feet above the sidewalk nor 15 feet above a driveway or an alley. 
(c)  Ground signs. Ground signs shall not exceed 20 feet in height and shall meet all yard requirements for the district in which they are located. 
(d)  Permanent window signs. Permanent window signs shall be placed only on the inside of commercial buildings and shall not exceed 25 percent of the glass area of the pane upon which the sign is displayed. 
(e)  Facing. No sign except those permitted in section 52-230 shall be permitted to face a residential district within 100 feet of such district boundary. 
(f)  Conflict with traffic signs or access. Signs shall not resemble, imitate or approximate the shape, size, form or color of railroad or traffic signs, signals or devices. Signs shall not obstruct or interfere with the effectiveness of railroad or traffic signs, signals or devices. No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape and no sign shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility. 
(g)  Signs not related to the use of premises. Any sign not directly related to the uses of the premises on which it is located shall conform to the setback and offset requirements which would apply to a building in that district. 
(h)  Hazards or nuisance prohibited. No sign, billboard or other advertising media which creates a hazard or dangerous distraction to vehicular traffic or a nuisance to adjoining residential property shall be permitted in any district. In no case shall the lighting intensity of any sign, whether resulting from internal or external illumination, exceed 40 footcandles when measured with a standard light meter held perpendicular to the sign face at a distance of ten inches. 
(Code 1997, § 17.69; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #603)  
Sec. 52-235. - Exterior lighting and illumination of signs. 
(a)  All lighting for external illumination of buildings or grounds or for the illumination of signs shall be directed away from and shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts and shall also be so arranged as to not adversely affect driver visibility on adjacent thoroughfares (see sections 52-27 and 52-176(7)). 
(b)  The use of flashing or revolving lights other than traffic control lights is specifically prohibited in all districts. This prohibition shall apply to all signs, including portable or temporary signs. 
(c)  Signs which convey changing noncommercial information such as time or temperature, by words, letters or images represented by lights of uniform color on a uniform background where the words, letters or images are not in motion are permitted. Such signs may not include changing advertisements for products or services or other messages of a commercial nature. The rate of change for any message, excepting time and temperature, may not be less than 30 minutes. 
(d)  Light intensity of electronic messaging systems shall be limited to less than 0.3 footcandles above ambient lighting levels at the property boundary. 
(Code 1997, § 17.70; Rep. and Recr. #411; Am. #474; Am. #491; Am. # 719 ) 
( Ord. No. 732 , § 3, 3-19-2018)  
Sec. 52-236. - Bonds. 
Every applicant for a building permit for a sign to be located completely or partially within a public right-of-way shall, before the permit is granted, execute a surety bond in a sum to be fixed by the administrator, but not to exceed $25,000.00, and it shall be of a form and type approved by the city attorney, indemnifying the city against all loss, costs, damages or expenses incurred or sustained by or recovered against the city by reason of erection, construction or maintenance of such sign. 
(Code 1997, § 17.71; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-237. - Signs within a public right-of-way. 
Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any sign located completely or partially within a public right-of-way, a liability insurance policy is required. The city attorney shall determine the nature and amount of the liability policy to indemnify the city against all liabilities. The required bond and insurance policy shall be renewed annually for the life of the sign. Should the liability policy lapse, the sign shall be removed by the city with the city's expenses covered by the bond and/or assessed to the owner. 
(Code 1997, § 17.72; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-238. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Signs lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which do not conform with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed nonconforming signs. 
(b)  A nonconforming sign may be continued and maintained exactly as it existed at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(c)  A nonconforming sign shall not: 
(1)  Be changed to another nonconforming sign. 
(2)  Have any changes made in the words or symbols used or the message displayed on the sign unless the sign is an off-premises advertising sign, a bulletin board or substantially similar type of sign, specifically designed for periodic change of message. 
(3)  Be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign or so as to change the shape, size, type or design of the sign. 
(4)  Be reestablished after the activity, business or usage to which it relates has been discontinued for 30 days or longer. 
(5)  Be reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the reproduction cost. 
(d)  The zoning board of appeals may permit variances from subsection (c) of this section or variances permitting the erection or maintenance of a nonconforming sign only upon the grounds established by law for the granting of zoning variances or upon a finding that the grant of a variance will reduce the degree of nonconformance of an existing sign or will result in the removal of one or more lawfully nonconforming signs and replacement by a sign more in keeping with the spirit, purpose, and provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Nonconforming signs, as defined in this chapter, may remain in a nonconforming state effective from the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived until such time that a new business plan of operation or building permit is filed with the city. Thereafter, the sign shall be brought into conformity with this chapter by obtaining a sign permit or being removed. 
(Code 1997, § 17.73; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #603)  
Sec. 52-239. - Sandwich board or A-frame style signs. 
Sandwich board or A-frame style signs are permitted for commercial businesses in the city without permit, review, or fee collection, so long as the board or sign complies with all of the following provisions: 
(1)  The signs shall be located directly in front of the business frontage either next to the building face or at the street side of the sidewalk by newsstands, streetlights or other amenities. On multi-occupancy parcels, signs must be spaced at least 40 feet apart. 
(2)  Only one sign shall be permitted per business. 
(3)  The sign shall be removed from the right-of-way at the end of the business day and not left outdoors overnight. 
(4)  The sign shall not exceed two feet wide by 3½ feet high. 
(5)  Signs shall be constructed of durable materials (steel, iron, metal, wood, or corrugated plastic) and shall be maintained in good condition. The use of cardboard, paper, canvas or similar impermanent material is prohibited. 
(6)  The use of metallic or fluorescent paint shall be prohibited, and all permanent lettering must be of professional quality. Creativity is encouraged, and all signs shall be maintained and kept in good repair. 
(7)  The signs shall not be lighted. 
(8)  The signs shall not interfere with streetlights, street trees, utility poles, benches, ramps, fire hydrants or other structures, and shall not impede traffic visibility or vision corners as regulated in section 52-174. 
(9)  The content shall be limited to the name and trademark of the business establishment, a listing of products for sale and prices, or the advertisement of special products and prices. 
(10)  The signs shall not advertise a business or products, goods and services located on another property. 
(11)  Signs located on the sidewalk shall not impede pedestrian traffic, shall not cause the minimum accessible path to be less than five feet in width, and shall not interfere with the turning movements of a wheelchair. 
(12)  An approved business plan of operation is required prior to the installation of the sign. The sign rights of the business are nontransferable. 
(13)  If the sign is to be located within the public right-of-way, the business owners must agree to indemnify the city from any and all liability arising out of the placement of the sign in a public right-of-way. The business owner also must provide the city with proof of a minimum general liability insurance of $1,000,000.00 in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, and indicating the city as an additional insured. 
(14)  Signs placed in violation of this section will result in the immediate removal of the sign by the city. 
(15)  Signs within the public right-of-way may be moved or removed by the city for municipal purposes, including for the benefit of the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Code 1997, § 17.734; Rep. and Recr. #411; Cr. #597)  
Sec. 52-240. - Enforcement. 
The city administrator or his/her appointee is authorized to remove any illegal sign as defined by this chapter or any sign that is displayed under an expired permit. 
(1)  Before taking action to require removal of any illegal sign, the city administrator or his/her appointee shall give a written compliance notice to the holders of the permit for the sign or, if no permit has been issued, to the owner of the premises on which such sign is located and to the lessee of the premises to which such sign pertains. The notice shall state the reasons and grounds for removal, specifying the deficiencies or defects in such sign with reasonable definiteness, and the violations charged, if any. Such notice shall specify what repairs, if any, will make the sign conform to the requirements of this chapter and specify that the sign must be removed or made to conform to the provisions of this chapter within the compliance period provided below. Service of notice in the case of permanent signage shall be made on the parties specified above as follows: 
a.  By delivering personally copies of the notice to the parties; 
b.  By leaving a copy of the notice with any person in charge of the premises; or 
c.  In the event that no such person can be found on the premises, by affixing a copy of the notice in a conspicuous position at an entrance to the premises and by the certified mailing of copies of the notice to the post office addresses of the holders of the permit as specified in the application for the permit, if any, or to the last known post office addresses of the parties specified above. 
(2)  Service of notice in the case of temporary signage shall be made via standard mail. The start date of the compliance period shall be identified in the violation letter from the city administrator or his/her appointee. 
(3)  Compliance period. 
a.  The compliance period for permanent signs shall be 30 days. 
b.  The compliance period for temporary signs shall be ten days. 
(4)  Re-erection of any sign or any substantially similar sign on the same premises after a compliance notice has been issued shall be deemed a continuance of the original violation and the sign may be removed without a second notice sent to the owner of the premises on which such sign pertains, and/or the business entity displayed on the sign provided that they received the original violation letter. 
(5)  If the holders of the permit of the owner and lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located have not demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city administrator of his/her appointee that the sign has been removed or brought into compliance with the provisions of the chapter by the end of the compliance period, the city administrator or his/her appointee shall issue municipal citations to the owner and/or tenant. 
(6)  Removal. The city administrator or his/her appointee is authorized to cause the removal of any sign found to be illegal. The actual costs and expense of any such removal by the city administrator or his/her appointee shall be borne by the holders of the permit or, if no permit had been issued, by the owner of the premises on which the sign is located and the lessee of the premises to which such sign pertains. All such parties shall be jointly and severally liable for such cost and expense and subject to the penalties provided by the provisions of this chapter. Removed signs shall be held by the city department of public works for no less than 90 days. 
(7)  Violators shall be subject to section 52-296. Each act of violation shall be subject to a forfeiture of no less than $50.00 per day. 
(Code 1997, § 17.735; Rep. and Recr. #411; Cr. #586)  
Sec. 52-241. - Downtown directional signs. 
The purpose of this section is to allow and regulate the use of downtown directional signs (DDS) within the municipal limits of the city. 
(1)  Definitions. The following terms or phrases, when used herein, shall have the following meaning: 
Downtown directional sign (DDS) means a sign or group of signs of uniform and standard size, color, typeface, material, and construction located within the right-of-way of a public street or located on publicly owned property giving direction to off-premises public facilities, lodging, or consumer attractions such as shops, amusement, restaurants, service businesses, etc., available on a yearly, leasable basis. 
(2)  Qualification for DDS. To qualify for a DDS, the following requirements must be met: 
a.  Have an approved business plan of operation by the city plan commission, or be municipally owned. 
b.  Business or facility does not have direct access to Genesee Street. 
c.  Business or facility must be located within the central business district as determined in the land use plan. The central business district includes those businesses or facilities from Genesee Street East to Bleeker Street; from Genesee Street West to Cushing Park Road. 
(3)  Types of business or facilities eligible for DDS. 
a.  Public facilities (municipal offices, parks, parking lots, etc.). 
b.  Lodging (hotels, motels, resorts, boarding houses, bed and breakfast establishments). 
c.  Consumer and service businesses (shops, museums, restaurants, financial services, legal services, etc.). 
(4)  Application and permit required. 
a.  An application is required for the installation of DDS. The application is referenced as "Exhibit A" to the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
b.  Each DDS shall have a life of one year. 
c.  Each qualifying business may only have one DDS. 
d.  Each qualifying business shall submit an application for a DDS which is due by the close of business on March 1 annually, to the city clerk-treasurer's office. 
e.  A lottery system will be used to determine which qualifying business shall receive a sign on an annual basis. 
f.  Upon completion of lottery, the qualified business shall pay a $100.00 fee. 
g.  Failure to maintain a business license or failure to meet any of the qualifying conditions or discontinuance or close of business will prompt revocation of the permit for the DDS. 
(5)  Location, construction and materials. 
a.  DDs shall be located within the right-of-way of a public street or located on publicly owned property. 
b.  DDS will be installed along Genesee Street at the intersections of Wells Street, Main Street and Milwaukee Street. 
c.  All DDS must be purchased by the city. 
d.  DDS shall have a uniform font of san serif and no logos. 
e.  DDS will be listed in alphabetical order. 
f.  No more than seven leasable DDS will be permitted on one side of the sign. 
g.  DDS may only be purchased and installed by the city. 
h.  One leasable DDS will be reserved for city-owned property/operations. 
(Code 1997, § 17.736; Rep. and Recr. #411; Cr. #611)  
Sec. 52-242. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Directional sign means a sign which guides or directs pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
Eave means, for the purpose of sign regulation, the lower edge of an angled roof or the top edge of the wall in the case of flat-roofed buildings. Surfaces at an angle of 20 degrees or less from vertical are to be considered as wall rather than roof. 
Ground sign means a sign which is attached to the ground independent of any building. 
Harmonious means having component elements that are compatible with building aesthetics. 
Identification signs means signs that identify large developments or groupings for any multi-tenant establishment. 
Projecting sign means a sign other than a wall sign which is attached to or supported by a building or structure and projecting more than eight inches from the face of the building or structure. The surface of a projecting sign may be parallel to or at an angle to the outside wall surface of a building or structure, but does not project above the eave. 
Roof sign means a sign mounted on a building, situated in total or in part above the eave of that part of the building to which it is mounted. 
Sign means a name, identification, image, description, display or illustration, which is affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land, which directs attention to an object, project, place, activity, facility, service, event, attraction, person, institution, organization or business and which is visible from any street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park or other public property. Customary displays of merchandise or objects and material without lettering placed behind a store window are not signs or parts of signs. 
Sign area means the entire area within a circle, triangle or parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. 
Sign, on-premises, means a sign which advertises only goods, services, facilities, events or attractions available on the premises where located, identifies the owner or occupant or directs traffic on the premises. All other signs are off-premises signs. 
Temporary sign means a sign with a commercial message permitted for a limited period of time. 
Wall sign means a sign which is in any manner affixed to any exterior wall of a building structure and which projects not more than 12 inches from the building or structure wall or a sign which is painted on any exterior wall, but does not project above the eave. 
Window sign means a sign which is on the inside of a window, including those painted on the glass and neon or backlit signs oriented toward the building exterior. 
(Code 1997, § 17.74; Rep. and Recr. #411; Cr. #586; Am. #586)  
Secs. 52-243—52-262. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT AS A CONDITIONAL USE 
 
Sec. 52-263. - Intent. 
(a)  Standards and exceptions established. Planned development projects are substantially different in character from other conditional uses and for this reason, specific and additional standards and exceptions are hereby established to regulate planned development projects. 
(b)  Compliance. The planned development process provides a flexible regulatory framework designed to allow developers greater freedom, imagination and flexibility in the development of land while ensuring substantial compliance with the basic intent of the zoning code and comprehensive plan. At the same time the PD process ensures the city that key development parcels and large land holdings will be developed with a comprehensive and cohesive unified development plan. 
(c)  As conditional uses. A planned development may be permitted as a conditional use in any district. No planned development is permitted in any lake district, unless the parcel to be developed has a minimum of 200 feet of lake frontage. A planned development project may also contain mixed dwelling types and mixed compatible uses. Unless modified by specific provisions of this section, the provisions and requirements of article V of this chapter shall apply. 
(d)  Stages. All PDs are submitted and approved in two stages: 
(1)  The first stage is a general development plan which shows the entire property holding. The general development plan shows the general locations of buildings or building envelopes, common open spaces, parking and drive areas and principal landscape features. If the development is proposed to occur in phases, sequence of development should be indicated. It is recognized that general development plans are often submitted prior to the identification of the ultimate land user or the specific land uses. 
(2)  The second stage is a detailed plan which shows detailed plans and information for that portion of a project which is intended for construction in the near future. Frequently detailed plans are submitted for only those portions of the total project area shown in the general development plan which are planned for immediate development. Subsequent phases of development are shown in separate detailed plans prepared at the time of development. 
(e)  Densities. Development densities in conditional use - planned development shall not exceed the densities permitted by the underlying zoning district. Where a proposed planned development project encompasses more than one underlying zoning district, the densities of the various zoning districts may be averaged or densities may be calculated separately for each of the different zoning districts. Density averaging may not be employed where any zoning district is A-1 agricultural or A-1E exclusive agricultural. 
(f)  Residential clustering. A planned development may permit condensed building sites in nearer proximity than permitted in the underlying zoning district regulations in order to maximize common open space, enhance preservation of natural features, or minimize infrastructure improvements. Residential clustering may be accomplished by reduced fee simple lot sizes or by condominium. Building setbacks, building to building separation, lot size and the quality of the resulting common area may be considered when evaluating a residential clustering plan. No planned development shall be permitted with residential lots less than one-half acre in size. 
(g)  Submittal requirements. 
(1)  General development. 
a.  A site map drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or greater, showing existing topography and vegetation. 
b.  A site plan drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or greater, showing proposed public streets, access points for private drives and driveways, proposed building envelopes and the location of common open space or preserved green areas. 
c.  Conceptual landscape plan showing the general location of new plant materials, landscaped features and screens and berms. Areas where mature vegetation is to be removed must be shown on the conceptual landscape plan. 
d.  Conceptual grading plan showing general site drainage, the location of on-site stormwater management facilities, and any modification of the existing topography. 
e.  Photographs of the site and the adjoining properties. 
f.  If available, building elevations or photographs of other comparable buildings constructed on other sites. 
(2)  Detailed plan submittal requirements. 
a.  Detail site plan based on a certified survey, condominium plat or subdivision plat, showing precise locations and size of all elements shown on the general development plan. 
b.  Building plan showing exterior elevations and floor plans of each building proposed for construction. The plans shall include descriptions of materials and colors. The plan commission may request material and color samples. Include finished ground and basement floor grades. 
c.  Engineering plan showing existing and proposed topography with contours at intervals not exceeding two feet, proposed drainage patterns, site grading plan, sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system and water supply system, all subject to approval by the city engineer. 
d.  Landscape planting plan showing the type, size, and location of plantings, retaining walls and other landscape features. 
e.  Erosion control plan as required by this Code. 
f.  Other special documents showing such other design components and related information as may be required by the plan commission or common council. These may include, but are not limited to, maintenance agreements, development agreements, plans of operation, property owners' association documentation, and deed restrictions. 
(h)  Criteria for approval. The intent of the PD procedures is to enable the developer to have greater flexibility in planning for land uses and site design than would be permitted under standard zoning provisions. However, there are some general criteria that the plan commission will follow in reviewing and approving PDs. Criteria for approval include: 
(1)  A planned development may be allowed by the plan commission where natural features are determined to warrant preservation. 
(2)  Existing mature vegetation and natural topography will be preserved to the greatest extent feasible. 
(3)  The character and intensity of the proposed development must be compatible with existing and planned land uses on nearby and adjoining properties. 
(4)  Reduction in lot area, lot width and building setbacks may be considered by the plan commission if the resulting configuration creates greater open space, produces appreciable areas that enhance preservation or expansion of natural features, or provides tangible community benefits associated with public use and enjoyment. 
(5)  The proposed development must not result in diminishment of property values of adjoining or nearby properties. 
(6)  Existing and planned street and highway improvements are adequate to handle the projected volumes of traffic generated by the proposed development. 
(7)  There is adequate capacity in the public sanitary sewer and stormwater sewer system to handle projected demand. 
(8)  The proposed circulation system and the design and layout of utilities has taken into account existing and potential streets and utility systems on adjoining parcels. 
(Code 1997, § 17.75; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #623; Am. #646; Cr. # 729 ; Am. # 729 )  
Sec. 52-264. - Application procedure and required information. 
(a)  Preliminary staff consultation. A petitioner shall have a preliminary consultation with the administrator and such other city staff and consultants that the city administrator deems needed and appropriate to conduct a preliminary review of the application. 
(b)  Preliminary plan commission consultation. An applicant may meet with the plan commission for a preliminary consultation prior to formally submitting a conditional use application. The purpose of the preliminary consultation is to discuss the proposed request, review the local regulations and policies applicable to the project, and discuss the land use implications of the proposal. 
(c)  Application and general development plan. 
(1)  The applicant shall submit a conditional use application in accordance with the application procedure described in section 52-137. In addition to the required information noted in section 52-137, a general development plan shall be submitted to the plan commission and common council for review 60 days prior to the rezoning hearing and/or detailed design work. The general development plan shall include data required under section 52-263(7) and (8). 
(2)  In addition, other documents or related information may be required by the plan commission and common council, which may include, but is not limited to, economic impact and market feasibility studies. 
(3)  The general development plan and related information shall be available for public inspection prior to any public hearing for conditional use zoning on the proposed project. 
(Code 1997, § 17.76; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-265. - Resolution on conditions and restrictions. 
(a)  As noted in section 52-263, planned developments may be regulated by specific and additional standards and exceptions different from conventional zoning regulations. To accomplish this, the plan commission may recommend and the common council may adopt by resolution specific conditions and restrictions for each planned development project. The specific conditions and restrictions may specify permitted uses, density standards, including lot area, yard setbacks, open space, dwelling unit size and distribution, and other appropriate regulations. When lands border a lake or other public body of water, pyramiding as defined and prohibited in this Code may be allowed under this article only if the minimum lake frontage and width of the parcel fronting on the lake at the ordinary high water mark is 100 feet for the first dwelling unit and 50 percent of the lake frontage requirement of the underlying zoning district for each additional dwelling unit; provided, however, that the number of dwelling units per parcel shall not exceed 25 percent additional units than would have been permissible under the restrictions of the underlying zoning district. 
(b)  The resolution containing the conditions and restrictions may also include other nonstandard or non-uniform requirements, regulations and provisions as recommended by the plan commission and approved by the common council. Such nonstandard requirements, regulations and provisions shall be designed to ensure proper development and appropriate operation and maintenance of each specific planned development project. 
(c)  Owners, their heirs, successors, and assigns shall agree by contract with the city to comply with all applicable laws and regulations, including the specific conditions and restrictions adopted to regulate a specific planned development project. 
(Code 1997, § 17.77; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-266. - Detailed plans and information. 
(a)  After conditional use zoning has been granted based upon the information shown in the general development plan, detailed plans and information covering that portion of the total project which is intended for construction shall be submitted for approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  The detailed plans and information described in this section shall be submitted to the plan commission for its review and approval at least 30 days prior to the expected date of approval by the plan commission. After approval by the plan commission, all detailed plans and information shall be submitted to the common council along with any written statement of the plan commission findings and recommendations within 45 days. The common council shall approve all detailed plans and information prior to the issuance of a building permit or any other permits. 
(c)  The detailed plans and information shall cover that portion of the project which is intended for construction and shall include data required in section 52-263. 
(Code 1997, § 17.78; Rep. and Recr. #411; Am. #517)  
Sec. 52-267. - Common open space. 
All residential planned developments shall provide permanent common open space. The open space may be in public ownership or in private ownership with an open space easement to assure that the open space will be permanent. The common open space area shall be conveniently accessible to all residential dwelling units within a planned development and is further defined as follows: 
(1)  Common open space includes: 
a.  Land area of the site not covered by buildings, parking structures or accessory structures, except recreational structures. Underground parking decks may be counted as open space. 
b.  Land which is accessible and available to all occupants of dwelling units for whose use the space is intended. 
(2)  Common open space does not include: 
a.  Land area covered by buildings. 
b.  Proposed street rights-of-way, public or private. 
c.  Open parking areas and driveways for dwellings. 
d.  Public or private walkways. 
e.  School sites. 
f.  Commercial areas and the buildings, accessory buildings, parking and loading facilities for these commercial areas. 
g.  Land determined unsuitable by the plan commission. 
The aggregate open space of the planned development, including any proposed roads, shall be no less than would have resulted from the application of the existing open space requirements of the district. Up to 20 percent of the land currently zoned C-1 or wetlands may be used in this open space computation. 
(Code 1997, § 17.79; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-268. - Maintenance of project. 
(a)  Should the owner of a planned development fail to properly operate or maintain the project or premises to the extent that a nuisance is caused to occupants or neighbors or constitutes a nuisance to nearby properties, the city may refuse to approve subsequent stages of development until the situation and/or method of operation has been corrected. 
(b)  Should the owner of a planned development fail to adequately perform maintenance functions, such as snow and ice removal, weed cutting or trash disposal, the city shall have the right to perform such functions or to contract for their accomplishment at the expense of the owner of the planned development. 
(c)  The care and maintenance of common open space shall be insured either by establishment of appropriate management organization for the project or by an agreement with the city for establishment of a special district for the project area on the basis of which the city shall provide the necessary maintenance service and levy the costs thereof as a special assessment on the tax bills of the properties within the project area. In any case, the city shall have the right to carry out and levy an assessment for the cost of any maintenance which it feels necessary if it is not otherwise taken care of to the satisfaction of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 17.80; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-269. - Changes or revisions. 
(a)  All changes, revisions or additions to any aspect of an approved planned development project shall be submitted to the plan commission for their review. 
(b)  A public hearing shall be held by the plan commission and a written recommendation to approve, approve with conditions, or deny shall be submitted to the common council prior to a final decision by the common council. 
(Code 1997, § 17.81; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #646)  
Sec. 52-270. - Relationship to subdivision control chapter. 
(a)  Any planned development which initially involves a division of land or any successive division of land shall be subject to the regulations of chapter 44, pertaining to subdivisions. 
(b)  However, the design standards and required improvements in chapter 44 may be modified or waived upon recommendation by the plan commission and approval by the common council where strict compliance may result in not achieving the design flexibility necessary to achieve the objectives of the planned development. 
(Code 1997, § 17.82; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Sec. 52-271. - Failure to comply. 
Failure to comply with the conditions and restrictions as herein established and specifically made applicable to a specific planned development shall be cause for termination of the approval for such project. At least 15 days' notice shall be given to the developer to appear before the plan commission and answer any such charges of noncompliance. If the plan commission finds the charges substantiated, they may recommend such termination of the project approval if the situation is not satisfactorily adjusted within a specified period. 
(Code 1997, § 17.83; Rep. and Recr. #411)  
Secs. 52-272—52-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - ADMINISTRATION AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 52-291. - Zoning board of appeals. 
(a)  Establishment. 
(1)  Authority. 
a.  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23, there is hereby created in and for the city a zoning board of appeals to consist of five members appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council, for regular terms of three years. The members of such board shall serve without compensation and shall be removable for cause as provided by law. There shall also be appointed as provided above first and second alternate members of such board for a term of three years, who shall act with full power only when a member of the board refuses to vote because of conflict of interest or when a member is absent. Any vacancy occurring on such board shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member involved by appointment and confirmation as aforesaid. 
b.  Such board shall adopt rules, meet, hear and determine appeals as prescribed by law and shall have all of the powers conferred thereon by the provisions of any statute, law, rule or ordinance now existing or hereafter created including, but not limited to, the power in appropriate cases of appeal and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, to make special exceptions to the terms of this section or of any such ordinance hereafter adopted in harmony with the general purposes and intent of such ordinance and in accordance with general or specific rules therein contained. Such exceptions or variances may be granted upon the determination by such board that the same will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the terms of the ordinance will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinance will be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(2)  General. All members of the board shall reside within the city. The actual and necessary expense incurred by the board in performance of its duties shall be paid and allowed as in cases of other claims against the city. 
(b)  Rules. 
(1)  Cooperation with plan commission. The board shall keep the plan commission informed as to any matters brought before it and shall call upon the plan commission for such information as is pertinent to the matter under consideration. 
(2)  Rules and procedures. The board shall adopt such rules governing its procedure as it may deem appropriate and consistent with this chapter, but such rules shall provide: 
a.  All meetings of such board shall be open to the public. 
b.  Proper minutes of the proceedings of the board shall be regularly kept, indicating members present, members voting, ayes and nays individually and a synopsis of testimony, appearances and interlocutory rulings made in the course of its proceedings. Final orders shall be set forth at length. 
c.  Before any appeal shall be scheduled or advertised for public hearing, complete data and information respecting the proposed structure, alteration, use or other variance, including detailed plot plans demonstrating the relation of the proposal to surrounding lands within 100 feet of the site, shall be filed in writing with the board and shall be available for public inspection. If amendment of such specifications is thereafter submitted or if the variance to be granted differs materially from such specifications, any objector shall be entitled upon demand in writing within ten days of the filing of any order granting a variance to have the matter readvertised and reheard. 
d.  If the variance sought differs in any material respect from the proposal presented to the original officer, commission or board whose decision is appealed from, no variance shall be granted unless the proposal has been resubmitted to such original authority. 
e.  Orders reversing in any degree or respect the prior determination of an original administrative authority shall not of themselves constitute an authorization to proceed with any construction, use or occupancy, but such orders shall be remanded to the appropriate original authority for action consistent with their expressed terms. No reversal shall arise from any such orders by implication. 
(c)  Appeal. 
(1)  Appeal rights. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officers, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of any administrative official, provided such appeal be initiated by written notice filed with such officer or board within not to exceed 20 days of such decision. Such notice of appeal shall specify the particular grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  Stay. An appeal shall stay all rights, privileges or proceedings pursuant to the action appealed from, unless the officer from whose decision the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and in due cause shown. 
(3)  Hearing. Each appeal shall be heard within 40 days from the time the appeal was filed with the board. Notice of hearing shall be given by publishing in a newspaper of general circulation in the vicinity of the appeal at least two times within 30 days and not less than ten days before the date of hearing. In addition, written notice shall be given to the plan commission, any other administrative officer appealed from, the petitioner, city clerk, owners of each parcel of land adjoining the land in question, and any other specifically interested parties who have filed as such in the matter. If the appeal involves a lot or parcel of land, any part of which is in a designated floodplain area (see floodplain zoning regulations in chapter 16, article II) or is zoned RL-1, RL-1A or RL-2 or a text or map interpretation affecting the same, the southeast district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources shall be given ten days' prior written notification. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(4)  Decision. The decision on any appeal shall be made within 15 days after completion of the hearing thereon. If the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources was notified of the hearing in accordance with the above provisions, it shall be notified of the decision. Copies of the decision shall be sent to the department within ten days after the appeal was granted or denied. If no decision is filed in the records of the board within such time, the order appealed shall stand affirmed. 
(5)  Certiorari. After determination of an appeal relative to a given application, recourse may be had to certiorari as provided by law. But no right of appeal shall lie upon any subsequent application, which is substantially similar, to object to any matter determined upon a prior appeal, unless there shall have intervened a substantial change of material circumstances affecting the determination. 
(6)  Concurrence for reversal. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official or board or to effect any exception or variation in such ordinance. The grounds of every such determination shall be stated herein. 
(d)  Yard and open space variance. Variances granted by the board of appeals may not exceed 40 percent of any one or more of the above requirements which are not met. The following conditions must be met in order for a variance to be granted: 
(1)  On or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the owner of the lot in question did not own lands contiguous to the lot in question, which have since been divided into separate ownership. 
(2)  The applicant for the variance has offered in good faith to purchase at a fair price adjacent lands to minimize the degree of variance, unless such offer, if made, would obviously be useless or unavailing. 
(3)  It is impractical from an engineering standpoint, as distinguished from a financial standpoint, to reduce or eliminate the degree of nonconformity by eliminating or relocating the proposed building, use, or occupancy. 
(Code 1997, § 17.84; Rep. and Recr. #411; Am. #719 )  
Sec. 52-292. - Administration of building permits and occupancy permits. 
(a)  Building permit. 
(1)  Required. No building, structure, or part thereof shall hereafter be built, enlarged, altered or demolished within the city or moved into, within or out of the city nor shall any work be commenced on any such project until a building permit has been issued by the building inspector pursuant to application as prescribed herein, certifying that such building or structure as proposed would be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with chapter 8, article II. See article II of this chapter for site plan requirements, if applicable. 
(2)  Procedure. An application for a building permit shall be made in conformity with requirements of chapter 8, article II. 
(3)  Exception. No building permit shall be required for public utility transmission or distribution facilities. 
(4)  Building previously unoccupied, bond required. No building permit shall be issued to erect, structurally alter or relocate any building which is unoccupied at the time that application is made unless the applicant tenders a cash bond as established in section 8-22, which such cash bond shall be immediately forfeited to the city in the event that such building is occupied prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit as is further provided in this section. This requirement applies only to buildings which exceed 750 square feet in size, whether intended for human occupancy or not. 
(b)  Certificate of occupancy permit. 
(1)  Required. No building previously unoccupied shall be used or occupied until a certificate of occupancy permit has been issued certifying that any such building, use, or occupancy complies with the provisions of this chapter. A like permit shall be obtained before any change is made in the use relevant to zoning classification or before any legal nonconforming use is resumed, changed, extended or granted conditional use status. 
(2)  Procedure. 
a.  Application for a certificate of occupancy permit shall be made to the building inspector prior to occupancy or prior to the commencement of any use not involving a building permit. Such application shall be made on a checklist form provided by the building inspector. 
b.  After the issuance of a building permit and within ten days after notification of the completion of the erection, alteration or relocation of the building or structure or of intent to commence a use, the building inspector shall make an inspection of the premises and of any building thereon. If the building and the existing and proposed uses of the premises comply with the requirements of this chapter, a certificate of occupancy permit shall be issued. No permit shall be issued until exterior work, plumbing, heating, electrical, sanitary installations are complete and until interior surfaces are structurally complete. Exterior work shall include erosion control conditions or measures that have been determined to be necessary by the city. If, after inspection, there are erosion control concerns, these must be addressed by the lot owner within seven calendar days after written notice is issued by the city. In the instances where damage or harm to adjacent public or private property could occur due to improper or lack of adequate erosion control, the time frame for correction after written notice shall be reduced to 24 hours. If the situation is not corrected within said time frames, the city has the authority and right to correct the situation, and deduct all costs and expenses from the cash bond that has been deposited per section 8-22. If adequate funds are not available, then the costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special assessment against the property and collected in conjunction with any and all other taxes levied on said property. 
(3)  Water supply for occupied buildings. Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for all buildings intended for human occupancy and constructed after the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, satisfactory evidence of a safe and adequate supply of pure water must be furnished to the building inspector, unless connection is to be made to a city water system. The evidence submitted to the building inspector shall include, in addition to the water quality information, the location of the proposed well and the distance from the proposed well to any septic system, building or other well located or proposed to be located within 100 feet. 
(4)  Expiration. If within six months of the date of application no certificate of occupancy permit has been issued, any building permit related thereto shall lapse and the building inspector shall make immediate investigation to ascertain that no use of occupancy has in fact commenced without proper authority. Upon determining that interruption of construction, if any, is temporary and will probably not extend beyond 60 additional days, the building inspector may grant successive extensions of such permit for successive periods not to exceed three months each. 
(c)  Temporary occupancy permit. 
(1)  Pending the issuance of a regular certificate of occupancy permit, a temporary permit may be issued for a period not exceeding six months during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its permanent occupation. Such temporary permit shall not be issued, except under such restrictions and provisions as will adequately insure the safety of the occupants, and in any event will not be issued until the complete plumbing and electrical wiring and outlets are installed and approved and the plastering, if any, and outside wall insulation are complete. A temporary permit shall be voided if the building fails to conform to the provisions of this chapter to such a degree as to render it unsafe for the occupancy proposed. No premises shall be rented out to tenants under a temporary occupancy permit. If a site plan is required, the regulations of section 52-59 regarding temporary occupancy permits are applicable. 
(2)  No temporary occupancy permit shall be issued unless a cash bond in the sum of $250.00 for any existing building and $500.00 for any new building has been tendered to the city by the applicant. In the event that an applicant shall have already tendered a $500.00 cash bond with subsection (a) of this section, then, in that event, an additional $500.00 cash bond shall be required if such applicant applies for a temporary occupancy permit pursuant to this subsection (c). Any cash bonds required by this subsection shall be immediately forfeited to the city if any such new building or additions or alterations to any existing building fail to conform to the provisions of this chapter or chapter 8, article II, within six months of the time that a temporary occupancy permit is issued. 
(d)  Building permit fees. Fees as from time to time set by the common council by resolution shall be paid to the building inspector before any building permit is issued. Whenever any work is commenced prior to obtaining a permit from the building inspector, the person on whose property such work has been commenced shall be liable for double the fees. 
(Code 1997, § 17.85; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #540; Am. #540)  
Sec. 52-293. - Administration of chapter and administrator and building inspector's duties. 
(a)  Plan commission. It shall be the function and duty of the plan commission to make and adopt a master plan, and to perform such duties as are required of the plan commission in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. The plan commission shall oversee the administration of this chapter, and when required or upon the request of the common council, shall make and present to the common council such recommendations as is required or requested relating to zoning matters and the administration of this chapter. 
(b)  Administrator. The city administrator is hereby designated the administrative officer for the provisions of this chapter under the direction of the plan commission. The administrator may delegate certain administrative, inspection, and enforcement responsibilities to the building inspector or other city employees or independent contractors subject to approval by the plan commission. 
(c)  Building inspector. 
(1)  Designation. The building inspector is hereby designated as the inspection and enforcement officer for the provisions of this chapter under the direction of the city administrator. 
(2)  Duties. In the administration and enforcement of this chapter, the building inspector shall perform the following duties: 
a.  Issue, where appropriate, building and occupancy permits and make or cause to be made the necessary inspections. 
b.  Keep an accurate record of all building and occupancy permits issued and all documents upon which the same are based and review conditional uses annually. 
c.  Keep a current file of all nonconforming uses as prescribed in section 52-197 to be reviewed annually. 
(3)  Authority. In the enforcement of this chapter, the building inspector shall have power and authority for the following: 
a.  At any reasonable time under reasonable circumstances and for any proper purposes of his office to enter upon any public or private premises and make inspection thereof. 
b.  Upon reasonable cause or question as to proper compliance, to revoke any building or occupancy permit and issue cease and desist orders requiring the cessation of any building, moving, alteration or use which is in violation of the provisions of this chapter, such revocation to be in effect until reinstated by the building inspector or the board of appeals. 
c.  In the name of the city and with the authorization of the common council and advice of the city attorney, commence any legal proceedings necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including the collection of forfeitures provided for herein. 
(4)  Compensation of building inspector. The building inspector shall receive compensation for his duties and necessary expenses incurred, such salary and expense allowances as may be fixed by the common council. 
(Code 1997, § 17.86; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #719 )  
Sec. 52-294. - Changes and amendments. 
(a)  Authority. Whenever the public necessity, general welfare or good zoning practice require, the common council may by ordinance change the district boundaries or amend, change or supplement the regulations established by this chapter or amendments thereto. Such change or amendment shall be subject to the review and recommendation of the plan commission. 
(b)  Initiation. A change or amendment may be initiated by the common council, plan commission or by a petition of one or more of the owners or lessees of property within the area proposed to be changed. 
(c)  Filing of petitions. 
(1)  Petitions for any change to the district boundaries or amendments to the regulations shall be filed with the city clerk at least 15 days in advance of a regularly scheduled plan commission meeting. 
(2)  The petition shall describe the premises to be rezoned or the regulations to be amended, list the reasons justifying the petition, specify the proposed use, and have attached the following: 
a.  Plot plan. A plot plan drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, showing the area proposed to be rezoned, its location, dimensions, the location and classification of adjacent zoning districts, and the location and existing use of all properties within 300 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned. 
b.  Owners' names and addresses. The owners' names and addresses of all properties lying within 300 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned. 
c.  Additional information. Additional information required by the plan commission or common council. 
d.  Fee. A fee as established in section 52-296(a) or by resolution of the common council. 
(d)  Referral and review by the plan commission. The city clerk shall transmit without delay one copy of such petition to the common council and plan commission. The plan commission shall review all proposed changes and amendments and shall conduct the necessary investigation. 
(e)  Hearings. The plan commission shall hold a public hearing upon each petition, giving public notice thereof as specified in section 52-295, listing the time, place and the changes or amendments proposed. 
(f)  Recommendation. Based upon its review and findings, the plan commission shall recommend to the common council that the petition be granted as requested, modified or denied. The recommendation shall be made in writing to the common council and shall be made within 45 days of the date of the plan commission recommendation. 
(g)  Common council's action. Upon receipt of the report of the plan commission, the common council may adopt the action recommended by such commission or with amendments or it may reject the action recommended by the plan commission, in which case it shall refer the matter to the plan commission with directions to recommend action to effectuate the council's determination and report the same back to the common council. After approval of a rezoning, map or text amendment which affects a lot or parcel of land, any part of which is located in a designated floodplain area or is zoned RL-1, RL-1A or RL-2, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, southeast district office, shall be notified. Copies of the decision shall be sent to the department of natural resources within ten days after the rezoning, map or text amendment was granted or denied. 
(h)  Protest. In the event of a protest against such district change or amendment to the regulations of this chapter, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more, either of the areas of the land included in such proposed change, by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such changes or amendments shall not become effective, except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the full common council membership. A protest shall be filed with the city clerk at least 24 hours prior to the date of the meeting of the common council when the proposed change is to be considered. 
(Code 1997, § 17.87; Rep. and Recr. #411; Am. #496; Am. #517; Rep. & Recr. #646)  
Sec. 52-295. - Public hearing notice and publication. 
Notice of any public hearing which the common council, plan commission or zoning board of appeals is required to hold under the terms of this chapter shall specify the date, time and place of hearing and the matter to be presented at the hearing. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 985, the notice shall be published as a Class 2 notice, to wit: 
(1)  The notice of public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least once each week for two consecutive weeks, the last publication of which shall be at least one week before the public hearing. 
(2)  Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to all parties-in-interest at least ten days before the hearing. Parties-in-interest shall be defined as the petitioner, the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any lands included in the petition and the owners of all lands lying within 300 feet of the lands included in the petition. Where notification is required for an individual property that is a component of a multi-parcel conditional use or planned development, notice requirements shall include all parcels within the parent development and shall extend beyond the bounds of the parent development. Exterior notice requirements be measured from the extreme limits of the governing conditional use boundary. Parties-in-interest for board of appeals' hearings shall be defined as the owners of all lands lying within 100 feet of the site. The failure of such notice to reach any property owner shall not invalidate the action taken by one of the bodies above. 
(3)  The southeast district office of the Wisconsin DNR shall be given at least ten days' prior written notice of any public hearings required by this chapter which involve a lot or parcel of land, any part of which is located in a designated floodplain area (see floodplain zoning regulations in chapter 16, article II) or is zoned RL-1, RL-1A or RL-2. 
(Code 1997, § 17.88; Rep. and Recr. #411; Rep. & Recr. #603)  
Sec. 52-296. - Fees and penalties. 
(a)  Fees. All persons performing work for which this chapter requires issuance of a permit shall pay the following nonrefundable fee to the city to help defray the cost of administration, investigation, advertising and processing of permits and variances: 
Building permit 	As specified in Table No. 1, Wisconsin Uniform Building Code, as amended 
Occupancy permit 	As specified in Table No. 1, Wisconsin Uniform Building Code, as amended 
Sign permit 	As specified for structures in Table No. 1, Wisconsin Uniform Building Code, as amended 
Conditional use permit 	Established by resolution; see city clerk 
Amendment to chapter (zoning text or map) 	Established by resolution; see city clerk 
Board of zoning appeals variances 	Established by resolution; see city clerk 
Certificate of approval (site plan and appearance reviews) 	Established by resolution; see city clerk 
Certified survey map approval 	Established by resolution; see city clerk 
 
(b)  Violations. No person shall construct or use any structure, land or water in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Failure to secure the necessary permits prior to commencing construction shall also constitute a violation. In case of any violation, the common council, plan commission, building inspector, administrator or any property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation may institute appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00 and costs of prosecution for each violation and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding six months. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Enforcement by injunction. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by injunction order at the suit of the city or of one or more owners of real estate situated within an area affected by the regulations of this chapter. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or imprisonment before resorting to injunction proceedings. 
(e)  Declared nuisances. Any building erected, structurally altered or placed on a lot or any use carried on in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se and the city may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain or abate such nuisance. 
(Code 1997, § 17.89; Rep. and Recr. #411; Am. # 740 )  
Sec. 52-297. - Plan commission applications. 
All persons wishing to appear before the plan commission must complete the official plan commission agenda application and submit it to the administrator's office no later than 15 days prior to a scheduled plan commission meeting in order to be placed on the agenda. If application is returned to the administrator's office 14 days or less prior to a scheduled plan commission meeting, the matter will be automatically deferred to the following month's meeting. No request to be placed on a plan commission agenda will be considered unless such application is timely filed. 
(Code 1997, § 17.90; Rep. and Recr. #411) 
