CHAPTER 1
GENERAL GOVERNMENT
1.01 Elected Officials
1.02 Appointed Officials
1.025 Interim Appointments
1.03 Boards and Commissions
1.035 Assessor Confidential Information
1.04 Personnel Code
1.05 Salaries
1.06 Gifts or Gratuities, Receipt of Prohibited
1.07 Annexations
1.08 Nominations
1.09 Cost and Per Diem Reimbursements
1.10 Public Records
1.11 Exemption from Bond
1.12 Returned Payment Charge
General Government 1.01
1
1.01 ELECTED OFFICIALS. The elected officials of the
Village shall be as follows:
Official When Elected Term
(1) Village President Odd numbered years 2 years
(2) Six Trustees Three each year 2 years
1.02 APPOINTED OFFICIALS. The appointed officials of the
Village shall be as follows:
Official How Appointed Term
(1) Village Clerk-Treasurer Village Board Indefinite
[Ord.159]
(2) Village Assessor Village Board Indefinite
[Ord.159]
(3) Village Attorney Village Board One year
(4) Building Inspector Village Board Indefinite
(5) Chief of Police Village Board Indefinite
(7) Health Officer Village Board One year
(8) Emergency Management Chief of Police shall serve as
Director Emergency Management Director
(9) Public Works Director Village Board Indefinite
(10) Weed Commissioner Village President, One year
subject to confirmation
by Village Board
(11) President Pro Tem Village Board One year
(12) Humane Officer Village Board One year
(13) Sexton Village Board One year
[Ord. 159, 373, 521 05/02, 536 (04/04),547 02/05, 559 10/05, 569 03/07]
General Government 1.025
2
1.025 INTERIM APPOINTMENTS. Where a vacancy is created with
respect to any of the officials appointed under §1.02 as a result
of illness, resignation, death or otherwise, the Village President
may appoint an interim replacement, said replacement to be
confirmed by the Village board at its next regular meeting. [Ord.
531 06/03]
1.03 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS. (1) BOARD OF REVIEW. The Board
of Review shall consist of not less than three Village Board
Trustees, or two Village Board Trustees and the Village President,
together with the Village Clerk. The Village Board shall appoint
annually the trustees to serve on the Board of Review. The Board
may appoint more than three members to serve on the Board. Members
serving on the Board, except full time employees of the Village,
shall receive $60.00 per day the Board of Review meets.[Ord. 163, 199,
502, 569 03/07,Ord. 661 5/2017]
(2) PLAN COMMISSION. (a) Composition. The Plan Commission
shall consist of seven (7) members: the Village President and two
(2) Trustees appointed annually by the Village Board and four (4)
citizen members appointed annually by the Village Board. All members
shall serve a term of one year and their term shall begin on May 1.
The Board may also appoint such alternate members as it deems
expedient. The Zoning Administrator shall be a non-voting advisory
member of the Committee. The Village President shall appoint a
Secretary of the Plan Commission who may, but need not be, a member
of the Commission. [Ord. 179, 265, 553 06/05]
(b) Powers and Duties. It shall be the power and the
duty of the Plan Commission to review and make recommendations
concerning the Village of Ellsworth Zoning Ordinance, zoning map and
extraterritorial zoning to the Village Board. The Village Board
shall not be restricted hereby from review or adoption of changes
and amendments to the Village of Ellsworth Zoning Ordinance, zoning
map and issues relating to extraterritorial zoning. [Ord. 259]
(3) BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consist of 5 citizens appointed by the Village President subject to
confirmation by the Village Board, for 3 year terms. Appointments
shall be staggered so that not more than 2 members are appointed in
any one year.
(4) BOARD OF HEALTH. The Health Committee shall serve as the
Board of Health.
General Government 1.03(5)(a)
3
(5) ELECTION OFFICIALS. (a) Election Officials for each
polling place shall be appointed pursuant to Chapter 7, Wis. Stats.
The Village Board shall appoint five (5) Election Inspectors for each
polling place at each election. Such election officials shall have
all of the powers and perform all of the duties prescribed by the
Statutes.
(b) The party which received the largest number of votes
in the last election pursuant to Sec.7.30(2), Stats.
shall be entitled to one more inspector than the party
receiving the next largest number of votes at each polling
place.
(c) The Village Clerk is authorized to select alternate
officials, or two sets of officials, to work at different
times at each election. However, there shall at all times
be at each polling place the ratio of inspectors as
required under (a) above, to-wit, an equal number of
inspectors for each major party plus one more inspector
from the party which received the largest number of votes
in the last election as described in Sec.7.30(2), Stats.
(d) The Village Clerk may reduce the number of election
officials for any given election to not less than
three.[Ord.535 03/01/2004]
(6) POLICE COMMITTEE. (a) The §61.65, Wis. Stats. Police
Committee shall consist of five (5) members. One member shall be
appointed annually by the Village President for a five year term.
The members shall be electors of the Village who are not also members
of the Village Board. None of the members shall be employed by the
Village nor shall they be a member of the police department. The term
of each member shall commence on May 1 and shall be for a term of
5 years ending on April 30. When in session the §61.65, Wis. Stats.
Police Committee shall select a chairperson to chair the meeting and
a secretary to take minutes of the meeting. The chairperson and
secretary shall be members of the §61.65, Wis. Stats. Police
Committee. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(b) The §61.65 Police Committee shall have those powers
and duties, specified under §61.65 (1)(am)1 and shall
act in accordance with §62.13 (5), Stats.
(c) The §61.65 Police Committee shall be a committee
separate from any other police or law enforcement
committee established by the Village Board. The
Village Board may, in its discretion, request
non-binding, advisory opinions of the §61.65 Police
Committee on matters pertaining to law enforcement.
General Government 1.03(7)(a)
4
[Ord. 511]
(7) CEMETERY COMMITTEE. (a) The Cemetery Committee shall
consist of five members appointed annually by the Village President
for a one year term. Three of the members shall be members of the
Village Board. Two of the members shall be electors of the Village
who are not also members of the Village Board. The Committee shall
have a Chairperson appointed be the Village President.
(b) The duties of the Cemetery Committee shall be
to advise the Village Board concerning operation and
maintenance of Maple Grove Cemetery, including public
works maintenance, sale of grave sites, the other
matters set forth in Sec. 11.17 of the Municipal Code,
and duties of the Sexton.” [Ord.536 04/04]
(8) ETZ COMMITTEE. (a) A joint extraterritorial zoning
committee consisting of three(3) citizen members of the Plan
Commission and three(3) Town members from each Town affected by
the proposed plan and regulations. [Ord. 569 03/07]
1.035 ASSESSOR CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Whenever the
Assessor, in the performance of the Assessor’s duties, requests or
obtains income and expense information pursuant to Wis. Stat.
§70.47(7)(af), or any successor statute thereto, then such income
and expense information that is provided to the Assessor shall be
held by the Assessor on an confidential basis; except, however, that
the information may be revealed to and used by person in discharge
of duties imposed by law, in the discharge of duties imposed by
office (including but not limited to use by the Assessor in the
performance of official duties of the Assessor’s office and use by
the Board of Review in the performance of its official duties), or
pursuant to order of a court. Income and expense information
provided to the Assessor under Wis. Stat.§70.47(7)(af), is not
subject to the right of inspection and copying under Wis.
Stat.§19.35(1). [Ord. 652 06/2016]
1.04 PERSONNEL CODE. The Village Board shall establish a
Personnel Code, and from time to time shall amend same as
appropriate. This Personnel Code shall address employer/employee
relations, including such matters as wages, salary, sick leave,
vacation pay, employee conduct, grievances, etc. [Ord.443]
1.05 SALARIES. (1) VILLAGE PRESIDENT. The salary of the
Village President shall be $3,500.00 per year, effective
General Government 1.05(2)
5
01-01-07, pursuant to Board action taken 12-04-06.[Ord. 275, 287a, 405,
559 10/05, 569 03/07]
(2) VILLAGE TRUSTEES. The salary of each Village Trustee shall
be $3,000.00 per year, effective 01-01-07, pursuant to Board action
taken 12-04-06. [Ord. 559 10/05, 569 03/07]
(3) No change of salary herein provided shall be effective
during the existing term of any such office, pursuant to Sec. 61.32,
Wis. Stats. [Ord. 139, 224, 257, 287a, 302, 319, 405]
1.06 GIFTS OR GRATUITIES, RECEIPT OF PROHIBITED. (1) No
public employee or public official shall receive or offer to receive,
either directly or indirectly, any gift, gratuity or anything of
value which he is not authorized to receive from any person, if such
person:
(a) Has or is seeking to obtain contractual or other
business or financial relationships with the Village or
the Village Board.
(b) Conducts operations or activities which are
regulated by the Village or the Village Board.
(c) Has interests which may be substantially affected
by such Village or Village Board.
(2) The receipt of any gift, gratuity or anything of value as
denoted above is contrary to the public policy of the Village. [Ord.
213]
1.07 ANNEXATIONS. [Ord. 137, 203, 204, 205, 206, 211, 261, 309, 370,
389, 429, 433]
1.08 NOMINATIONS. (1) All candidates for elective office
shall be nominated in accordance with this section. The caucus
system of nomination shall not be used.
(2) Candidates for elective office shall be nominated by
nomination papers circulated and filed in accordance with Sec.
8.10, Wis. Stats. Nomination papers for spring election shall be
circulated not sooner than December 1 preceding election and shall
be filed not later than 5:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in January,
or the next day if Tuesday is a holiday. [Ord. 347]
(3) All nomination papers shall conform to the requirements
of the Wisconsin Statutes. A Type A or other authorized Notice of
General Government 1.08(4)
6
Election, conforming to Sec. 10.01(2)(a), Wis. Stats., shall be
published once by the Village Clerk on the fourth Tuesday in November
preceding a spring municipal election, in conformity with Sec.
10.06, Wis. Stats.
(4) The Village Clerk shall certify the list of candidates for
municipal office to the County Clerk, and shall publish all notices
required by Sec. 10.06(3), Wis. Stats. [Ord. 347]
1.09 COST AND PER DIEM REIMBURSEMENTS. (1) Village Trustees
and Village President attending a committee meeting shall be paid
a per diem cost allowance of $40.00 per meeting. The Chairperson
of the meeting shall receive a per diem allowance of $45.00 per
meeting, effective 01/01/18, pursuant to Board action taken
01/06/14. [Ord.569 03/07, Ord. 639 05/14, Ord. 667 06/18]
(2) Village Trustees and Village President shall be paid a per
diem allowance of $42.00 for each special Board meeting attended,
effective 01/01/14, pursuant to Board action taken 01/06/14. [Ord.
569 03/07, Ord. 639 05/14]
(3) Village Trustees and Village President serving on the
Board of Review shall be paid the per diem allowance of $60.00,
effective 01/01/14, pursuant to Board action taken 01/06/14. [Ord.
405, 569 03/07,Ord. 639 05/14]
(4) Village Trustees and Village President attending out of
town meetings shall be paid the per diem cost allowance of $60.00,
effective 01/01/14, pursuant to Board action taken 01/06/14. [Ord.
569 03/07, Ord. 639 05/14]
1.10 PUBLIC RECORDS. (1) DEFINITIONS. (a) "Authority" means
any of the following entities having custody of a Village record:
an office, elected official, agency, board, commission, committee,
council, department or public body corporate and politic created by
construction, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally
constituted subunit of the foregoing.
(b) "Custodian" means that officer, department head,
division head, or employee of the Village designated
under subsection 3 or otherwise responsible by law to
keep and preserve any Village records or file, deposit
or keep such records and who is required by this chapter
to respond to requests for access to such records.
(c) “Employee” means any individual who is employed by
an authority, other than an individual holding local
public office or a state public office, or any individual
who is employed by an employer other than
General Government 1.10(1)(d)
7
an authority.[Ord. 589 12/2008]
(d) “Person authorized by the individual” means the
parent, guardian, as defined in Sec. 48.02(11)(1992),
of a child, as defined in Wis. Stats. 48.02(2)(1992),
the guardian, as defined in Wis. Stats.
880.01(3)(1992),an individual adjudged incompetent, as
defined in Wis.Stats.880.01(4)(1992), the personal
representative or spouse of an individual who is deceased
or any person authorized, in writing, by the individual
to exercise the rights granted under this section [Ord.
589 12/2008]
(e) ”Personally Identifiable Information” means
information that can be associated with a particular
individual through one or more identifiers or other
information or circumstances.[Ord. 589 12/2008]
(f) "Record" means any material on which written, drawn,
printed, spoken, visual or electromagnetic information
is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, which has been created or is being
kept by an authority. "Record" includes, but is not
limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps,
charts, photographs, films, recording, tapes (including
computer tapes), and computer printouts. "Record" does
not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and
like materials prepared for the originator's personal use
or prepared by the originator in the name of a person for
whom the originator is working; materials which are
purely the personal property of the custodian and have
no relation to his or her office; materials to which
access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and
published materials in the possession of an authority
other than a public library which are available for sale,
or which are available for inspection at a public library
emails are public record. Voicemail, instant
messaging, voice-over the internet protocol (VOIP) and
other forms of perishable data do not constitute public
records. [Ord. 589 12/2008]
(g) “Record subject” means an individual about whom
personally identifiable information is contained in a
record. [Ord. 589 12/2008]
General Government 1.10(1)(h)
8
(h) “Records series” means records that are arranged
under a manual or automated filing system, or are kept
together as a unit, because they relate to a particular
subject, result from the same activity or have a
particular form.[Ord. 589 12/2008]
(i) “Requestor” means any person who requests inspection
or copies of a record.[Ord. 589 12/2008]
(2) DUTY TO MAINTAIN RECORDS. (a) Except as provided under
subsection 7, each officer and employee of the Village shall safely
keep and preserve all records received from his or her predecessor
or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept
in his or her office of which are in the lawful possession or control
of the officer or employee or his or her deputies, or to the
possession or control of which he or she or they may be lawfully
entitled as such officers or employees.
(b) Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office
or an employee's term of employment, or whenever the
office or position of employment becomes vacant, each
such officer or employee shall deliver to his or her
successor all records then in his or her custody and the
successor shall receipt therefore to the officer or
employee, who shall file said receipt with the Village
Clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is selected
or qualifies such records shall be delivered to and
receipted for by the Clerk, on behalf of the successor
to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's
receipt.
(c) Perishable data and rewriteable recording systems
is not subject to retention as a public record unless
some action is taken to download or otherwise preserve
that data. Temporary computer logs and operating systems
data is not preserved as a public record.
(3) LEGAL CUSTODIANS. (a) Each elected official is the legal
custodian of his or her records and the records of his or her office,
but the official may designate an employee of his or her staff to
act as the legal custodian.
(b) Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Village Clerk
or the Clerk's designee shall act as legal custodian for
the Village Board and for any committees, commissions,
boards, or other authorities created by ordinance or
resolution of the Village Board.
General Government 1.10(3)(c)
9
(c) For every authority not specified in subsections
a or b, the authority's chief administrative officer is
the legal custodian for the authority, but the officer
may designate an employee of his or her staff to act as
the legal custodian.
(d) Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as
legal custodian in his or her absence or in the absence
of his or her designee.
(e) The legal custodian shall have full legal power to
render decisions and to carry out the duties of an
authority under subchapter II of Chapter 19, Wisconsin
Statutes, and this subsection. The designation of a legal
custodian shall not affect the powers and duties of an
authority under this subsection.[Ord.523 8/2002]
(4) PUBLIC ACCESS TO RECORDS. (a) Except as provided in
subsection 6, any person has a right to inspect a record and to make
or receive a copy of any record as provided in section 19.35(1),
Wisconsin Statutes. Substantive common law principles construing
the right to inspect, copy or receive copies of records shall remain
in effect. The exemptions contained in this ordinance are indicative
of public policy, but may be used as grounds for denying public access
to a record only if the legal custodian under Subsection (3) makes
a specific demonstration that there is a need to restrict public
access at the time that the request to inspect or copy the record
is made.
(b) Records shall be available for inspection and copying
during all regular office hours.
(c) If regular office hours are not maintained at the
location where records are kept, the records will be
available for inspection and copying upon at least 48
hours advance notice of intent to inspect or copy.
(d) A requester shall be permitted to use facilities
comparable to those available to Village employees to
inspect, copy or abstract a record.
(e) The legal custodian may require supervision during
inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions
on the manner or access to an original record if the record
is irreplaceable or easily damaged.
(f) A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the
cost of locating and copying records as follows:
General Government 1.10(4)(f)(1)
10
(1) The cost of photocopying shall be established
from time to time by resolution of the Village Board.
Other costs may be imposed not to exceed the actual,
necessary and direct cost of reproduction and
transcription of the record. [Ord. 475]
(2) If the form of a written record does not permit
copying, the actual and necessary cost of
photographing and photographic processing shall be
charged.
(3) The actual full cost of providing a copy of
other records not in printed form on paper, such
as films, computer printouts and audio or video
tapes shall be charged.
(4) If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual
cost thereof shall also be charged.
(5) There shall be no charge for locating a record
unless the actual cost therefore exceeds $50.00, in
which case the actual cost shall be determined by
the legal custodian and billed to the requestor.
Such actual cost shall be derived by multiplying
the actual hourly wage of the employee or
employees conducting the search, including fringe
benefits, by the amount of time spent in the search.
(6) The legal custodian shall estimate the cost
of all applicable fees and may require a cash deposit
adequate to assure payment, if such estimate exceeds
$5.00.
(7) Elected and appointed officials of the Village
of Ellsworth shall not be required to pay for public
records they may reasonable acquire for the proper
performance of their official duties.
(8) The legal custodian may provide copies of a
record without charge or at a reduced charge where
he or she determines that waiver or reduction of the
fee is in the public interest.
(9) Pursuant to Sec. 19.34, Wis. Stats., and the
guidelines therein listed, each authority shall
adopt, prominently display and make available for
inspection and copying at its offices, for the
General Government 1.10(5)(a)
11
guidance of the public, a notice containing a
description of its organization and the established
times and places at which the legal custodian from
whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain
information and access to records in its custody,
make requests for records, or obtain copies of
records, and the costs thereof. This subsection
does not apply to members of the Village Board.
(5) ACCESS PROCEDURES. (a) A request to inspect or copy a
record shall be made to the legal custodian. A request shall be
deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record
or the information requested. However, a request for a record
without a reasonable limitation as to the subject matter or length
of time represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient
request. A request may be made orally, but a request must be in
writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under
Sec. 19.37, Wis. Stats. Except as provided below, no request may
be refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be
identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may
be refused because the request is received by mail or email, unless
prepayment of a fee is required under subsection (4), a requester
may be required to show acceptable identification whenever the
requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever security
reasons or federal law or regulation so require. [Ord. 589 12/2008]
(b) Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall,
as soon as practicable and without delay, either fill
the request or notify the requester of the authority's
determination to deny the request in whole or in part
and the reasons therefore. If the legal custodian, after
conferring with the Village attorney, determines that
a written request is so general as to be unduly
time consuming, the party making the request may first
be required to itemize his or her request in a manner
which would permit reasonable compliance.
(c) A request for a record may be denied as provided
in subsection (6). If a request is made orally, the
request may be denied orally unless a demand for a written
statement of the reasons denying the request is made by
the requester within 5 business days of the oral denial.
If a written request is denied in whole or in part, the
requester shall receive a written statement of the
reasons for denying the request. Every written denial
of a request shall inform the requester that if the
request for the record was made in writing, then the
determination is subject to review upon petition for a
General Government 1.10(5)(d)
12
writ of mandamus under Sec. 19.37 (1), Wis. Stats., or
upon application to the attorney general or district
attorney.
(d) Form of request – The Wisconsin Public Records Law
dictates that certain actions must be taken with regard
to oral requests for records and that certain more formal
actions are taken in response to written requests for
records. However, State Law does not expressly provide
how to respond to the following methods of communication:
email, voicemail and instant messaging/text messaging.
Therefore, requests made by said means shall be responded
to as follows:
(1) Email – a request made by email may be responded
to via email or in writing as though the request
was made in writing.
(2) Voicemail – a request made by voicemail shall
be responded to as though it were made orally.
(3) Instant Messaging/Text Messaging – a request
made in either such manner shall be treated as an
oral request.[Ord.589 12/2008]
(6) LIMITATIONS ON RIGHT TO ACCESS. (a) As provided by Sec.
19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records are exempt from inspection
under this Section:
(1) Records specifically exempted from disclosure
by State or federal law;
(2) Any record relating to investigative
information obtained for law enforcement purposes
if federal law or regulations requires exemption
from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is
a condition to receipt of aids by the State;
(3) Computer programs, although the material used
as input for a computer program or the material
produced as a product of the computer program is
subject to inspection; and
(4) A record or any portion of a record containing
information qualifying as a common law trade secret.
(b) As provided by Sec. 43.30, Wis. Stats.,
General Government 1.10(6)(c)
13
public library circulation records are exempt
from inspection under this Section.
(c) In responding to a request for inspection or copying
of a record which is not specifically exempt from
disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with
the Village attorney, may deny the request, in whole or
in part, only if he or she determines that the harm to
the public interest resulting from disclosure would
outweigh the public interest in full access to the
requested record. Examples of matters for which
disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited
to, the following:
(1) Records obtained under official pledges of
confidentiality which were necessary and given in
order to obtain the information contained in them.
(2) Records of current deliberations after a
quasi-judicial hearing.
(3) Records of current deliberations concerning
employment, dismissal, promotion, demotion,
compensation, performance or discipline of any
Village official or employee, or the investigation
of charges against a Village officer or employee,
unless such officer or employee consents to such
disclosure.
(4) Records concerning current strategy for crime
detection or prevention.
(5) Records of current deliberations or
negotiations on the purchase of Village property,
investing of Village funds, or other Village
business whenever competitive or bargaining reasons
require nondisclosure.
(6) Financial, medical, social or personal
histories or disciplinary data of specific persons
which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a
substantial adverse affect upon the reputation of
any person referred to in such history or data.
(7) Communications between legal counsel for the
Village and any officer, agent or employee of the
Village, when advice is being rendered concerning
General Government 1.10(6)(d)
14
strategy with respect to current litigation in which
the Village or any of its officers, agents or
employees is or is likely to become involved, or
communications which are privileged under Sec.
905.03, Wis. Stats.
(d) If a record contains information that may be made
public and information that may not be made public, the
custodian of the record shall provide the information
that may be made public and delete the information that
may not be made public from the record before release.
The custodian shall confer with the Village attorney
prior to releasing any such record and shall follow the
guidance of the Village attorney when separating out the
exempt material. If in the judgment of the custodian
and the Village attorney there is no feasible way to
separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material
without unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the
exempt material, the entire record shall be withheld from
disclosure.
(e) The right of any requestor who is an individual or
person authorized by the individual to inspect or copy
a record does not apply to any of the following:
(1) Any record containing personally identifiable
information that is collected or maintained in
connection with a complaint, investigation or other
circumstances that may lead to an enforcement
action, administrative proceeding, arbitration
proceedings or court proceeding, or any such record
that is collected or maintained in connection with
such an action or proceeding.
(2) Any record containing personally identifiable
information that, if disclosed, would do any of the
following:
(a) Endanger an individual’s life or safety.
(b) Identify a confidential informant.
(c) Endanger the security of any state
correctional Institution, as defined in Wis.
Stats. 301.01(4),jail, as defined in Wis.
Stats.165.85(2)(bg),secured correctional
General Government 1.10(6)(e)(2)(d)
15
facility, as defined in Wis. Stats. 48.02
(15m), mental health institute, as defined in
Wis.Stats. 51.01(12), center for the developmentally
disabled, as defined in Wis.Stats.
51.01(3), or the population or staff of any of
these institutions, facilities or jails.
(d) Compromise the rehabilitation of a person
in the custody of the department of corrections
or detained in a jailor facility identified
in subdiv.b.iii.
(3) Any record that is part of a records series,
as defined in this ordinance that is not indexed,
arranged or automated in a way that the record can
be retrieved by use of any individual’s name,
address or other identifier. [Ord. 589 12/2008]
(f) Unless access is specifically authorized or required
by statute, a custodian shall not provide access under
this ordinance to records containing the following
information, except to an employee or the employee’s
representative to the extent required under s. 103.13,
Wis. Stats., or to a recognized or certified collective
bargaining representative to the extent required to
fulfill a duty to bargain under ch. 111, Wis. Stats.,
or pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement under
ch.111, Wis. Stats.:
(a) Information maintained, prepared, or provided
by an employer concerning the home address, home
electronic mail address, home telephone number, or
social security number of an employee, unless the
employee authorizes the authority to provide access
to such information.
(b) Information relating to the current
investigation of a possible criminal offense or
possible misconduct connected with employment by
an employee prior to disposition of the
investigation.
(c) Information pertaining to an employee’s
employment examination, except an examination score
if access to that score is not otherwise prohibited
(d) Information relating to one or more specific
employees that is used by an authority or by the
General Government 1.10(6)(g)
16
employer of the employees for staff management
planning, including performance evaluations,
judgments or recommendations concerning future
salary adjustments or other wage treatments,
management bonus plans, promotions, job
assignments, letters of reference, or other
comments or ratings relating to employees.
[Ord. 589 12/2008]
(g) Unless access if specifically authorized or required
by statute, a custodian shall not provide access under
This ordinance to records, except to an individual to
the extent required under s.103.13, Wis. Stats.,
containing information maintained, prepared, or provided
by an employer concerning the home address, home
electronic mail address, home telephone number, or
social security number of an individual who holds a local
public office, unless the individual authorizes the
custodian to provide access to such information. This
subsection does not apply to the home address of an
individual who holds an elective public office or to the
home address of an individual who, as a condition of
employment, is required to reside in a specified
location. [Ord. 589 12/2008]
(7) RETENTION OF PUBLIC RECORDS.
(a) General Records Schedule Adopted. The Village hereby
adopts, by reference, the Wisconsin Municipal Records Schedule
(hereinafter, “Records Schedule”), pertaining to the
retention and destruction of public records, and approved by
the State of Wisconsin Public Records Board (hereinafter,
“Records Board”) on August 27, 2018. A copy of the Records
Schedule will be kept on file in the Village Clerk’s office
located at 130 Chestnut Street, Ellsworth, WI 54011, and made
available for public viewing during office hours.
(b) Other Records. In the event the Village creates a
record not contemplated by the Records Schedule, the Village
may, subject to the Records Board’s prior approval, either
adopt an applicable records retention schedule set forth by the
Records Board, if available, or create its own retention
schedule pertaining to the record.
(c) Repeal. All ordinances, or portions thereof, and
resolutions, or portions thereof, in conflict with any portion
of the Records Schedule are hereby repealed. Any approved
Village retention schedule, or portion thereof, for any record
not contemplated by the Records Schedule shall remain in full
force and effect. [Ord 673 05/2019]
General Government 1.10(8)
17
(8) PRESERVATION THROUGH MICROFILM. Any Village officer,
or the director of any department or division of Village government
may, subject to the approval of the Village manager, keep and
preserve public records in his or her possession by means of
microfilm or other photographic reproduction method. Such records
shall meet the standards for photographic reproduction set forth
in Sec. 16.61 (7)(a) and (b), Wis. Stats., and shall be considered
original records for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved
along with other files of the department or division and shall be
open to public inspection and copying according to the provisions
of State law and of subsections (4) and (6). [Ord 419, Ord 673 05/2019]
1.11 EXEMPTION FROM BOND. The Village Treasurer shall not be
required to give the bond otherwise provided under Sec. 70.67(1),
Wis. Stats. The Village shall be obligated, in case the treasurer
fails so to do, to pay all taxes of any kind required by law to be
paid by such treasurer to the county treasurer. [Ord. 293]
1.12 RETURNED PAYMENT CHARGE Any check issued to or for the
benefit of the Village of Ellsworth, or any of its departments,
for services, fines, taxes, assessments or any other charge of any
kind or nature whatsoever, which are returned “Not Sufficient
Funds” (NSF), “Account Closed” or otherwise in such manner that
the check or remittance does not constitute good funds, shall
result in a surcharge in an amount as is established from time to
time by resolution of the Village Board and set forth in the Village
Fee Schedule. Such surcharge shall be added to the charge with
respect to which the check, draft or remittance was issued. [Ord.
592 06/2009]
Chapter 2
THE GOVERNING BODY
2.01 The Village Board
2.02 Meetings
2.03 Presiding Officer
2.04 Roll Call: Quorum
2.05 Order of Business
2.06 Conduct of Deliberations
2.07 Reconsideration of Questions
2.08 Call of the Board
2.09 Disturbances and Disorderly Conduct
2.10 Appropriations and Accounts
2.11 Standing Committees
2.12 Publication and Effect of Ordinances
2.13 Amendment of Rules
2.14 Suspension of Rules
The Governing Body 2.01
1
2.01 THE VILLAGE BOARD. The Village Board shall consist
of the Village President and 6 trustees who shall be elected
for 2 year terms.
2.02 MEETINGS. (1) Regular meetings of the Board shall
be held on the first Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m., or at
such other times as the Board may direct, except that where a
regular meeting falls on a legal holiday such meeting shall
be held on the following Monday evening. [Ord.559 10/05]
(2) SPECIAL MEETINGS. All special meetings of the
Board shall be held at the place where the regular meetings
of the Board are held; when special meetings of the Board
shall have been called, the Clerk-Treasurer shall notify each
member of the Board of the time, place and purpose of such
special meeting. At least 2 day's notice shall be given each
member of the Board of each special meeting of the Board
unless the period intervening between the time of calling of
such meeting and the time fixed for such meeting precludes
the practicability of giving so long a notice, and in that
event the longest possible notice of such meeting shall be
given each member by the Clerk-Treasurer.
2.03 PRESIDING OFFICER. (1) The Village President will
preside. In the absence of the Village President, the
President Pro Tem shall preside at meetings of the Board and
during the absence or inability of the Village President, and
shall have the powers and duties of the President, except
that the President Pro Tem shall not have power to approve an
act of the Board which the President has disapproved by
filing objection with the Village Clerk. In the absence of
the President and President Pro Tem, the Village Clerk shall
call the meeting to order and shall preside until the
Trustees present select a Trustee to preside at such meeting.
(2) DUTIES. The presiding officer shall preserve
order and decorum, decide all questions of order, and conduct
the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with the
parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules Of Order,
Revised, unless otherwise provided by statute or by these
rules. Any member shall have the right to appeal from a
decision of the presiding officer. An appeal shall be
sustained by a 2/3 vote of the members present excluding the
President. [Ord. 130]
The Governing Body 2.04(1)
2
2.04 ROLL CALL: QUORUM. (1) ROLL CALL; PROCEDURE WHEN
QUORUM NOT IN ATTENDANCE. As soon as the Board shall be
called to order, the Clerk-Treasurer shall proceed to call
the names of the members in alphabetical order, noting who
are present and who are absent and record the same in the
proceedings of the Board. If it shall appear that there is
not a quorum present the fact shall be entered on the journal
and the Board may adjourn, or the presiding officer or, in
case of his absence, the Clerk-Treasurer may issue a process
to any constable or policeman commanding him forthwith to
summon the absentees.
(2) QUORUM. A majority of the members shall
constitute a quorum. The President shall be counted in
computing a quorum.
2.05 ORDER OF BUSINESS. At each regular meeting of the
Board the order of business shall be as follows:
(1) Reading and correcting the journal of the
last preceding meeting or meetings.
(2) Receiving petitions, memorials, remonstrances
and other communications.
(3) Reports of committees.
(4) Introduction of ordinances.
(5) Miscellaneous business.
(6) Action upon bills and claims.
2.06 CONDUCT OF DELIBERATIONS. The deliberations of the
Board shall be conducted in the following manner:
(1) When a motion is made and seconded, it shall
be stated by the President or read by the Clerk-Treasurer
previous to debate. All resolutions should be made and
submitted in writing.
(2) When the question is under discussion no
action shall be in order, except (a) to adjourn; (b) to lay
on the table; (c) to move the previous question; (d) to
The Governing Body 2.06(3)
3
postpone to a certain day; (e) to refer to a committee; (f)
to amend; or (g) to postpone indefinitely. These motions
shall have precedence in the order listed.
(3) Any member desirous of terminating the debate
may move the previous question, in which event the presiding
officer shall announce the question as "Shall the main
question now be put?" If a majority of the members present
vote in the affirmative, the main question shall be taken
without further debate and to bring the Board to a direct
vote, first upon any pending amendments and then upon the
main question.
(4) A motion to adjourn shall always be in order,
and a motion to adjourn, to lay on the table, and a call for
the previous question shall be decided without debate.
(5) A roll call shall not be necessary on aye
questions or motions except as follows:
(a) When the ayes and noes are requested by
any member.
(b) On confirmation and on the adoption if
any measure assessing or levying taxes,
appropriations or disbursing money, or
creating any liability or charge against the
Village or any fund thereof.
(c) When required by the statutes of
Wisconsin.
(6) All aye and nay votes shall be recorded in
the journal.
(7) The Board shall in all other respects
determine the rules in its procedure, which shall be governed
by Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, unless otherwise
provided by ordinance or statute.
2.07 RECONSIDERATION OF QUESTIONS. When a question has
been once decided any member of the majority, or in case of a
tie, any member voting in the affirmative, may move and
reconsideration thereof at the same or at the next succeeding
meeting; but if a motion to reconsider be made on a day
The Governing Body 2.08
4
subsequent to that on which an ordinance question was
decided, a vote of the majority of the entire Board shall be
required to sustain it.
2.08 CALL OF THE BOARD. A call of the Board shall be
ordered at any time by the request of 2 or more members and
absent members shall be sent for, but a call cannot be made
after voting has commenced. When a call of the Board has
been requested and ordered, the door shall be closed until
the report of the policeman has been received and acted upon,
or until further proceedings under the call are dispensed
with by a majority of the entire Board.
2.09 DISTURBANCES AND DISORDERLY CONDUCT. Whenever any
disturbance or disorderly conduct shall occur in any of the
meetings of the Board, the President may cause the room to be
cleared of all persons guilty of such disorderly conduct
except the trustees. In case any trustee shall be guilty of
such disorderly conduct, the President or presiding officer
may order the police to take him into custody for the time
being or until the meeting shall adjourn. Such member shall
have the right to appeal from such order to the Board as in
other cases.
2.10 APPROPRIATIONS AND ACCOUNTS. Allowance of
Accounts. All demands or accounts shall be acted upon at the
time of presentation, unless one or more members shall demand
a reference. In the latter case the accounts shall be
referred to the Finance Committee and lay over until the next
ensuing meeting, unless the Board by a 2/3 vote of all the
members present otherwise disposes of the same.
2.11 STANDING COMMITTEES. The standing committees of
the Village Board shall consist of the following:
(1) Finance, Purchasing, Buildings
(2) Street and Sidewalk
(3) Public Safety [Ord.559 10/05]
(4) Health, License, Welfare
(5) Salary and Labor
(6) Parks, Recreation, Development
(7) Water and Sewer
The Governing Body 2.11(8)
5
(8) Solid Waste, Cable T.V., Special [Ord.569 03/07]
(9) Cemetery [Ord.559 10/05]
(10) Housing Program [Ord.559 10/05]
2.12 PUBLICATION AND EFFECT OF ORDINANCES. (1) As
provided in Sec. 61.50, Wis. Stats., all ordinances of the
Village of Ellsworth imposing a penalty shall be published in
the official paper of the Village once and shall be
immediately recorded, with the Affidavit of Publication, by
the Village Clerk-Treasurer in a book kept for that purpose.
A printed copy of such ordinance or regulation in any book,
pamphlet or newspaper and published or purporting to be
published therein by direction of the Village Board shall be
prima facie proof of due passage, publication and recording
thereof.
(2) All ordinances shall take effect and be in
force from and after passage and publication unless otherwise
provided and published copies thereof shall have appended the
date of first publication.
2.13 AMENDMENT OF RULES. These rules shall not be
rescinded or amended unless the proposed amendment or motion
to rescind has laid over from a regular meeting and then it
shall require a vote of 2/3 of all members of the Board.
2.14 SUSPENSION OF RULES. These rules shall not be
suspended except by a 2/3 vote of all the members of the
Board.
Chapter 3
FINANCE AND TAXATION
3.01 Preparation of Tax Roll and Tax Receipts
3.02 Fiscal Year
3.03 Budget
3.04 Changes in Budget
3.05 Village Funds to Be Spent in Accordance
with Appropriation
3.07 Interest Rates on Village Obligations
3.08 Special Assessments
FINANCE AND TAXATION 3.01
1
3.01 PREPARATION OF TAX ROLL AND TAX RECEIPTS. (1)
AGGREGATE TAX STATED ON ROLL. The Clerk-Treasurer shall, in
computing the tax roll, insert only the aggregate amount of state,
county, school and local taxes in a single column in the roll
opposite the parcel or tract of land against which the tax is
levied, or, in the case of personal property, in a single column
opposite the name of the person against whom the tax is levied.
(2) RATES STAMPED ON RECEIPTS. Pursuant to Sec. 74.08(1),
Wis. Stats., in lieu of entering on each tax receipt the several
amounts paid respectively for state, county, school, local and
other taxes, the aggregate amount of such taxes shall be combined
in a single column on the tax receipt issued by the Clerk-
Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer shall cause to be printed or
stamped on the tax receipt the separate proportion or rate of
taxes levied for state, county, school, local or other purposes.
3.02 FISCAL YEAR. The calendar year shall be the fiscal
year.
3.03 BUDGET. (1) DEPARTMENTAL ESTIMATES. When requested
by the Finance Committee, each year, each officer, department and
committee shall file with the Clerk-Treasurer an itemized
statement of disbursements made to carry out the powers and duties
of such officer, department or committee during the preceding
fiscal year, and a detailed statement of the receipts and
disbursements on account of any special fund under the supervision
of such officer, department or committee during such year, and of
the conditions and management of such fund; also detailed
estimates of the same matters for the current fiscal year and for
the ensuing fiscal year. Such statements shall be presented in
the form prescribed by the Clerk-Treasurer and shall be designated
as "Departmental Estimates," and shall be as nearly uniform as
possible for the main division of all departments.
(2) FINANCE COMMITTEE TO PREPARE. (a) Budget to Include.
Each year the Finance Committee of the Village Board shall prepare
and submit to the Board a proposed budget presenting a financial
plan for conducting the affairs of the Village for the ensuing
calendar year. The budget shall include the following
information:
1. The expense of conducting each department
and activity of the Village for the ensuing
fiscal year and corresponding items for the
current year and last preceding fiscal year,
with reasons for increase and decrease
FINANCE AND TAXATION 3.03(2)(a)(2)
2
recommended as compared with appropriations for
the current year.
2. An itemization of all anticipated income of
the Village from sources other than general
property taxes and bond issued, with a
comparative statement of the amounts received by
the Village from each of the same or similar
sources for the last preceding and current
fiscal year.
3. An itemization of the amount of money to be
raised from general property taxes which, with
income from other sources, will be necessary to
meet the proposed expenditures.
4. Such other information as may be required by
the Board and by state law.
The Village shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the
budget thus prepared for distribution to citizens.
(3) HEARING. The Board shall hold a public hearing on
the budget as required by law. Following the public hearing the
proposed budget may be changed or amended and shall take the same
course in the Board as ordinances.
3.04 CHANGES IN BUDGET. The amount of the tax to be levied
or certified, the amounts of the various appropriations, and the
purposes thereof shall not be changed after approval of the budget
except by a 2/3 vote of the entire membership of the Village
Board. Notice of such transfer shall be given by publication
within 15 days thereafter in the official Village newspaper.
3.05 VILLAGE FUNDS TO BE SPENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH
APPROPRIATION. No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the
Village, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be
incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the
adopted budget or when changed as authorized by sec. 3.04 of this
Chapter. At the close of each fiscal year any unencumbered
balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund and
shall be subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be
made by the Board, to be paid out of the income of the current
year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works
which will not be completed within such year, and any such
appropriations shall continue in force until the purpose for which
it was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned.
FINANCE AND TAXATION 3.07
3
3.07 INTEREST RATES ON VILLAGE OBLIGATIONS. On all
obligations owing to the Village the rate of interest shall be two
percentage points in excess of the then current five (5) year
State Trust Fund Loan Interest rate. The interest rate on each
obligation owing the Village shall be established at the time the
obligation is established and shall continue for the life of the
obligation. Once established, the interest rate shall not be
changed by subsequent State Trust Fund Loan Interest rate changes.
The interest rate established in this Section shall not apply to
contracts entered into, or obligations established, prior to the
date of enactment hereof. It shall not apply to any obligations
owing to the Village for which some other rate of interest is
provided by state law or by regulations of any State agency having
jurisdiction thereof. [Ord. 654 07/2016]
3.08 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS. (1) In addition to other methods
provided by law, special assessments for any public work or
improvement or any current service may be levied in accordance
with the provisions of this ordinance.
(2) Whenever the Village Board shall determine that any
public work or improvement or any current service shall be
financed in whole or in part by special assessments levied under
this ordinance, it shall adopt a resolution specifying this
intention and the time, either before or after completion of the
work or improvement, when the amount of the assessments will be
determined and levied, the number of annual installments, if any,
in which assessments may be paid, the rate of interest to be
charged on the unpaid balance and the terms on which any of the
assessments may be deferred while no use of the improvement is
made in connection with the property.
(3) The provisions of Sec. 66.0703, Wis. Stats., shall apply
to special assessments levied under this ordinance except that,
when the Village Board determines by resolution that the hearing
on the assessments be held subsequent to the completion of the
work or improvement or the rendering of the service, the report
required by Sec. 66.0703 (5), Wis. Stats., shall contain a
statement of the final cost of the work, service or improvement in
lieu of an estimate of the cost. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(4) Notice of the time and place of the public hearing on
any special assessment proposed to be levied and notice of the
final assessment and terms of payment thereof shall be given in
the manner prescribed by Sec. 66.0703(7)(a) and (8)(d), Wis.
Stats. [Ord. 523 8/02]
FINANCE AND TAXATION 3.08(5)
4
(5) Any special assessment levied under this ordinance shall
be a lien against the property assessed from the date of the final
resolution of the Village Board determining the amount of the
levy.
(6) Any person against whose property a special assessment
is levied under this ordinance may appeal therefrom in the manner
prescribed by Sec. 66.0703(12), Wis. Stats., within 40 days of the
date of the final determination of the Village Board. [Ord. 297,
523 8/02]
CHAPTER 4
POLICE DEPARTMENT
4.01 Police Department
4.02 Chief of Police, Duties and Powers
4.03 Police Officers
4.04 President and Trustees: Police Powers of
4.05 Storage of Motor Vehicles
4.20 Penalty
POLICE DEPARTMENT 4.01(1)
1
4.01 POLICE DEPARTMENT. (1) PERSONNEL. The Police
Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such police
officers as the Village Board may prescribe by ordinance or
resolution.
(2) SALARY: COLLECTION OF FEES. The Chief and the police
officers shall receive a salary as fixed by the Village Board and
shall not be entitled to any other compensation. All fees, bail
deposits and other special renumeration or funds collected or
received by the Department or any officers thereof shall be
deposited with the Clerk-Treasurer not less than monthly.
(3) TENURE OF CHIEF, POLICE OFFICERS. The Chief of Police
may be removed at any time for cause by a majority vote of the
members of the Village Board. Other members of the Department
shall be suspended or removed only pursuant to the process
established in Sec. 62.13(5), Wis. Stats., and by the committee
established under Sec. 1.03(6) [Ord. 523 8/02]
4.02 CHIEF OF POLICE, DUTIES AND POWERS. (1) The Chief of
Police shall possess the powers, enjoy the privileges and be
subject to the liabilities conferred and imposed by law upon
marshals and constables.
(2) He shall obey all lawful written orders of the President
and Board.
(3) He shall cause the public peace to be preserved and see
that all laws and ordinances of the Village and State are
enforced, and whenever any violation thereof shall come to his
knowledge, he shall cause the requisite complaint to be made and
see that the evidence is procured for the successful prosecution
of the offender or offenders.
(4) He shall exercise supervisory control over all the
personnel of his Department and may adopt, subject to the approval
of the Board, rules and regulations for the government,
discipline, equipment and uniforms of police officers.
(5) He shall be solely responsible for the care and
condition of the equipment used by his department.
(6) He shall keep an accurate and complete record of all
complaints, arrests, traffic violations, convictions and
dispositions of the Department.
4.03 POLICE OFFICERS. (1) GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES. Each
officer of the Department shall possess the powers conferred on
marshals and constables by law, shall preserve the
POLICE DEPARTMENT 4.03(2)
2
public peace, and enforce the laws and ordinances of the State and
Village subject to the orders, rules and regulations of the Chief,
the President and the Board.
(2) POWER OF ARREST. The Chief of Police and any police
officer shall arrest all persons in the Village found in the act of
violating any law or ordinance of the Village or State or aiding or
abetting in such violation, and they shall arrest without warrant all
persons whom they have reasonable grounds to believe have violated
any law or ordinance and who will not be apprehended unless
immediately arrested, shall take all arrested persons in charge and
confine them, and shall within a reasonable time bring such persons
before the court having jurisdiction thereof to be dealt with
according to law.
4.04 PRESIDENT AND TRUSTEES: POLICE POWERS OF. The President
and the trustees shall have and exercise the powers of peace officers
and may summarily suppress any riotous or disorderly conduct in the
streets or public places of the Village.
4.05 STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES. (1) The Chief of Police shall
be in charge of the Village storage facility for junked motor
vehicles or those involved in an accident or crime. As used in this
section the term "motor vehicle" shall have the same meaning as set
forth in Section 340.01, Stats.
(2) The Village Board shall from time to time, by resolution,
establish the daily charge for storage of motor vehicles at the
storage facility.
(3) The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall make the
determination when charging shall begin for storage of an automobile
at the storage facility. The Chief may allow motor vehicles involved
in accidents or crimes to be stored
until the conclusion of a reasonable investigation or other
holding period without charge. The determination shall be left to
the discretion of the Chief of Police. The Chief may in any event
impose charges immediately upon commencement of storage subject to
the notice requirement in subsec. (4).
(4) Before imposing a storage charge upon the record owner of a
motor vehicle, the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall give
notification to the owner of the motor vehicle by personal service,
or by mailing a certified mail notice, with return receipt requested,
to the last known address of the owner, and if the owner be unknown,
then to the last record owner. Where certified mail return receipt
is returned from the owner evidencing receipt by the owner of said
notice, the charge for storage shall begin on that date. Where the
receipt is returned indicating the mailing was refused,
POLICE DEPARTMENT 4.05(5)
3
charging shall commence on the date of the refusal to receive the
certified mail notice. Where the receipt is returned indicating
"addressee unknown" or in other manner to indicate the notice was
undeliverable, then the charge for storage shall commence on the date
said undeliverable notice is returned to the police department.
(5) No motor vehicle shall be returned to its owner until all
costs of storage have been paid and the Village shall have a lien
upon said vehicle for all costs of storage until paid. [Ord. 465]
4.20 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of
this Chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in sec. 25.04
of this Municipal Code. [Ord 465]
CHAPTER 5
FIRE DEPARTMENT
5.01 Fire Department
5.02 Fire Inspections and Prevention
5.03 Police Power of Department
5.04 Reimbursement for Emergency
Response Calls
5.05 State Fire Code Adopted
5.06 Penalty
FIRE DEPARTMENT 5.01
1
5.01 FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Fire Department for the
Village of Ellsworth shall be known as the Ellsworth Fire
Services Association and shall provide service to the
Village Of Ellsworth according to Chapter 61 of Wisconsin
Statutes for Fire Suppression and Prevention.
5.02 FIRE INSPECTIONS AND PREVENTION. (1) FIRE
INSPECTORS. The Chief of the Ellsworth Fire Services
Association shall hold the office of Fire Inspector, with
the power to appoint one or more Deputy Fire Inspectors,
who shall have the same power as the Fire Inspector.
(2) ENFORCEMENT OF FIRE PREVENTION ORDINANCES.
He/she shall enforce all fire prevention ordinances of the
Village and state laws and regulations pertaining to fire
prevention, and shall keep citizens informed on fire
prevention methods and on the activities of the Department.
(3) DUTY OF INSPECTION. Fire Inspectors shall
inspect semi-annually all commercial buildings, premises
and thoroughfares within the fire limits and inspect semiannually
all commercial buildings, premises and public
thoroughfares within the Village limits, for the purpose of
noting and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to
cause fires. Repairs or alterations necessary to remove
the hazardous condition shall be made within a reasonable
time at the expense of the owner. The Inspector shall also
investigate the storage and handling of explosives and
inflammable liquids within the Village.
(4) CORRECTION OF FIRE HAZARDS. When any inspection
by the Fire Chief or his deputies reveals a fire hazard,
the Chief or his deputies may serve a notice in writing
upon the owner of the property, giving said owner a
reasonable time in which to remove the hazard. If the fire
hazard is not removed within the time allowed, it shall be
deemed a nuisance and the Fire Chief or his deputy may have
the same removed by the Village against the owner of the
property and may also be entered in the tax roll as a
special charge against the property.
(5) ENTERING ON PREMISES. No person shall deny the
Chief or his deputies’ free access to any property within
the Village at any reasonable time for the purpose of
making fire inspections. No person shall hinder or
FIRE DEPARTMENT 5.03(1)
2
obstruct the Fire Inspector in the performance of his duty,
or refuse to observe any lawful direction given by him.
5.03 POLICE POWER OF DEPARTMENT. (1) POLICE
AUTHORITY AT FIRES. The Chief and his assistants or
officers in command at any fire are hereby vested with full
and complete police authority at fires. Any officer of the
Department may cause the arrest of any person failing to
give the right-of-way to the Fire Department in responding
to a fire.
(2) CONTROL OF FIRES. The Fire Chief may prescribe
certain limits in the vicinity of any fire within which no
persons, except firefighters and police officers and those
admitted by order of any officer of the Department, shall
be permitted to come. The Chief may cause the removal of
any property whenever it shall become necessary for the
preservation of such property from fire, or to prevent the
spreading of fire, or to protect the adjoining property,
and during the progress of any fire he/she may order the
removal or destruction of any property necessary to prevent
the further spread of the fire. He/she may also cause the
removal of all wires or other facilities and the turning
off of all electricity or other services where the same
impedes the work of the Department during the progress of a
fire.
(3) ENTERING PREMISES. Any firefighter while acting
under the direction of the Fire Chief or other officer in
command may enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the
vicinity of any building or other property when on fire for
the purpose of extinguishing such fire, and if any person
shall hinder, resist or obstruct any firefighter in
discharge of his duty as hereinbefore provided, the person
so offending shall be deemed guilty of resisting
firefighter in the discharge of their duties.
(4) DUTIES OF BYSTANDERS. Every person who shall be
present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the
Fire Chief or officer in command, and may be required to
render assistance in fighting the fire, or removing or
guarding property. Such officer may cause the arrest of
any person or persons refusing to obey said orders.
FIRE DEPARTMENT 5.03(5)
3
(5) INJURY TO EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED. No person shall
willfully injure in any manner any hose, hydrant or fire
apparatus belonging to the Village and/or Ellsworth Fire
Services Association and no vehicle, except car or railroad
equipment shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a
fire department when laid down on any street, private
driveway, track or other place, to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.
5.04 REIMBURSEMENT FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALLS. The
responsible party or parties shall be jointly and severally
liable to the Village for reimbursement of the costs
associated with emergency response by the Ellsworth Fire
Services Association, Ellsworth Area Ambulance Service,
Ellsworth Police Department, Village Of Ellsworth Street
Department and any other municipal department of the
Village, or any designee thereof, or those furnishing
mutual aid to any such entity, for assistance in
containment, control, clean-up, or other emergency response
to hazardous or toxic spills, pipe line leaks, tank leaks,
vehicle accidents, explosions, fires or any other emergency
requiring response by any of the aforementioned. The
“responsible party” is the owner of the premises at which
the incident has taken or is taking place, or the owner of
the vehicle or vehicles or other personal property involved
in the said emergency incident, whether or not at fault.
5.05 STATE FIRE CODE ADOPTED. Those provisions of
Chapter COMM14, Fire Prevention is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part hereof, and further adopted are
any and all future amendments thereto.
5.06 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this Chapter or any order, rule, or regulation
made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
sec. 25.04 of this Municipal Code. [Ord. 570 03/07]
CHAPTER 6
EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS
6.01 Emergency government defined
6.02 Emergency government director
6.03 Utilization of existing services and
facilities
6.04 Declarations of emergency
6.05 Emergency regulations
6.06 Obstruction of emergency government
organization – penalty
6.07 Prohibited discharges
6.08 Containment, cleanup and restoration
6.09 Emergency services response
6.10 Site access
6.11 Public protection
6.12 Enforcement
6.13 Civil liability
6.14 Coordination with county
EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS 6.01
1
6.01 EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT DEFINED. “Emergency government”
means the preparation for and carrying out of all emergency
functions other than functions for which the military forces are
primarily responsible, to minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other
hostile action or by fire, flood, or other natural causes.
6.02 EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT DIRECTOR. (A) Appointed.
The Police Chief shall serve as emergency government director of
the Village.
(B) Duties. The director shall be the executive head of
the Village emergency government organization and shall have
direct responsibility for the organization, administration and
operation of such organization subject to the direction and
control of the Village President and the Village Board. In
addition to such powers and responsibilities as may be imposed
on him or her from time to time by the Village Board, he or she
shall:
1. Coordinate all activities for emergency
government within the Village;
2. Maintain liaison and cooperate with emergency
government agencies and organizations of other
political subdivisions and of the state and federal
governments;
3. Participate in county and state emergency
government activities upon request;
4. Prepare a comprehensive general plan for the
emergency government of the Village and present such
plan to the Village Board for its approval;
5. Upon the declaration of an emergency, issue all
necessary proclamations as to the existence of such
state of emergency and such disaster warnings or
alerts as are required by the emergency government
plan.
(C) Assistants. Such deputy and assistant directors may
be appointed by the director, subject to the approval of the
Village Board, as may be deemed necessary. Such appointees
shall receive such compensation as the Village Board may
determine.
6.03 UTILIZATION OF EXISTING SERVICES AND FACILITIES In
preparing and executing the emergency government plan, the
director shall utilize the services, equipment, supplies and
EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS 6.04
2
facilities of the existing departments and agencies of the Village
to the maximum extent practicable. When the Village Board has
approved the plan, all municipal agencies and departments of the
Village shall perform the duties and functions assigned by the
approved plan.
6.04 DECLARATIONS OF EMERGENCY. The emergency government
organization shall take action in accordance with the emergency
government plan only after a declaration of emergency and the
issuance of the official disaster warnings. Declarations of
emergency shall be made by the Governor, the Village Board or in
accordance with Section 166.23, Wis. Stats. by the Village
President. Such state of emergency shall continue until
terminated by the issuing authority, provided any declaration not
issued by the Governor may be terminated by the Village Board.
6.05 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS. Whenever necessary to meet an
emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by
the Village Board, the Village President or, in his or her
absence, the emergency government director may proclaim,
promulgate and enforce orders, rules and regulations relating to
the conduct of persons and the use of property which are necessary
to protect the public peace, health and safety, to preserve lives
and property and to insure cooperation in emergency government
activities. Such proclamations shall be posted in three public
places and may be rescinded by resolution of the Village Board.
6.06 OBSTRUCTION OF EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION
PENALTY. (A) No person shall willfully obstruct, hinder or
delay any member of the emergency government organization in the
enforcement of any order, rule, regulation or plan issued
pursuant to this chapter or violate any order, rule, regulation
or plan issued pursuant to the authority contained in this
chapter.
(B) Any person who violates any provision of subsection A
of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 25.04.
6.07 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. No person, firm or corporation
shall discharge or cause to be discharged, leaked, leached or
spilled on any public or private street, alley, public or private
property, or unto the ground, surface waters, subsurface waters or
aquifers or within the Village, except those areas specifically
licensed for waste disposal or landfill activities and to receive
such materials, any explosive, flammable or combustible solid,
liquid or gas, any radioactive material at or above Nuclear
EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS 6.08
3
Regulatory Restriction levels, etiologic agents or any solid,
liquid or gas creating a hazard, potential hazard or pubic
nuisance or any solid, liquid or gas having a deleterious effect
on the environment.
6.08 CONTAINMENT, CLEANUP AND RESTORATION. Any person, firm
or corporation in violation of Section 8.24.010, shall so notify
the fire department and begin immediate actions to contain, clean
up and remove to an approved repository the offending material(s)
and restore the site to its original condition, with the offending
person, firm or corporation being responsible for all expenses
incurred. Should any person, firm or corporation fail to engage
the necessary personnel and equipment to comply or to complete the
requirements of this section, the office of the emergency
government coordinator may order the required actions to be taken
by public or private sources, and allow the recovery of any and
all costs incurred by the village as action imposed by Section
8.24.030.
6.09 EMERGENCY SERVICES RESPONSE.
Emergency services response includes, but is not limited to: fire
service, emergency medical service, law enforcement and public
works. A person, firm or corporation who possesses or controls a
hazardous substance which is discharged or who causes the
discharge of a hazardous substance shall be responsible for
reimbursement to the responding agencies for actual and necessary
expenses incurred in carrying out their duties under this chapter.
Actual and necessary expenses may include, but not be limited to :
replacement of equipment damaged by the hazardous material ,
cleaning, decontamination and maintenance of the equipment
specific to the incident, costs incurred in the procurement and
use of specialized equipment specific to the incident, specific
laboratory expenses incurred in the recognition and identification
of hazardous substances in the evaluation of response,
decontamination, clean up and medical surveillance, and incurred
costs in future medical surveillance or response personnel as
required by the responding agency’s medical advisor.
6.10 SITE ACCESS. Access to any site, public or private,
where a prohibited discharge is indicated or suspected will be
provided to fire department officers and staff and to village
police department personnel for the purpose of evaluating the
threat to the public and monitoring containment, cleanup and
restoration activities.
EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS 6.11
4
6.11 PUBLIC PROTECTION. Should any prohibited discharge
occur which threatens the life, safety or health of the public at,
near or around the site of a prohibited discharge, and the
situation is so critical that immediate steps must be taken to
protect life and limb, the fire chief, his or her assistant, or
the senior police official on the scene of the emergency may order
an evacuation of the area or take other appropriate steps for a
period of time until the Village Board for the village can take
appropriate action.
6.12 ENFORCEMENT. The fire chief and emergency government
director shall have authority to issue citations or complaints
under this chapter.
6.13 CIVIL LIABILITY. Any person, firm or corporation in
violation of this chapter shall be liable to the village for any
expenses incurred by the village for loss or damage sustained by
the village by reason of such violations.
6.14 COORDINATION WITH COUNTY.
Prior to the village pursuing an enforcement action, it should
coordinate enforcement options with the affected county pursuant
to Wis. Stats. Section 166.22. [Ord. 572 04/07]
TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 7
TRAFFIC CODE
7.001 Standards for Motor Vehicle Equipment
7.002 Off-Highway School Premises
7.01 State Traffic Laws Adopted
7.02 Through Streets
7.03 One-Way Streets and Alleys
7.04 U-Turns Prohibited
7.05 Parking Restrictions
7.06 Vehicle Weight Limits
7.07 Snowmobiles
7.08 Bicycle And Skateboards Regulated on Public
Sidewalks
7.085 All-Terrain Vehicles and All-Terrain Vehicle
Routes
7.086 Utility Terrain Vehicles and Routes
7.09 Driving Vehicles over Public and Private
Property not Designated for Vehicular
Traffic Prohibited
7.10 Official Traffic Signs and Signals
7.11 Speed Restrictions
7.14 Disorderly Conduct with a Motor Vehicle
7.15 Jake Brakes
7.40 Enforcement
7.45 Construction
7.50 Penalties
Revised 12/2/19
TRAFFIC
1
INDEX
Wisconsin Statutes Adopted by Reference in Sec. 7.01:
-AABANDONED
VEHICLE, REPORT OF 342.31 (2)
ACCIDENTS AND ACCIDENT REPORTS 346.66 to
346.73
-BBACKING,
LIMITATIONS ON 346.87
BICYCLES
Towing by Motor Vehicles 346.94(11)
Riding in Bicycle Lane 346.802
Riding on Bicycle Way 346.803
BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES 346.77 to
346.804
[Ord 523 8/02]
BOATS
Transporting Persons in 346.94(8)
BRAKES
General Requirements ------------------------- 347.35
Performance Ability -------------------------- 347.36
-CCERTIFICATE
OF TITLE 342.05
Application for 342.06
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 343.05
[Ord. 523 8/02]
-DDEFINITIONS
340.01
341.01
342.01
343.01
344.01
346.01
347.01
347.01
TRAFFIC
2
348.01
DESTRUCTION OF VEHICLES 342.34
DRINKING INTOXICANTS IN MOTOR VEHICLES ON HIGHWAYS 346.935
[Ord. 523 08/02]
DRIVERS AND PEDESTRIANS
Rights and Duties of 346.23 to
346.29
DRIVER'S LICENSE
Duplicate 343.19
Identification Cards 343.50
Improper Use of 343.52
Notice of Change of Address or Name 343.22
Occupational 343.10
Required 343.05
Instruction Permits[Ord. 609 01/11,Ord. 610 03/11] 343.07
Special
School Bus Operators 343.12
Surrender of Upon Revocation, Cancellation,
or Suspension 343.35
Surrender of Upon Suspension 344.45
To Be Carried 343.18
DRIVING, MEETING, OVERTAKING AND PASSING 346.05 to
346.16
346.485
-EEMERGENCY
VEHICLES 346.03
Following 346.90
EQUIPMENT
Applicability of Ordinances 347.02
Brakes
General Requirements 347.35
Performance Ability 347.36
Drawbars 347.47
Fenders and Mudguards 347.46
Flammable Liquids
Equipment of Vehicles 347.49
Height, Modification of 347.455
Horns and Warning Devices 347.38
Improperly Equipped Vehicles 347.04
TRAFFIC
3
Lighting Equipment 347.06 to
347.29
[Ord.523 8/02]
Mirrors 347.40
Mobile Homes
Couplings 347.47
Motor Driven Cycles
General Requirements 347.486
Protective Headgear 347.485
Seating Requirements 347.487
Mufflers 347.39
Painting Requirements 347.43
Sale of Prohibited Equipment Unlawful 347.03
[Ord.523 8/02]
Seat Belts 347.48
Speed Indicators 347.41
Tire Equipment 347.45
Trailer Hitches 347.47
Windshield Wipers 347.42
-FFALSE
STATEMENTS, PENALTY FOR 345.17
FENDERS AND MUDGUARDS 347.46
FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
Rented Vehicles 344.51,
344.52
Transfer of Ownership to Defeat 344.46
FIRE HOSE
Crossing of 346.91
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
Equipment of Vehicles 347.49
-HHEADLAMPS,
MODULATING
Motorcycles, Motor Bicycles or Mopeds 347.115
HIGHWAY OBSTRUCTION 86.02-86.025
[Ord. 523 8/02]
TRAFFIC
4
Obstructing Emergency or Rescue Personnel 941.37
[Ord.523 8/02]
HORNS AND WARNING DEVICES 347.3
-IIDENTIFICATION
CARDS 343.50
Unlawful Use of Special 343.52
IDENTIFICATION NUMBERS
Assignment and Stamping of 342.30 (3)
ILLEGAL RIDING 346.92
IMPROPERLY REGISTERED VEHICLE,
Operation of 341.04
IMPLIED CONSENT 343.305
INATTENTIVE DRIVING 346.89
INTOXICANTS
In Vehicle; Underage person 346.93
In Motor Vehicles 346.935
-LLEADING
ANIMALS FROM MOTOR VEHICLE 346.94 (3)
LICENSES
(See DRIVER'S LICENSE)
LICENSE PLATES
Display of 341.15
Misuse of 341.55
Surrender of Illegible 341.16
Surrender of Upon Suspension 341.63 (3)
LITTERING DEBRIS ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY --- 346.94 (6)
Permitting ---------------------------------- 346.94 (6m)
-MMIRRORS
------------------------------------------ 347.40
MOBILE HOMES
Couplings ------------------------------------ 347.47
Transporting Persons in ---------------------- 346.94 (8)
TRAFFIC
5
MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLES
General Requirements ------------------------- 347.486
Operation of --------------------------------- 346.5
Protective Headgear --------------------------347.485
Seating Requirements ------------------------- 347.487
MOVING VEHICLES
Boarding or Alighting From ------------------- 346.94 (9)
Clinging to ---------------------------------- 346.94 (10)
MUFFLERS ----------------------------------------- 347.39
-OODOMETER
TAMPERING ------------------------------- 347.415
OFFICERS
Not to Profit From Arrests ------------------- 345.55
Obedience to --------------------------------- 346.04(1),
(2)
OPERATING AFTER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION --------- 343.44 [Ord.
523 8/02]
OPERATOR, OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW -------------------- 346.88
OWNER'S LIABILITY FOR VEHICLES ILLEGALLY
PASSING SCHOOL BUS --------------------------- 346.485
-PPAINTING
REQUIREMENTS ---------------------------- 347.44
PLACING INJURIOUS SUBSTANCE ON HIGHWAY ----------- 346.94(5)
-RRACING
------------------------------------------- 346.94(2)
RECKLESS AND DRUNKEN DRIVING 346.61 to
346.63
RECKLESS DRIVING OFF HIGHWAYS 941.01
REGISTRATION
Application for 341.08
Banks 341.57
By Resident Lessees 341.07
TRAFFIC
6
Change of Address or Name, Notice of 341.335
Credit Unions 341.57
Dealer, Distributor, Manufacturer
or Transporter 341.51
Display of Certificates 341.11(4)
Display of Plates 341.15
Driver Education Motor Vehicles 341.267
Exemptions 341.05
False Evidence of 341.62
Finance Companies 341.57
Improper Use of Evidence of 341.61
Misuse of Plates 341.55
Personalized Plates 341.145
Reciprocity Permits 341.41 [Ord.
523 8/02]
Surrender of Illegal Plates ------------------ 341.16
Surrender of Plates Upon Suspension ---------- 344.45
RENTING VEHICLES --------------------------------- 343.46
RIGHT-OF-WAY ------------------------------------- 346.18 to
346.21
-SSAFETY
GLASS ------------------------------------- 347.43
SALE OF VEHICLE USED AS TAXICAB ------------------ 342.33
SEAT BELTS --------------------------------------- 347.48
SIDEWALKS, DRIVING ON ---------------------------- 346.94(1)
SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD
Height of Vehicles -------------------------- 348.06
Modification of ----------------------------- 347.455
Length of Vehicles -------------------------- 348.07
Projecting Loads ---------------------------- 348.09
Special Limitations of Load ----------------- 348.10
Vehicle Trains ------------------------------ 348.08
Weight Limitations -------------------------- 348.15 to
348.28
Width of Vehicles --------------------------- 348.05
SKATES
Towing Person on ---------------------------- 346.94(11)
TRAFFIC
7
SKIS
Towing of ------------------------------------ 346.94(11)
SLEDS
Towing of ------------------------------------ 346.94(11)
SNOWMOBILES ------------------------------------- - 350.01 to
350.19
SPEED INDICATORS --------------------------------- 347.41
SPEED RESTRICTIONS ------------------------------- 346.57(2)to
346.59
SPILLING LOADS ----------------------------------- 346.94(7)
STOLEN VEHICLES, REPORT OF ----------------------- 342.31(2)
STOPPING AND PARKING, RESTRICTIONS ON ------------ 346.50 to
346.55
STOPS, REQUIRED ---------------------------------- 346.44 to
346.48
SUSPENSION, DRIVING AFTER ------------------------- 343.44
-TTHROWING
MISSILE IN VEHICLE ------------------------ 346.94(4)
TITLE OF VEHICLE
Duties
Secured Party and Owner ------------------ 342.23
TIRE EQUIPMENT ------------------------------------- 347.45
TOBOGGANS
Towing of ------------------------------------ 346.94(11)
TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS
Obedience to---------------------------------- 346.04(1)
(2)
TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS--------------- 346.37 to
346.42
Passing School Bus Illegally ----------------- 346.485
TRAILOR HITCHES ---------------------------------- 347.47
TRAFFIC
8
TRANSFER OF INTEREST IN A VEHICLE ---------------- 342.15,
342.16
TURNING AND STOPPING, REQUIRED SIGNALS ----------- 346.31 to
346.35
-UUNLAWFUL
USE OF VEHICLE, PERMITTING -------------- 343.45
UNREGISTERED VEHICLE, OPERATION OF --------------- 341.04
-WWINDSHIELD
WIPERS ------------------------------- 347.42
Other Traffic Code Provisions
-BBICYCLES
Riding on Sidewalks Prohibited ---------------- 7.08
-CCONSTRUCTION
--------------------------------------- 7.45
-EENFORCEMENT
---------------------------------------- 7.40
EQUIPMENT, STANDARDS FOR --------------------------- 7.001
EXHIBITION DRIVING --------------------------------- 7.14
-OONE-
WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS ------------------------ 7.03
-PPARKING
RESTRICTIONS ------------------------------- 7.05
All-Night Parking Prohibited ------------------ 7.05(4)
Angle Parking --------------------------------- 7.05(2)
No Parking ------------------------------------ 7.05(3)
Parallel Parking ------------------------------ 7.05(1)
Truck Parking --------------------------------- 7.05(5)
TRAFFIC 7.001
9
PENALTIES ------------------------------------------ 7.50
-SSNOWMOBILES
---------------------------------------- 7.07
SPEED RESTRICTIONS --------------------------------- 7.11
-TTHROUGH
STREETS ------------------------------------ 7.02
TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS ---------------- 7.10,
7.13
-UU-
TURNS PROHIBITED --------------------------------- 7.04
-VVEHICLES
Weight Limits --------------------------------- 7.06
Driving Over Public and Private
Property Prohibited --------------------------- 7.09
Modification to Height of -------------------- 347.455
7.001 STANDARDS FOR MOTOR VEHICLE EQUIPMENT. The statutory
provisions describing and defining standards for motor vehicle
equipment under Chapter 110 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and the
Wisconsin Administrative Code provision adopted pursuant thereto,
including Chapter TRANS 305 of the Administrative Code, exclusive
of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed
or the punishment for violation of same, are hereby adopted and by
reference made a part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. [Ord. 383, 523 8/02]
7.002 OFF-HIGHWAY SCHOOL PREMISES. The statutory
provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to
control of off-highway school premises pursuant to Sec. 118.105,
Wis. Stat., shall apply to, regulate, and govern the operation and
parking of motor vehicles on off-highway public school premises,
school drives and parking lots, and pedestrian traffic on any such
premises, drives or parking lots, where such premises, drives or
TRAFFIC 7.01
10
parking lots are located in the Village of Ellsworth. [Ord. 262]
7.01 STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED. The statutory provisions
describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and
traffic in Chapters 340 – 348, Wisconsin Statutes, including the
following enumerated statutes, all as time from time amended,
exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to
be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are
hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this Chapter as if
fully set forth herein, except to the extent such incorporation by
reference is specifically prohibited by any section in any said
Chapters, in which case such section of any such chapter is not
adopted by reference. Any act required to be performed or
prohibited by any Statute incorporated herein by reference is
required or prohibited by this Chapter. [Ord. 143, 330, Ord. 609
12/2010]
340.01, 341.01,
342.01, 343.01,
344.01, 346.01,
347.01, 348.01 --------- Words and Phrases Defined
341.04 ----------------- Operating Unregistered or Improperly
Registered Vehicle
341.05 ----------------- When Vehicle Exempt from Registration
341.07 ----------------- Certain Vehicles to be Registered by
Resident Lessee
341.08------------------ Application for Registration
341.11(4)--------------- Display of Registration Certificates
341.145 ---------------- Personalized Registration Plates
341.15 ----------------- Display of Registration Plates
341.16(2) -------------- Surrender of Illegal Plates
341.267 ---------------- Driver Education
341.335 ---------------- Notice of Change of Address
341.41 ----------------- Reciprocity Permits [Ord.523 8/02]
341.51 ----------------- Registration of Dealer, Distributor,
Manufacturer or Transporter
341.55 ----------------- Misuse of Plates
341.57 ----------------- Registration of Finance Companies and
Financial Institutions
341.61------------------ Improper Use of Evidence of
Registration
341.62 ----------------- False Evidence of Registration
341.63(3) -------------- Surrender of Plates Upon Suspension
342.05 ----------------- Certificate of Title Required
342.06 ----------------- Application for Certificate of Title
342.15 ----------------- Transfer of Interest in a Vehicle
342.23 ----------------- Secured Party's and Owner's Duties
342.16 ----------------- Transfer to or from Dealer
TRAFFIC 7.01
11
342.30 (2)(3) ---------- Assignment and Stamping of New
Identification Numbers
342.31(2) -------------- Report of Stolen or Abandoned Vehicle
342.33 ----------------- Sale of Vehicle Used as Taxicab
342.34 ----------------- Destruction of Vehicles
343.05 ----------------- Operators to Be Licensed
343.07 ----------------- Instruction Permits[Ord.609 12/2010, Ord.610
03/2011]
343.10 ----------------- Occupational Licenses
343.12 ----------------- School Bus Operators to Obtain Special
License
343.18 ----------------- License to be Carried
343.19 ----------------- Duplicate Licenses
343.22 ----------------- Notice of Change of Address or Name
343.305 ---------------- Implied Consent
343.35 ----------------- Surrender of License Upon Revocation,
Cancellation or Suspension
343.44 ----------------- Driving After Suspension
343.45 ----------------- Permitting Unauthorized Persons to
Drive
343.46 ----------------- Renting Vehicles
343.50 ----------------- Identification Cards
343.52 ----------------- Unlawful Use of Special
Identification Cards
344.45 ----------------- Surrender of License and Registration
Upon Suspension
344.46 ----------------- Transfer of Ownership to Defeat
Financial Responsibility
343.44 ----------------- Operating Vehicle After Suspension or
Revocation of Registration
[Ord. 523 8/02]
344.51 & 344.52 -------- Financial Responsibility for Rented
Vehicles
345.17 ----------------- Penalty for False Statements
345.55 ----------------- Traffic Officers Not to Profit from
Arrests
346.02 ----------------- Applicability of Ch. 346
346.03 ----------------- Authorized Emergency Vehicle
346.04(1) & (2) -------- Obedience to Traffic Officer, Signs and
Signals
346.05 ----------------- Vehicles to be Driven on Right Side of
Roadway
346.06 ----------------- Meeting of Vehicle
346.07 ----------------- Overtaking and Passing on Left
346.075 ---------------- Overtaking and Passing Bicycles
346.08 ----------------- When Overtaking and Passing on Right
346.09 ----------------- Limitations on Overtaking on Left or
Driving on Left Side of Roadway
TRAFFIC 7.01
12
346.10 ----------------- When Passing at Railroad Crossing or
Intersection Prohibited
346.11 ----------------- Passing or Meeting Frightened Animal
346.12 ----------------- Driving Through Safety Zones Prohibited
346.13 ----------------- Driving on Roadways Laned for Traffic
346.14 ----------------- Distance Between Vehicles
346.15 ----------------- Driving on Divided Highway
346.16 ----------------- Use of Controlled-Access Highways,
Expressways and Freeways
346.18 ----------------- General Rules of Right-of-Way
346.19 ----------------- What to do on Approach of Emergency
Vehicle
346.20 ----------------- Right-of-Way of Funeral Processions
and Military Convoys
346.21 ----------------- Right-of-Way of Livestock
346.23 ----------------- Crossing Controlled Intersection or
Crosswalk
346.24 ----------------- Crossing at Uncontrolled Intersection
or Crosswalk
346.25 ----------------- Crossing at Place Other Than Crosswalk
346.26 ----------------- Blind Pedestrian on Highway
346.27 ----------------- Persons Working on Highway
346.28 ----------------- Pedestrians to Walk on Left Side of
Highway; Pedestrians on Sidewalks
346.29 ----------------- When Standing or Loitering in Roadway
or Highway Prohibited
346.31 ----------------- Required Position and Method of
Turning at Intersections
346.32 ----------------- Required Position for Turning Into
Private Road or Driveway
346.33 ----------------- Where Turns Prohibited
346.34 ----------------- Turning Movements and Required Signals
on Turning and Stopping
346.35 ----------------- Method of Giving Signals on Turning
and Stopping
346.37 ----------------- Traffic-Control Signal Legend
346.38 ----------------- Pedestrian Control Signals
346.39 ----------------- Flashing Signals
346.40 ----------------- Whistle Signals
346.41 ----------------- Display of Unauthorized Signs and
Signals Prohibited
346.42 ----------------- Interference With Signs and Signals
Prohibited
346.44 ----------------- All Vehicles to Stop at Signal
Indicating Approach of Train
TRAFFIC 7.01
13
346.45 ----------------- Certain Vehicles to Stop at All
Railroad Crossings
346.46 ----------------- Vehicles to Stop at Stop Signs
346.47 ----------------- When Vehicles Using Alley or Non-
Highway Access to Stop
346.48 ----------------- Vehicles to Stop for School Buses
Loading or Unloading Children
(Ord. 240)
346.485 ---------------- Owner's Liability for Vehicle
Illegally Passing School Bus
346.50 ----------------- Exceptions to Stopping and Parking
Restrictions
346.505 ---------------- Stopping, Standing or Parking
Prohibited in Parking Spaces
Reserved for Vehicles
Displaying Special
Registration Plates or
Special Identification Cards
346.51 ----------------- Stopping, Standing or Parking Outside
of Business or Residence Districts
346.52 ------------------ Stopping Prohibited in Certain
Specified Places
346.53 ----------------- Parking Prohibited in Certain
Specified Places
346.54 ----------------- How to Park and Stop on Streets
346.55 ----------------- Other Restrictions on Parking and
Stopping
346.57(2) -------------- Reasonable and Prudent Speed
346.57(3) -------------- Conditions Requiring Reduced Speed
346.57(4)(a)-(c) ------- Fixed Speed Limits in School or Safety
Zones
346.57(4)(d)-(h) ------- Fixed Speed Limits
346.57(4)(i) ----------- Speeding in Park or Recreation Area
346.57(5) -------------- Zoned and Posted Speed Limits
346.58 ----------------- Special Speed Restrictions for Certain
Vehicles
346.59 ----------------- Minimum Speed Regulations
346.595 ---------------- Motor-Driven Cycles [Ord. 195]
346.61 ----------------- Applicability of Sections Relating to
Reckless and Drunken Driving
346.62 ----------------- Reckless Driving
346.63 ----------------- Operating Under Influence of
Intoxicant
346.66 ----------------- Applicability of Sections Relating to
Accidents and Accident Reporting
TRAFFIC 7.01
14
346.67 ----------------- Duty Upon Striking Person or Attended
or Occupied Vehicle
346.68 ----------------- Duty Upon Striking Unattended Vehicle
346.69 ----------------- Duty Upon Striking Property on or
Adjacent to Highway
346.70 ----------------- Duty to Report Accident
346.71 ----------------- Coroners Report
346.72 ----------------- Garages to Keep Record of Repairs of
Accident Damage
346.73 ----------------- Accident Reports Confidential
346.77 ----------------- Responsibility of Parent or Guardian
for Violation of Bicycle and Play
Vehicle Regulations
346.78 ----------------- Play Vehicles Not to be Used on
Roadway
346.79 ----------------- Special Rules Applicable to Bicycles
346.80 ----------------- Riding Bicycle on Roadway
346.803 ---------------- Riding Bicycle on Bicycle Way
346.804 ---------------- Riding Bicycle on Sidewalks
347.489 ---------------- Lamps and Other Equipment on Bicycles
[Ord. 523 8/02]
346.87 ----------------- Limitations on Backing
346.88 ----------------- Obstruction of Operator
346.89 ----------------- Inattentive Driving
346.90 ----------------- Following Emergency Vehicle
346.91 ----------------- Crossing Fire Hose
346.92 ----------------- Illegal Riding
346.93 ----------------- Intoxicants in Vehicles; Underage
Persons [Ord. 195]
346.935 ---------------- Intoxicants in Motor Vehicles
[Ord.219,247]
346.94 ----------------- Miscellaneous Prohibited Acts
347.02 ----------------- Applicability of Ch. 347
347.03 ----------------- Sale of Prohibited Equipment[Ord. 523 8/02]
347.04 ----------------- Improperly Equipped Vehicle
347.06 ----------------- When Lighted Lamps Required
347.07 ----------------- Special Restrictions on Lamps and the
Use Thereof
347.08 ----------------- Determining the Visibility Distance
and Mounted Height of Lamps
347.09 ----------------- Headlamps on Motor Vehicles
347.10 ----------------- Headlamp Specifications for Motor
Vehicles Other Than Power-Driven
Cycle
TRAFFIC 7.01
15
347.11 ----------------- Headlamp Specifications for Power-
Driven Cycles and Motor Bicycles
347.115 ---------------- Modulating Headlamps for Motorcycles
Motor Bicycles or Mopeds
347.12 ----------------- Use of Multiple-Beam Headlamps
347.13 ----------------- Tail Lamps and Registration Plate
Lamps
347.14 ----------------- Stop Lamps
347.15 ----------------- Direction Signal Lamps or Devices
347.16 ----------------- Clearance Lamps and Reflectors
347.17 ----------------- Color of Clearance and Marker Lamps
and Reflectors
347.18 ----------------- Mounting of Clearance Lamps and
Reflectors
347.19 ----------------- Visibility of Clearance Lamps and
Reflectors
347.20 ----------------- Lamp or Flag on Projecting Load
347.21 ----------------- Lamps and Flags on Trains of
Agricultural Vehicles
347.22 ----------------- Lamps on Farm Tractors and Self-
Propelled Farm Implements
347.23 ----------------- Lamps on Highway Maintenance
Equipment
347.24 ----------------- Lamps on Non-motor Vehicles and
Equipment
347.25 ----------------- Special Warning Lamps on Emergency
Vehicles
347.26 ----------------- Restrictions on Certain Optional
Lighting Equipment
347.27 ----------------- When Lighted Lamps Required on Parked
Vehicles
347.28 ----------------- Certain Vehicles to Carry Flares or
Other Warning Devices
347.29 ----------------- Display of Warning Devices for
Certain Vehicles When Standing
on Highway
347.35 ----------------- Brakes
347.36 ----------------- Performance Ability of Brakes
347.38 ----------------- Horns and Warning Devices
347.39 ----------------- Mufflers
347.40 ----------------- Mirrors
347.41 ----------------- Speed Indicators
347.415 ---------------- Odometer Tampering
347.42 ----------------- Windshield Wipers
347.43 ----------------- Safety Glass
347.44 ----------------- Painting Requirements
TRAFFIC 7.01
16
347.45 ----------------- Tire Equipment
347.455 ---------------- Modifications to Height of Vehicle
347.46 ----------------- Fenders and Mudguards
347.47 ----------------- Drawbars, Trailer Hitches and Mobile
Home Couplings
347.48 ----------------- Seat Belts
347.485 ---------------- Protective Headgear for Motorcyclist
347.486 ---------------- General Requirements (Motorcyclists)
347.487 ---------------- Seating Requirements (Motorcyclists)
347.49 ----------------- Equipment of Vehicles Transporting
Flammable Liquids
348.02 ----------------- Applicability of Ch. 348
348.05 ----------------- Width of Vehicles
348.06 ----------------- Height of Vehicles
348.07 ----------------- Length of Vehicles
348.08 ----------------- Vehicle Trains
348.09 ----------------- Projecting Loads on Side of Vehicle
348.10 ----------------- Special Limitations on Load
348.15 ----------------- Weight Limitations on Class "A"
Highways
348.16 ----------------- Weight Limitations on Class "B"
Highways
348.17 ----------------- Special or Seasonal Weight
Limitations
348.175----------------- Seasonal Operating Rights for
Vehicles Hauling Peeled or
Unpeeled Forest Products
Cut Crosswise
348.18 ----------------- Weight Limitations Apply to Publicly-
Owned Vehicles; Exceptions
348.185 ---------------- Empty Weight to be Indicated on Side
of Certain Vehicles; Rules
348.19 ----------------- Traffic Officers May Weigh Vehicles
and Require Removal of
Excess Load
348.20 ----------------- Policy in Prosecuting Weight
Violations
348.25 ----------------- General Provisions Relating to
Permits for Vehicles and Loads
of Excessive Size and Weight
348.26 ----------------- Single Trip Permits
348.27 ----------------- Annual or Multiple Trip Permits
348.28------------------ Permits to be Carried
350.01 to 350.19 ------- Snowmobiles
941.01 ----------------- Reckless Driving Off Highways
TRAFFIC 7.02(1)
17
86.02-86.025 ----------- Highway Obstruction
[Ord. 143, 148, 240, 298, 523 8/02]
7.02 THROUGH STREETS. The following streets shall be through streets:
(1) Main Street from the west Village limits to the east Village
limits.
(2) Maple Street from the north curb line of Main Street to the north
Village limits. [Ord. 143]
7.03 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS. Vehicular traffic shall move only in the
direction indicated on the following streets and alleys:
(1) Chestnut Street between Woodworth and Church Street, vehicular
traffic to proceed north.
(2) The alley from Plum Street to Chestnut Street, all eastbound
traffic upon entering Chestnut Street to turn only to the left and proceed
north. [Ord. 158]
(3) Broadway Street, vehicular traffic to proceed north. The parking
on such streets shall be angle parking facing north on both sides of such
street. [Ord. 175]
7.04 U-TURNS PROHIBITED. In addition to the turns prohibited by Sec.
346.33, Wis. Stats., the operator of a vehicle shall not turn his vehicle so
as to proceed in the opposite direction upon a street or highway at any of
the following intersections:
(1) Main and Plum Streets.
(2) Main and Chestnut Streets
(3) Main and Grant Streets.
(4) Main and Bay Streets. [Ord. 149]
7.05 PARKING RESTRICTIONS. (1) PARALLEL PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS. No
person shall park a vehicle other than parallel to the edge of the street
headed in the direction of traffic on the right side of the street and with
the right
wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches of the curb or edge of the
street, and not closer than 2 feet from another vehicle upon the following
streets or portions of streets:
(a) Main Street, the entire length.
TRAFFIC 7.05(1)(b)
18
(b) Plum Street, extending one block south from Main
street to Spruce Street.
(c) Chestnut Street, extending one block north from Main Street
to Kinne Street and one block south from Main Street to Spruce
Street.
(d) Grant Street, extending one block north from Main Street to
Kinne Street and one block south from Main Street.
(e) Maple Street, north of Main Street. [Ord. 143, 148]
(2) ANGLE PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS. No person shall park a vehicle
on any street or highway in the business district in said Village other than
described in par. (1) of this section other than against the right-hand
curb, if there be a curb, and only on the right-handed side of the street.
Such vehicle shall be so parked that the right front wheel shall touch the
curb, or if there be no curb, the outside line of the sidewalk, or as nearly
to the outside line of the sidewalk as practicable and so that it shall make
with the curb or sidewalk with its shorter angle in angle of approximately
45 degrees, and so that it shall least discommode public travel on the
street and other drivers of vehicles who may desire to park, and where lines
are marked on the street designating the angle for parking and the area to
be occupied by each vehicle, parking shall be parallel to and between such
designating lines. [Ord. 138]
(3) NO PARKING. (a) The Village Board may designate by resolution
or ordinance streets with respect to which no parking is allowed, or where
only restricted parking is permitted. The Director of Public Works or Chief
of Police shall mark by suitable sign or curb markings those portions of
streets in the Village within which parking restrictions shall apply.
Length of time and other parking limits shall be specified and the signs
shall include words such as "No Parking," "Two Hour Parking Only," or
"Handicapped Parking Only." In addition the Director of Public Works or
Chief of Police may post "No Parking" or other appropriate traffic control
signs during times of public emergency, traffic accidents or road
construction. [Ord. 214, 354, 447, 610 03/11, 619 01/12, 634 09/13]
(b) "Parking shall be prohibited on the following streets or
portions thereof."
(1) That portion of North Maple Street between Cairns
Street and the entry to the Pierce County Fair Grounds
is designated a no parking area, and no vehicles may
park on either side of such portion of North Maple
Street at any time. [Ord. 174]
(2) East Main Street at Broadway. That portion of the South
side of East Main Street from a point 72 feet east of
TRAFFIC 7.05(3)(b)(3)
19
the east curb line of Broadway extending west for 231
feet, and no vehicle may park within such area at any
time.
(3) East Main Street At Morse. The South side of East Main
Street (US Highway 10)from the center line of Morse
Street to a point 490 feet East of the center line of
Morse Street; and, on the North side of East Main Street
from the center line of Morse Street to a point 510 feet
East of the center line of Morse Street; and on the
north side of Main Street 215 feet and the South side of
Main 380 feet West of the center line of Morse Street.
(4) Main Street East of Piety. The Southside of Main Street
(US Highway 10)extending from the West curb of Piety
Street to the West driveway curb cut of Dar Street.
Also, the North side of Main Street from the East curb
of Piety Street to a point directly North of the East
curb of Dar Street; except that part lying between a
point directly North of the East curb cut of Outlot 274
to a point directly North of the East curb cut of Beebe
Street
(5) Main Street West of Piety. That portion of the South
side of Main Street (US Highway 10) extending from the
West curb of Piety Street to a point 90 feet West of the
West curb of Piety Street.
(6) Main Street East of Maple. That portion of the North
and South side of Main Street (US Highway 10) extending
from the East curb of Maple Street to a point 44 feet
East of the East curb of Oak Street.
(7) Main Street West of Maple. That portion of the North
and the South side of Main Street (US Highway 10)
extending from the West curb of Maple Street to a
point 207 feet West of the West curb of Oak Street.
(8) Maple Street North of Main. That portion of the East
and the West side of Maple Street (US Highway 65)
extending from the North curb of Main Street to the
South curb of Kinne Street.
(9) West Kinne West of Grant. The South side of Kinne
Street extending from the West curb of Grant Street to
the East curb of Chestnut Street.
(10) West Kinne West of Chestnut Street. The North side of
Kinne Street from the West curb of Chestnut Street to a
point 315 feet west of the West curb of Chestnut.
TRAFFIC 7.05(3)(b)(11)
20
(11) West Kinne East of Oak. The South side of Kinne Street
from the East curb of Oak Street to a point 476 feet
East of the East curb of Oak Street.
(12) Plum Street South of Main. That portion of the East
side of Plum Street extending from the South curb of
Main Street to the North curb of Spruce Street.
(13) Grant Street North of Cairns. That portion of the North
and the South side of Grant Street extending from the
South curb of Cairns Street 220 feet North of Grant
Street.
(14) Grant Street and Hollywood. That portion on the East
side of Grant Street extending from the South curb of
Hollywood 196 feet South of the South curb of Hollywood
on Grant Street; and, on the West side of Grant Street
from 236 feet South of the South curb of Hollywood
extending 348 feet North to the East entrance of the
Pierce County Fairgrounds.
(15) Yellow Painted Curbs. That portion of any street
adjacent to a yellow painted curb or otherwise
designated by official traffic sign.[Ord. 634 09/13]
(c) Fair Parking. From 8:00 a.m. on the Tuesday immediately
preceding the weekend of the annual Pierce County Fair at
Ellsworth, Wisconsin, through the succeeding Monday, at 8:00 a.m.,
there shall be no parking allowed on the following Streets: [Ord.
423, 634 09/13]
Cairns St.: From Highway 65 (North Maple) east to North
Grant. [Ord. 447]
(4) ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED. No person shall park on any street
or highway in the Village any vehicle, except physicians on emergency calls,
between 2 a.m. and 6 a.m. from and after November 1 in any year to and
including March 31 in the following year. [Ord. 233, 443, 545 12/2004]
(5) TRUCK PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS PROHIBITED. When signs are
erected in any block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a truck on
any portion of Main Street or on any portion of Chestnut Street at any time,
except while loading or unloading, and such loading or unloading shall be
accomplished diligently and with all reasonable and practical speed.
(6) PARKING LIMITS. (a) When signs are erected in any block giving
notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time between 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and public holidays for
longer than 2 hours upon that portion of Broadway between Wall Street and
Main Street, that portion of Wall Street between Cross Cut Avenue and
Morse Street, that portion of Main Street between Maple Street and Piety
TRAFFIC 7.05(6)(b)
21
Street, that portion of Main Street between Broadway and Morse Street, or
upon any street between Maple Street and Piety Street, both such streets
included, for one block north and on block south of Main street near the
post office designated and marked for such limited parking time. In
addition to those portions of streets enumerated therein, there shall also
be a two hour parking restriction as more particularly described in said
Section on the North side of that portion of Kinne Street from the Southwest
corner of Lot 3, Block C, Kinne's Addition to the Village of Ellsworth West
to Oak Street, and on that portion of the South side of Kinne Street from a
point commencing 12 feet East of the Northwest corner of Outlot 113 of the
Assessor's Plat of the Village of Ellsworth East to Chestnut Street. [Ord.
143, 148, 151, 165, 172, 252, 256, 403]
(b) No person shall park a motor vehicle adjacent to any curb
which is painted yellow, within the Village of Ellsworth. [Ord
252]
(c) No person other than a handicapped person, shall park a motor
vehicle adjacent to any curb which is marked or posted as a
handicapped parking area or stall. [Ord. 256]
(7) PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES RESTRICTED. (a) Street Parking;
Trucks, Trailers and Similar Vehicles. No person owning or having control
of any truck, trailer, truck power unit, tractor, bus or powered recreation
vehicle or combination of vehicles, weighing in excess of fifteen thousand
(15,000) pounds gross weight, or over twenty-two (22) feet in length
(including accessories, racks, or other physical extensions), or having a
height of more than eight (8) feet from the traveled portion of the roadway,
shall park the same upon any street, avenue, or public way in the Village of
Ellsworth in areas zoned residential (including R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4) or
commercial. Where one side of the street is so zoned as to prohibit parking
under this section, and the other side of the street is so zoned, as it
would not normally prohibit such parking, parking shall be prohibited on
both sides of the street. The provisions of this subsection shall not be
deemed to prohibit the lawful temporary parking of such equipment upon any
street, avenue or public way in the Village for the actual loading or
unloading of goods, ware or merchandise, providing, however, the permissible
“loading” and “unloading” as used in this subsection, shall be limited to
the actual time consumed in such operation. The Village Board may, in
addition, designate by resolution specific truck parking zones. [Ord 668 9/18]
(b) Forty-eight (48) Hour Limitation. Nor person shall park or
leave standing any automobile, truck, boat trailer (including, but not
limited to, recreational trailers, boat trailers, utility trailers, ATV/UTV
trailers, and snowmobile trailers), or any other vehicle of any type or
description (collectively “vehicle”) on any public street or Village of
Ellsworth property in the Village of Ellsworth for a period of forty-eight
(48) or more consecutive hours in the same location at any time within any
120-hour period. It shall not be a defense to a citation charged under this
subsection that the vehicle was not parked in the exact location and thus
there is no “technical” violation. A vehicle shall be deemed in violation
TRAFFIC 7.05(7)(c)
22
of this subsection if it has been parked for more than forty-eight (48)
hours out of a consecutive 120-houre period in any place in front of or
adjacent to a premise owned by the same owner or related owners. “Related
owners” include spouses, children, revocable and irrevocable trusts whose
beneficiaries are the individual, spouses or children, stockholders in
corporations and the corporation itself, and corporations and their
subsidiaries. [Ord 668 9/2018]
(c) Dumpsters. No person shall place or park any dumpster or
“roll off” used for collection of trash or rubbish on any street, roadway,
alleyway or other public place or area unless equipped as follows:
(1) Each corner of the dumpster shall exhibit two
reflective signs (one immediately adjacent to each side of
the angle formed by the meeting of the two sides) of not less
than 48 square inches which shall be placed at least four
feet above the roadway surface. For example, a rectangular
dumpster will require 8 reflective signs.
(2) Each dumpster unit shall have affixed to it the name,
address and telephone number of the owner.
(3) No dumpster shall be placed upon any street or alleyway
unless such dumpster is placed upon wooden planking or other
similar material sufficient to protect the roadway surface.
(d) Placement of Dumpsters. The following regulations shall
apply to placement of dumpsters:
(1) No dumpster used for collection of trash or rubbish
shall be placed or parked on any parking space required under
Chapter 46, Zoning of this code.
(2) Dumpsters used for demolition or construction debris may
be allowed on a public street or alleyway only if there is no
other on-site space available.
(3) Any person placing a dumpster on any street, alleyway,
or other public place shall first obtain a permit from the
Police Department. The fee for a permit shall be as is
established from time to time by the Village Board. The
form of the dumpster permit shall be as is attached here to
and on file with the Village Clerk.
(e) Street Vendors. No sales of food or merchandise,
including produce, flowers, crafts and artwork, may be made from vehicles,
trailers, stalls, carts, wagons, tables or otherwise within the right-of-way
of any street or highway in the Village of Ellsworth except such streets or
highways as may be designated by the Village
TRAFFIC 7.05(7)(f)
23
Board from time to time by resolution as streets or highways, or portions
thereof, upon which such sales may take place. [Ord.562 08/2006]
(f) Removal, Penalty. Any vehicle unlawfully parked under
subsection (a)thru (d) above shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle for
purpose of removal and may therefore be removed from the street as a public
nuisance pursuant to §9.09 (2), Municipal Code. The expense of so moving
and storing such vehicle shall be paid by the operator or owner of said
vehicle as a forfeiture in addition to the penalties impose under Section
25.04. [Ord. 515, 562 08/06, Ord. 668 9/18]
7.06 VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS. All streets and alleys within the Village,
except those known and marked as Wisconsin State Highway 65 and Federal
Highways 10 and 63, are hereby designated Class "B" Highways and shall be
subject to the weight limitations imposed by Sec. 348.16, Wis. Stats. [Ord.
143, 425]
7.07 SNOWMOBILES. (1) STATE SNOWMOBILE LAWS ADOPTED. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions describing
and defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles in the following
enumerated sections of the Wisconsin statutes are hereby adopted by
reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Acts
required to be performed or prohibited by such statutes are required or
prohibited by this section:
(a) 350.01 Definitions
(b) 350.02 Operation of Snowmobiles on or in the Vicinity of a
Highway
(c) 350.03 Right-of-Way)
(d) 350.04 Snowmobile Races, Derbies and Routes
(e) 350.045 Public Utility Exemption
(f) 350.047 Local Ordinance to be Filed
(g) 350.05 Operation by Youthful Operators Restricted
(h) 350.055 Safety Certification Program Established
[Ord. 523 8/02]
(i) 167.31(2)Firearms and Bows [Ord. 523 8/02]
(j) 350.07 (Driving Animals
(k) 350.08 Owner Permitting Operation
(l) 350.09 Head Lamps, Tail Lamps and Brakes
(m) 350.10 Miscellaneous Provisions for
Snowmobiles
(n) 350.12 Registration of Snowmobiles
(o) 350.13 Uniform Trail Signs and Standards
(p) 350.15 Accident and Accident Reports
(q) 350.17 Enforcement
(r) 350.18 Local Ordinances
(s) 350.19 Liability of Land Owners
TRAFFIC 7.07(2)
24
(2) APPLICABILITY OF RULES OF THE ROAD TO SNOWMOBILES. The operator of
a snowmobile upon a roadway shall in addition to the provisions of Ch. 350
be subject to Secs. 346.04, 346.06, 346.11, 346.14(1), 346.18, 346.19,
346.20, 346.21, 346.26, 346.27, 346.33, 346.35, 346.37, 346.39, 346.40,
346.44, 346.46, 346.47, 346.48, 346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52, 346.53,
346.54, 346.55, 346.87, 346.88, 346.89, 346.90, 346.91, 346.92(1) and
346.94(1),(2) & (9), Wis. Stats. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(3) SNOWMOBILE ROUTES AND TRAILS DESIGNATED. (a) Except as provided
in Secs. 350.02 and 350.045, Wis. Stats., or for snowmobile events
authorized in accordance with Sec. 350.04, Wis. Stats., no person shall
operate a snowmobile upon any public right-of-way or on any other public
property in the Village, except upon the following designated snowmobile
routes: Cope St. West from Walnut to S. Piety St.: North on Piety St. to
Strickland; West on Strickland to S. Grant : North on Grant to Summit Ave.;
East on Summit to 122 East Summit Avenue. Also, Railroad Ave. from 145
North Railroad Ave.; South to Morse St.; Morse St. to intersection with Hwy.
10. Also, South Wallace Street. Also, Kinne St. between Grant and Beulah
St.; South on Beulah to intersection with Main Street. Also, Grant St.
North from Summit to Cairns St.; West on Cairns across Hwy. 65, to West end
of Cairns St. The designated snowmobile routes and trails shall be shown on
an official map to be prepared by the Chief of Police, and left on display
in his office and the office of the Village Clerk during normal business
hours.[Ord.609 12/2010]
(b) No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any State, Federal
or Village highway within the Village, other than to drive
directly across such street or highway at right angles to the
roadway, and only at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing, and then only after stopping and yielding the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such street or
highway. [Ord. 392, 406]
(4) OPERATION ON VILLAGE STREETS. Operators of snowmobiles:
(a) Shall yield to all vehicular traffic and pedestrian traffic.
(b) Shall come to a complete stop before entering any
intersection.
(c) Shall conform with all rules and regulations set forth in
Chap. 350 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(d) Shall not operate a snowmobile on a public sidewalk provided
for pedestrian travel.
(e) Shall not operate on any trails or permitted
streets or crossings within the Village of Ellsworth during any
period when the Pierce County snowmobile trails are closed by the
Pierce County Snowmobile Council. [Ord. 406, 435]
TRAFFIC 7.07(5)
25
(5) SPEED. All operation of snowmobiles shall be at a speed not over
15 miles per hour between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., and not more than 10
miles per hour at other hours, whether on or off a public street; provided,
however, that supervised racing contests or similar events sponsored by
valid snowmobile organizations may be conducted at designated places and
during designated hours upon permit therefore being obtained from the
Village. Application for such permit shall be made to the Village Clerk at
least 5 days prior to the day of each event, accompanied by a permit fee of
$50.00. No such event shall be conducted without permit therefore having
been issued. [Ord 197, Ord. 609 12/2010]
(6) OPERATION WITH DUE CARE. All operation of snowmobiles in the
Village shall be with due regard to the safety of the operator, his/her
passengers, all other persons and the property and property rights of all
persons.
(7) REGISTRATION. All snowmobiles operated in the Village shall be
validly registered pursuant to Sec. 350.12, Wis. Stats., and shall display
the registration number as required by such statute.
(8) EQUIPMENT. All snowmobiles operated in the Village shall be
equipped with a head lamp, tail lamp and brakes as required by Sec. 350.09,
Wis. Stats., and such head lamp and tail lamp shall be lighted at all times
during operation of a snowmobile, regardless of the hour of the day.
(9) OWNER PERMITTING OPERATION. No owner or other person having
charge or control of a snowmobile shall knowingly authorize or permit any
person to operate such snowmobile who is incapable, by reason of age,
physical or mental disability or under the influence of intoxicating liquor,
fermented malt beverages, narcotics or other drugs.
(10) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS FOR SNOWMOBILE AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE
OPERATION. No person shall operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle in
the following manner:
(a) At a rate of speed that is unreasonable or improper
under the circumstances.
(b) In any careless way so as to endanger the person or
property of another.
(c) While under the influence of intoxicating liquor,
fermented malt beverages, narcotics or other drugs.
(d) In such a way that the exhaust of the motor makes an
excessive or unusual noise.
(e) Without a functioning muffler.
(f) On the private property of another without the consent of
TRAFFIC 7.07(10)(f)
26
the owner or lessee. Failure to post private property does not
imply consent for snowmobile use. Any other motor-driven craft or
vehicle principally manufactured for off-highway use shall at all
times have the consent of the owner before operation of such craft
or vehicle on private lands.
(g) On a slide, ski or skating area except to serve the
area, crossing at places where marked or after stopping and
yielding the right-of-way.
(h) On or across a cemetery, burial ground, school or
church property without consent of the owner.
(i) On or across a public park, street boulevard or
conservancy district. [Ord. 359]
(j) The term "all-terrain vehicle," insofar as this subsection 10
applies to off-road or off-highway use, shall be deemed to include
those vehicles defined in Sec. 340.01(2g), Wis. Stats., as well as
any off road vehicle having less than three wheels.
7.08 BICYCLE AND SKATEBOARDS REGULATED ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.
(1) No person shall ride a bicycle on any sidewalk in the Village.
(2) No person shall operate a skateboard on any public sidewalk on
Main Street between Maple St. and Beulah St.[Ord. 579 08/06]
7.085 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE ROUTES
(1) DEFINITIONS
(a) All-Terrain Vehicle. The term “all-terrain vehicle”
includes those vehicles defined in Section 340.01(2)(g),
Wis. Stats.
(b) Roadway. Any public street, highway or alley in the
Village of Ellsworth.
(2) OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
(a) No person may operate an all-terrain vehicle on the roadway
portion of any alley, street or highway in the Village
except:
(1) As otherwise provided in Wis. Stats. 23.33(4).
(2) On roadways designated as all-terrain vehicle routes
under subsection (3).
(3) On all other streets other than Us Highway 10, US
Highway 63 and US Highway 65, when the operator of the
all-terrain vehicle is driving the all-terrain vehicle
TRAFFIC 7.085(2)(a)(3)
27
directly to or from the operator’s residence to a
designated all-terrain vehicle route using the
shortest route reasonably possible and without
deviation therefrom. US Highway 10, 63 and 65 may be
crossed for the purpose permitted under this
subsec.(2)(a)3. [ord. 676]
(b) The operation of all-terrain vehicles on an all-terrain
vehicle route is authorized only for the extreme right side
of the roadway, in the same direction as vehicular traffic
flow except, left turns may be made from any part of the
roadway; where it is safe to do so given prevailing
conditions.
(c) All-terrain vehicles must be operated on the paved portion
of the roadway and not on the dirt or gravel shoulder.
(d) All-terrain vehicles may not be operated on roads closed to
vehicular traffic for maintenance, repair, construction or other
purposes.
(3) DESIGNATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE ROUTES
The following routes are designated all-terrain vehicle routes in the
Village:
The southerly one-half of Crosstown Road from the Westerly Village limits
adjoining Trimbelle Township, crossing State Highway 65, to the
intersection of Railroad Avenue; Railroad Avenue to the intersection of
Wall Street and Morse Street; thence in two directions: 1) Morse Street to
Main Street, terminating at US Highway 10; and 2)extending from Railroad
Avenue along Wall Street to Crosscut Street, crossing U.S. Highway 10 to
Hillsdale Street, then along Hillsdale Street to Pleasant Avenue; then
westerly to Dar Street; then terminating on the Westerly side of Dar
Street. Ridge Road from South Maple Street to County Road C. From the
intersection of Crosstown Avenue and Lucas Lane; then on Lucas Lane to the
intersection of Lucas Lane and the Northwesterly entrance to ShopKo
parking lot; then on Lucas Lane to Overlook Drive; Overlook Drive to Brown
Street; Brown Street to Industrial Road; Industrial Road to Vincent Lane,
Vincent Lane to Cairns Street; Cairns Street to N. Grant Street; Grant
Street to Kinne Street; thence on Kinne Street in two directions: 1)
Westerly to Pierce County Government Center parking lot, and there ending;
and 2) Easterly to the intersection with Beulah Street, thence to Main
Street and there ending.[Ord. 647 01/2016]
(4) CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE ROUTES
The following restrictions are placed on the use of
all-terrain vehicle routes in the Village:
TRAFFIC 7.085(4)(a)
28
(a) Routes designated by this Section shall be marked and
maintained by the Pierce County ATV Association (as approved by
the Public Works Director) with uniform all-terrain route signs
in accordance with s. NR 64.12(7), Wisconsin Administrative
Code. No person may do any of the following in regard to signs
marking Village all-terrain vehicle routes:
(1) Intentionally remove, damage, deface, move, or
obstruct any uniform all-terrain vehicle route or
trail sign or standard or intentionally interfere
with the effective operation of any uniform
all-terrain vehicle route or trail sign or
standard if the sign or standard is legally
placed by the state, any municipality or any
authorized individual.
(2) Possess any uniform all-terrain vehicle route or
trail sign or standard of the type established by
the Department of Natural Resources for the
warning, instruction or information of the
public, unless he or she obtained the uniform
all-terrain vehicle route or trail sign or
standards if the sign or standard is legally
placed by the state, any municipality or any
authorized individual.
(b) Operation shall be subject to all provisions of s. 23.33,
Wis. Stats., which is adopted as a part of this ordinance
By reference, pursuant to Sec. 23.33(11), Wis. Stats.
(5) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
(a) In addition to the provisions of Sec. 23.33, Wis. Stats.,
the following restrictions are placed on the use of the
Village all-terrain vehicle routes designated by this
Section: [ord. 676]
(1) All-terrain vehicle operators shall observe a
speed limit of 25-mph unless posted speed limit
is higher, in which case the higher speed limit
must be observed.
(2) All-terrain operators shall drive single file.
(3) The allowed hours of operation shall be from
6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. [ord. 676]
(4) All-terrain vehicle operators under the age of 18
and those born on or after January 1, 1988 shall
TRAFFIC 7.085(5)(a)(5)
29
possess a valid state-issued ATV Safety
Certification.
(5) All-terrain operators under the ages of 12 to 15
must be under the direct supervision of a parent
or legal guardian at all times when operating on
a designated all-terrain vehicle route.
(b) No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle in a manner
contrary to Sec. 7.07(10)(a) through (i) of the Code of
Ordinances.
(c) All-terrain vehicles operated in the Village shall be
validly registered and shall display the registration number as
required by law.
(d) All-terrain vehicles operated in the Village shall be
equipped with such equipment as is required under State law.
(e) Operators of all-terrain vehicles shall:
(1) yield to all vehicular traffic and pedestrian
traffic,
(2) come to a complete stop before entering any
intersection,
(3) not operate on a public sidewalk provided for
pedestrian travel. [ord. 676]
(4) operate with due regard to the safety of the
operator, his/her passengers, all other persons
and the property and the property rights of all
persons.
(5) Shall ride single file,[ord. 676]
(6) Operate with headlights and taillights on at all
times,[ord.676]
(7) Where the operator is 12 years of age but less
than 16 years of age, the operator must be under
the direct supervision of a parent or legal
guardian at all times while operating the allterrain
vehicle, and[ord. 676
(8) If under the age of 18, must wear a helmet
designed and approved for ATV/UTV use and safety
purposes.[ord. 676]
(f) No all-terrain vehicle may be operated by any operator who
is under the age of 12 years.[ord. 676]
(6) PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of this Section shall upon conviction
TRAFFIC 7.085(7)
30
forfeit not less than $25 nor more than $250.
(7) This section is repealed effective 11:59 p.m. on December 31,
2020, unless otherwise extended by Ordinance of the Village Board.[Ord.588
07/08, 590 01/09, 602 01/10, 605 06/10, 613 06/11, 619 01/12, 630 1/13, 636 12/13, 641
12/14,646 12/15, 657 12/16, 666 12/2017, 670 12/18, 676 7/8/19, 680 12/19]
(8) This ordinance shall take effect upon passing and publication.
7.086 UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLES AND ROUTES
(1) DEFINITION: A utility terrain vehicle is defined as a motor
driven device with a gross weight of more than 900 pounds but not more
than 1,999 pounds that is designed to be used primarily off of a highway
and that has certain characteristics such as seats for at least two (2)
occupants, which are designed not to be straddled.
(2) PROVISIONS OF ALL TERRAIN VEHICLES AND ROUTES APPLY. The
provisions of Sec. 7.085 concerning definitions, operation, designation of
routes, conditions applicable, miscellaneous provisions and penalty
provisions, as they apply to all terrain vehicles, shall also apply to
utility terrain vehicles.
(3) This Section is repealed effective 11:59 p.m. on December 31,
2020, unless otherwise extended by Ordinance of the Village Board.[Ord.623
06/12,635 09/13,636 12/13,641 12/14,646 12/15,657 12/16,666 12/2017,670 12/18,680 12/19]]
7.09 DRIVING VEHICLES OVER PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY NOT DESIGNATED FOR
VEHICULAR TRAFFIC PROHIBITED. No person shall intentionally operate a
motor vehicle within the Village over, on or across property owned by the
Village, the County or Joint School District No. 1 of Ellsworth unless such
vehicle is operated thereon in areas designated for motor vehicular traffic,
or unless the property owner or the custodial authority of such property
consents to such vehicle operation. [Ord. 230, 262]
7.10 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS. (1) The Director of Public Works
is hereby authorized and directed to procure, erect and maintain appropriate
standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to the rules of the
State Division of Highways giving such notice of the provisions of secs.
7.02 through 7.06 of this chapter as required by State law. Signs shall
also be erected in such locations and manner as authorized by the governing
body as to give adequate warning to users of the street, alley or highway in
question. [Ord. 143, 148, 266, 443, Ord. 610 03/2011]
(2) REMOVAL OF UNOFFICIAL SIGNS AND SIGNALS. The Chief of Police
shall have the authority granted by Sec. 346.41, Wis. Stats., and shall
order the removal of a sign, signal marking or device placed, maintained or
TRAFFIC 7.10(2)
31
displayed in violation of this chapter or Sec. 346.41, Wis. Stats. Any
charge imposed on any premises for removal of an illegal sign, signal or
device shall be reported to the Village at its next regular meeting for
review and certification. [Ord. 266, 443]
7.11 SPEED RESTRICTIONS. In addition to those Speed Restrictions imposed
upon vehicles under 7.01 - 346.57, the following limitations are hereby
imposed:
(1)No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess
of 15 miles per hour on the following Streets within the Village of
Ellsworth:
(a) Broadway Street
(b) Wall Street between Crosscut Street and Morse Street [Ord. 241,
Ord. 609 12/2010]
7.14 DISORDERLY CONDUCT WITH A MOTOR VEHICLE. (1) No driver of any
vehicle shall cause, by excessive or unnecessary acceleration, the tires of
such vehicle to spin and emit loud noises, or to unnecessarily throw stones,
gravel, or other material, nor shall any driver cause to be made by
excessive and unnecessary acceleration any loud noise, such as would disturb
the peace, nor shall any driver otherwise operate a motor vehicle within the
Village limits of the Village in a manner that would disturb the public
peace or endanger the safety of other motorists, pedestrians, or property.
(2) Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable for the penalty provisions set forth in Section 25.04
of the Municipal Code. [Ord. 322, 348, 492]
7.15 Jake Brakes. No person shall use brakes in any way activated or
operated by the compression of an engine (commonly known as “jake brakes”)
of any motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof. [Ord. 574 06/2007]
7.40 ENFORCEMENT. (1) ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE. This chapter shall be
enforced according to Secs. 66.21, 66.115, Chapter 299 and Secs. 345.20 to
345.53, Wis. Stats.
(2) DEPOSIT. Any person arrested for a violation of this chapter may
make a deposit of money as directed by the arresting officer at the police
station or at the office of the Clerk of Court or by mailing the deposit to
such places. The arresting officer of the person receiving the deposit
shall comply with Sec. 345.26, Wis Stats., or if the deposit is mailed, the
signed statement required under Sec. 345.26, Wis. Stats., shall be mailed
with the deposit. The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit
shall notify the arrested person, orally or in writing, that [Ord. 523 8/02]:
TRAFFIC 7.40(2)(a)
32
(a) If he fails to appear in court at the time fixed in the
citation, he will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest
and submitted to a forfeiture plus costs not to exceed the amount
of the deposit; or
(b) If he fails to appear in court at the time fixed in the
citation, and if the court does not accept the deposit as a
forfeiture, he will be summoned into court to answer the
accordance with the deposit schedule established by the Seventh
Judicial Circuit. The arresting officer or the person receiving
the deposit shall issue the arrested person a receipt therefore as
required by Sec. 345.26 (3) (b), Wis Stats.
(c) If a deposit schedule has not been established, the arresting
officer shall require the offender to deposit not less than the
maximum forfeiture permitted under this chapter, plus anticipated
court costs.
(3) STIPULATION OF NO CONTEST. Any person charged with a violation of
this chapter except 7.01-346.62 and 7.01-346.63 may at the time of the
alleged violation or within 5 days thereafter make a stipulation of no
contest pursuant to Sec. 345.27, Wis. Stats. Such person shall at the time
of entering into the stipulation make the deposit as required under sub. (2)
of this section. A person who has mailed or filed or filed a stipulation
under this subsection may, however, appear in court on the appearance date.
[Ord. 241]
7.45 CONSTRUCTION. (1) The State traffic laws and Motor Vehicle Code
herein adopted and incorporated by reference in this chapter are so adopted
and incorporated by reference pursuant to Secs. 61.34, 349.03 and 349.06,
Wis. Stats. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(2) Where this chapter adopts a State statute making an act a felony
or providing a minimum prison sentence for committing or doing an act, the
Village hereby adopts no such felony or minimum prison sentence provision.
As provided in Sec. 66.0115, Wis. Stats., this chapter adopts only the
forfeiture provisions of such State statutes. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(3) Where a State statute prohibits many acts and one or more such
acts are punishable as crimes, as the term is defined in Sec. 939.12, Wis.
Stats., the ordinance or the chapter or section of this Code adopting such
State statute shall not be deemed to adopt those portions of such State
statute which make such act or acts criminal.
(4) The reference to "Wisconsin Statutes" wherever used in this
chapter shall refer to the Wisconsin Statutes for the years 1999/2000 and
shall include the 2001/2002 session laws. All subsequent amendments of such
Wisconsin Statutes, insofar as such amendments affect the following
TRAFFIC 7.45(4)
33
enumerated sections of such Statutes, but such amendments shall be
considered in strict conformity with Chs. 340-348, as provided in Sec.
349.06 (2), Wis. Stats. [Ord. 443, 523 8/02]
7.50 PENALTIES. The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be a forfeiture as hereafter provided together with costs under Sec.
345.26, Wis. Stats. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(1) STATE FORFEITURE STATUTES. Forfeitures for violation of 7.01 -
340.01 to 348.28 shall conform to the forfeiture permitted to be imposed for
violation of the statutes adopted by reference, including any variations or
increases for subsequent offenses, provided the minimum forfeiture for a
violation of secs. 7.01 - 346.50 to 346.55 shall be $1.00. The deposit
schedule for forfeitures followed by the Village may be the same such
schedule as is established pursuant to Sec. 345.26 (2)(a), Wis. Stats., and
adopted by the State Board of County Judges.
(2) STATE FINE STATUTES. The forfeiture for violation of any statute
adopted by reference hereunder for which the penalty is a fine shall not
exceed the maximum fine permitted under such statute.
(3) LOCAL REGULATIONS. The penalty for violation of secs. 7.02
through 7.05 of this chapter shall be as provided in sec. 25.04 of this
Municipal Code. [Ord. 200]
CHAPTER 8
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
8.01 Street and Sidewalk Grades
8.02 Sidewalks, Curb and Gutter
8.025 Public Improvements (Assessments)
8.03 Obstructions and Encroachments
8.04 Snow and Ice Removal; Grass Cutting
8.05 Trees
8.06 Dutch Elm Disease, Abatement of
8.07 Building Numbering System
8.08 Penalty
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.01
1
8.01 STREETS AND SIDEWALK GRADES. (1) ESTABLISHMENT.
The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be
established and described by the Board and shall be recorded by
the Village Clerk-Treasurer in his office. No street, alley or
sidewalk shall be worked until the grade thereof is established.
(2) ALTERING GRADE PROHIBITED. No person shall alter the
grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground, or any
part thereof, unless authorized or instructed to do so by the
Board.
(3) STREET CONSTRUCTION. All streets hereafter
constructed or opened in the Village shall comply with the
following minimum specifications:
(a) Width - 36 feet, face to face of curb.
(b) Sandlift base - 18 inches of clean granular
(sand)type material.
(c) Rock base - 6 inches of clean crushed rock.
(d) Blacktop - three (3) inches deep, compacted to 2
1/2 inches of street grade material.
(e) Curb and Gutter - curb and gutter must be
installed in accordance with the specifications of
this chapter. [Ord. 388]
8.02 SIDEWALKS, CURB AND GUTTER. (1) SIDEWALK WIDTH.
All sidewalks hereafter constructed or rebuilt in the business
district shall extend from the front of the building to the curb
except for such variances therefrom as shall first be approved
by the Village Board.
(2) SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION. (a) Sand Base. All sidewalks
shall be laid on a sand base not less than 4 inches in
thickness, which shall be thoroughly tamped and brought to an
even grade and a proper elevation. Prior to the placing of the
concrete in the forms, the sand base shall be wetted down.
(b) Concrete. All sidewalks shall be of one course
construction of Portland cement concrete, airentraining
type, with clean sand and gravel. The
standard mix shall consist of one part cement, 2
parts sand and 3 1/2 parts crushed stone or gravel
from a commercial aggregate producing plant. The
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.02(2)(C)
2
maximum size of gravel shall be 3/4 inch. Only the
minimum amount of water required to give the workable
mix shall be used. Ready-mix concrete of 3,000
pounds grade may be used. The finish shall be a steel
float broomed finish.
(c) Expansion Joints. All expansion joint material
shall be 1/2 inch non-extruding, fully impregnated
type installed 1/8 inch below finish surface, and
shall be placed in position at approximate 55 foot
intervals, and continuous at a point approximately
one foot from the building foundations.
(d) Scoring. All sidewalks are to be scored at
approximate 5 foot intervals at right angles to the
curb and gutter or street.
(e) Curing. Sidewalks shall be properly cured by
means equivalent to moist curing for not less than 5
days after placing and shall be protected from damage
by the elements during pouring and thereafter until
safe.
(3) CURB AND GUTTER CONSTRUCTION. Standard thirty (30)
inch style. Concrete for curb and gutter shall be same as for
sidewalks. The sand base shall be 12 inches in thickness
(depth) extending 12 inches behind the back of the curb. Any
curb and gutter installed shall also be in compliance with any
regulations and specifications therefore on file with the
Director of Public Works. [Ord.388, Ord. 610 03/2011]
(4) COST SHARING FOR CERTAIN REPLACEMENTS. The cost of
replacement of sidewalks. curbs, gutters and retaining walls
shall be paid one-half by the Village and one-half by the
property owners of the premises adjacent to which any such
sidewalk or curb and gutter or retaining wall is replaced.
Where there is sidewalk on only one side of the street then the
one-half portion of sidewalk replacement cost to be paid by the
property owners shall be paid equally by the owners adjoining
the sidewalk on either side of the street such that each
property owner pays one fourth of the replacement costs..[Ord.
356, 362, 489, Ord. 593 07/2009]
(5) DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS, SUPERVISION. All such walks
shall be constructed and rebuilt under the supervision of the
Director of Public Works. [Ord. 214, Ord. 610 03/2011]
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.025(1)
3
8.025 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. (1) SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS. The
cost of installing or constructing any street alley, curb,
gutter, sewer lines, or other public work designated by the
Village Board, shall be charged to the property benefited
thereby by the imposition of a special assessment against such
property. Such special assessment shall be a lien against the
property from the date of the levy.
(a) NOTICE, PROCEDURE. The procedure provided for
special assessments in the Wisconsin Statutes,
including sec. 66.0703, Stats., shall be followed
when the cost of any improvement herein is sought to
be specially assessed against the benefited property.
Owners of the benefited property shall be given
reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing. [Ord.
503, 523 8/02]
(b) AMOUNT OF ASSESSMENT. The cost of installation
and construction of the public work under sec. 8.025
(1) may be assessed in whole, or in part, against the
benefited property. In determining the amount or
extent of an assessment, or whether there shall be
any assessment whatsoever, the Village Board may
consider such factors as: the extent to which the
public work benefits a larger segment of the
community than the properties directly involved; the
past history of assessment and construction of the
particular public work involved; whether the public
work shall have the immediate effect of benefiting
primarily investors, developers or speculators in
real estate affected by the public work; such other
factors as may be deemed appropriate. [Ord. 268, 503]
(2) ALTERNATE METHOD FOR PAYMENT OF REPAIR AND
RECONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS. As an alternative to the special
assessment process set forth in (1) above, the Village Board may
from time to time by resolution direct that certain sidewalks in
the Village shall be repaired, replaced or reconstructed and
that the cost thereof be paid in a manner consistent with
§8.02(4) by the abutting owners. The cost so determined by
resolution of the Village Board shall be extended as a lien on
the current of next tax roll, and the Village
Board may in its discretion allow for the repayment of said
charge on an installment basis, with interest as determined by
the Board, over a period not to exceed three years. Notice of
the hearing at which the resolution shall be considered shall be
given as a Class 1 Notice at least 20 days before the hearing
and shall be mailed at least 10 days before the hearing to all
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.03(1)
4
interested persons (owners of the lands affected). The Notice
shall state the date and time of the hearing, that interested
persons may be heard, and that the Board shall determine whether
the proposed repair or reconstruction shall be performed. [Ord.
503]
8.03 OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS. (1) OBSTRUCTIONS
AND ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED. No person shall encroach upon or
in any way obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk,
public grounds or land dedicated to public use, or any part
thereof, or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed
or remain on any public way adjoining the premises of which he
is the owner or occupant, except as provided in sub. (2).
(2) EXCEPTIONS. The prohibition of sub. (1) shall not
apply to the following:
(a) Signs and clocks attached to buildings which
project not more than 6 feet from the face of such
building and which do not extend below any point 10
feet above the sidewalk, street or alley.
(b) Awnings which do not extend below any point 7
feet above the sidewalk, street or alley.
(c) Public utility encroachments authorized by the
Village.
(d) Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being
loaded or unloaded which do not extend more than 3
feet on a sidewalk, provided such goods, wares, etc.,
do not remain thereon for more than 3 hours.
(e) Building materials when placed upon the street,
alley or sidewalk upon conditions prescribed by the
Director of Public Works. He may require such
materials to be protected by barricades or
appropriate lights. [Ord. 610 03/2011]
8.04 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL; GRASS CUTTING. (1) SNOW AND
ICE REMOVAL. The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel shall
each day remove all snow and ice which may have fallen or
accumulated upon the sidewalk in front or such lot or parcel;
provided, when ice has so formed that it cannot be removed, the
owner or occupant shall keep the same sprinkled with a material
which will prevent the sidewalk from being dangerous to
pedestrians.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.04(2)
5
(2) GRASS CUTTING ON BOULEVARDS. The owner or occupant of
any lot or parcel shall keep all grass and weeds cut to a height
not to exceed 6 inches along any boulevards or right of way
lying immediately adjacent to any such parcel. [Ord. 339]
(3) In the event snow or ice is not removed, or weeds or
grass cut and removed, the Village may cause same to be done and
the cost thereof to be charged to the property owner under Sec.
66.60 (16), Wis. Stats. A 24 hour notice shall be given before
the Village shall cause removal of snow or ice, and a 7 day
notice shall be given before the Village shall cause removal of
grass or weeds. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(4) No accumulation of snow shall be plowed or pushed from
private driveways, parking lots, business lots or parking areas
onto or across any alleyway, road, street or highway in the
Village. No accumulation of snow, ice or other debris shall be
permitted to accumulate, nor shall same be so located, as to
interfere with visibility at roadway intersections or in any
other locations where same would cause an impediment to
visibility of pedestrians or drivers of motor vehicles. [Ord.
416, 430]
8.05 TREES. (1) VILLAGE FORESTER IN CHARGE. The Village
Forester shall be in charge of the maintenance and removal of
trees in the Village. Unless another appointment is made by the
Village Board, the Public Works Director shall act as Village
Forester. [Ord. 624 07/12]
(2) TRIMMING. Trees standing in and upon any public
street, alley, sidewalk or place, or upon any lot or land
adjacent thereof, and having branches projecting into the public
street or place shall under the supervision of the Village
Forester be kept trimmed by the owner or owners and
occupants of the property on or in front of which such trees
are growing so that the lowest branches projecting over the
public street or alley will provide a clearance of not less than
8 feet from the ground. This provision shall not apply to newly
planted trees provided they do not interfere with persons upon
the public street or place or obstruct the light of any street
light, or any traffic signs. Any tree or trees not trimmed as
herein provided shall be deemed hazardous. [Ord.493]
(3) INFECTED OR HAZARDOUS TREES. Any tree or part
thereof, which the Village Forester upon examination shall find
to be dead, diseased, infected or hazardous so as to be
injurious, or to endanger the public or shall be injurious to
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.05(4)
6
sewers or other public improvements, whether growing upon public
or private premised shall be removed by the abutting property
owner or occupant. If the owner of occupant shall fail to
remedy the situation within 14 days after mailing of a written
notice from the Village Forester, so to do, the notice to be
mailed by certified mail, return receipt at last known address,
the Village Forester shall provide for the removal or treatment
of such tree or part thereof and shall have the right to appeal
the order to the Village Board at its next regular meeting. The
determination of the Village Board upon the appeal shall be
final. No damages shall be awarded to the owner for the
destruction of trees pursuant to this section. It is hereby
established as a policy that all costs of tree removals in the
Village are to be paid for by the property owners, including the
costs as to trees located in street right of way (tree bank)
which latter costs are to be paid by abutting property owners.
[Ord. 493]
(4) ALTERNATIVE ASSESSMENT METHOD. As an alternative, the
costs under this section shall be determined and charged in
accordance with Sec. 66.60 (16), Wis. Stats. A 7 day notice
shall be given before the work directed to be done shall be
performed by the Village. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(5) PERMIT FOR PLANTING. No person shall plant any tree
or shrub within the street terrace or boulevard or right of way
without a permit therefore from the Village Forester.
8.06 DUTCH ELM DISEASE, ABATEMENT OF. (1) INTENT AND
PURPOSE OF ORDINANCE. Dutch Elm disease and elm bark beetles
are declared public nuisances. Whereas the Village Board has
determined that there are many elm trees growing on public and
private premises within the Village, the loss of which would
substantially depreciate the value of public and private
property, impair the use and enjoyment of public and private
premises and erode the tax base of the Village and that the
health and life of such trees is threatened by a fatal disease
known as Dutch Elm disease, which is spread by the elm bark
beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes
(Marsh.), the Board hereby declares its intention to control and
prevent the spread of such disease and the insect pests and
vectors which carry such disease and declares Dutch Elm disease
and the elm bark beetles which carry such disease to be a public
nuisance.
(2) VILLAGE FORESTER. The Public Works Director shall
serve as the Village Forester and shall have the powers and
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.06(3)
7
duties imposed by this Municipal Code and Chapter 27, Wisconsin
Stats. [Ord. 493]
(3) DEFINITIONS. As used in this section, unless
otherwise clearly indicated by the context:
(a) "Public nuisance" means:
1. Dutch Elm disease.
2. Elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus
(Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.).
3. Any living or standing elm tree or part
thereof infected with the Dutch Elm disease
fungus or in a weakened condition which harbors
any of the elm bark beetles, Scolytus
multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes
(Marsh.).
4. Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including
logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other elm
material from which the bark has not been
removed and burned or sprayed with an effective
elm bark beetle destroying concentrate.
(b) "Public property" means premises owed or
controlled by the Village; including without
limitation because of enumeration public sites,
parks, playgrounds, streets, alleys, sidewalks,
boulevards and the terrace strip between the lot line
and the curb or improved portion of any public way.
(c) "Person" means person, firm or corporation.
(4) INSPECTION. (a) The Village Forester shall inspect or
cause to be inspected at least twice each year all premises and
places within the Village to determine whether any public
nuisance exists thereon. He shall also inspect or cause to be
inspected any elm tree reported or suspected to be infected with
the Dutch Elm disease or any elm bark bearing material reported
or suspected to be infested with elm bark beetles.
(b) Whenever necessary to determine the existence of
Dutch Elm disease or elm bark beetles in any tree,
the person inspecting such tree shall remove or cut
specimens from the tree in such manner as to avoid
permanent injury thereto and deliver such specimens
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.06(4)(C)
8
to the Forester who shall forward them to the
Wisconsin Department of Agriculture at Madison for
analysis to determine the presence of such nuisances.
(c) The Forester and his agents or employees may
enter upon private premises at reasonable times for
the purpose of carrying out any of the provisions of
this section.
(5) ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES: DUTY OF FORESTER. (a) The
Forester shall order, direct, supervise and control the
abatement of public nuisances as defined in this section by
spraying, removal, burning or by other means which he determines
to be necessary to prevent as fully as possible the spread of
Dutch Elm disease fungus or the insect pests or vectors known to
carry the disease fungus.
(b) Whenever the Forester after inspection or
examination shall determine that a public nuisance as
herein defined exists on public property in the
Village he shall immediately abate or cause the
abatement of such nuisance in such manner as to
destroy or prevent as fully as possible the spread of
Dutch Elm disease or the insect pests or vectors
known to carry such disease fungus.
(c) 1. When the Forester shall determine with
reasonable certainty that a public nuisance exists
upon private premises he shall immediately serve or
cause to be served personally or by registered mail
upon the owner of such property if he can be found,
or upon the occupant thereof, a written notice of the
existence of such nuisance and of a time and place
for a hearing, not less than 14 days after service of
such notice, on the abatement action to be taken.
Such notice shall describe the nuisance and
recommended procedures for its abatement, and shall
further state that unless the owner shall abate the
nuisance in the manner specified in the notice, or
shall appear at the hearing to show that such
nuisance does not exist or does not endanger the
health of elm trees in the Village, the forester
shall cause the abatement thereof at the expense of
the property served. If the owner cannot be found,
such notice shall be given by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Village.
2. If after the hearing held pursuant to this
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.06(6)(a)
9
subsection it shall be determined by the
Forester that a public nuisance exists, he shall
forthwith order the immediate abatement thereof.
Unless the property owner abates the nuisance as
directed within 24 hours after such hearing, the
Forester shall proceed to abate the nuisance and
cause the cost thereof to be assessed against
the property in accordance with the procedures
provided in this section. The Forester may
extend the time allowed the property owner for
abatement work but not to exceed 10 additional
days.
(6) SPRAYING. (a) Whenever the Forester shall determine
that any elm tree or part thereof is infected with Dutch Elm
disease fungus or is in a weakened condition and harbors elm
bark beetles, he may cause all elm trees within a 1,000 foot
radius thereof to be sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle
destroying concentrate.
(b) In order to facilitate the work and minimize the
inconvenience to the public of any spraying
operations conducted under this section, the Forester
shall cause to be given advance public notice of such
operations by newspaper, radio, television, public
service announcements or other effective means and
shall also cause the posting of appropriate warning
notices in the area and along the streets where trees
are to be sprayed at least 24 hours in advance of
spraying. When any residue or concentrate from
municipal spraying operations can be expected to be
deposited on any public street, the Forester shall
also notify the Chief of Police, who shall take all
necessary steps to make and enforce temporary parking
and traffic regulations on such streets as conditions
require. Temporary "no parking" notices shall be
posted in each block of any affected street at least
24 hours in advance of spraying operations.
(c) When appropriate warning notices and temporary
"no parking" notices have been given and posted in
accordance with par. (b), the Village shall not allow
any claim for damages to any vehicle caused by such
spraying operations.
(d) When trees on private property are to be sprayed,
the Forester shall notify the owner of such property
and proceed in accordance with the requirements of
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.06(7)(a)
10
sub. (b).
(7) COST OF TREE CARE: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS. (a) The
cost of abatement of a public nuisance or spraying elm trees or
elm wood at the direction of the Forester if the nuisance, tree
or wood is located on public property, shall be borne by the
Village.
(b) The cost of abating a public nuisance or
spraying elm trees or elm wood located on private
premises when done at the direction and under the
supervision of the Forester shall be assessed to the
property on which such nuisance, tree or wood is
located.
1. The Forester shall keep a strict account of
the cost of such work or spraying and the amount
chargeable to each lot or parcel and shall
report such work, charges, description of land
to which charge and named and addresses of the
owners of such lands to the Village Board on or
before October 15 of each year.
2. Upon receiving the Forester's report, the
Village Board shall hold a public hearing on
such proposed charges, giving at least 14 days
advance notice of the time, place and purpose of
such hearing to interested persons by
publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village and by mail to the
owner of each property proposed to be charged.
Each property owner shall be notified of the
amount proposed to be assessed against his
premises and the work for which such charge is
being made.
3. After the hearing, the Village Board shall
affirm, modify and affirm or disapprove such
assessments by resolution and shall cause a copy
thereof to be published. Upon adoption and
publication of such resolution, assessments made
thereby shall be deemed final.
4. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall mail notice
of the amount of such final assessment to each
owner of property assessed at his last known
address, stating that unless paid within 30 days
of the date of the notice, such assessment shall
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.06(7)(b)(5)
11
bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum, and
will be entered on the tax roll as a delinquent
tax against the property, and all proceedings in
relation to the collection, return and sale of
property for delinquent real estate taxes shall
apply to such assessment. [Ord. 320]
5. The Village hereby declares that in making
assessments under this section, it is acting
under its police power and no damages shall be
awarded to any owner for the destruction of any
diseased or infested elm tree or elm wood or
part thereof.
6. The amount chargeable against any parcel or
lot in any year under this section shall not
exceed 2.5% of the assessed value of the
premises, exclusive or improvements, as shown on
that year's tax roll. The portion of any
assessment in excess of such percentage amount
shall be charged to the Village and paid out of
general funds. [Ord. 207, 269]
(8) PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTIES. Any person who does
any of the following acts within the Village shall upon
conviction thereof forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than
$100.00 together with the costs of prosecution and in default of
payment thereof shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until
such costs and forfeiture are paid, but not exceeding 60 days.
(a) Transports any bark bearing elm wood, bark or
material on public streets or highways or other
public premises without first securing the written
permission of the Forester.
(b) Interferes with or prevents any acts of the
Forester or his agents or employees while they are
engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this
section.
(c) Refuses to permit the Forester or his duly
authorized representative to enter upon his premises
at reasonable times to exercise the duties imposed by
this section.
(d) Permits any public nuisance to remain on any
premises owned or controlled by him when ordered by
the Forester to abate such nuisance.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.06(9)
12
(9) SEPARABILITY. If any section, subsection, sentence,
clause or phrase of this section is for any reason held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause
or phrase hereof. The Village President and Village Board
hereby declare that they would have passed this section and each
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions
thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. [Ord. 194]
8.07 BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM. (1) BASE LINES. There
is hereby established a uniform system of numbering all houses
and buildings fronting on all streets, avenues, alleys, and
highways in the Village. All houses, buildings, etc., fronting
on alleys shall be numbered to correspond with the numbers on
parallel streets. In establishing said system the following
shall be the base lines:
(a) The East-West base line for the North and South
numbers shall follow the East and West section line
on the south sides of sections 17 and 18 and the
north sides of sections 19 and 20 in Township 26
North, Range 17 West, Pierce County, Wisconsin.
(b) The North-South base line of the East and West
numbers shall follow the North and South section line
on the west sides of sections 17 and 20 and the east
sides of sections 18 and 19 in township 26 North,
Range 17 West, Pierce County, Wisconsin.
(2) NORTH AND SOUTH NUMBERS. The numbers on all houses
and buildings on streets running north and south or northerly
and southerly shall be extended each way upon the basis of one
number for each 15 feet of property frontage wherever possible,
starting at the base line with the number 100 and continuing
with consecutive hundreds at each intersection wherever
possible. All even numbers shall be placed upon houses on the
east side of the streets, avenues, alleys and highways and all
odd numbers upon houses and buildings on the west side of said
streets, avenues, alleys and highways.
(3) EAST AND WEST NUMBERS. The numbers on all streets
running east and west or easterly and westerly shall be extended
each way upon the basis of one number for each 15 feet of
property wherever possible, starting at the North-South base
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.07(4)
13
line as hereinbefore set forth upon the basis of one number for
each 15 feet of property frontage wherever possible. All even
numbers shall be placed upon houses and buildings on the north
side of said street, avenues, alleys and highways, and all odd
numbers shall be placed upon houses and buildings on the south
side of said streets, alleys and highways.
(4) STREETS NOT EXTENDED. All streets not extending
through to the base line shall be assigned the same relative
numbers as if the said street had extended to the said base
line.
(5) DETERMINATION OF INDIVIDUAL HOUSE NUMBERS. Upstairs
flats will use the next consecutive odd or even number as the
case may be. Rear houses shall use the same house number as the
front house, with an A B C suffix. Apartments with only one
front entrance shall have only one house number. Business
buildings with numerous entrances shall have the door nearest
the zero end of the block determine the base number of the
business building. Each adjacent door shall take the next
consecutive odd or even number as the case may be, except where
the door is more than 15 feet distant from the initial door, in
which case it shall follow the rule in sub. (3).
(6) BLOCK NUMBERING. One number shall be allowed for each
15 feet of front footage of the block.
(7) VILLAGE CLERK-TREASURER TO ASSIGN. In any situation not
covered by the foregoing sections of this chapter, the Village
Clerk-Treasurer shall assign the number in accordance with the
intent and purpose of this section.
(8) PLACING OF NUMBERS. The owner, occupant or agent of
every house or other building shall place or cause to be placed
upon each house or building controlled or owned by him, the
number or numbers assigned thereto under the uniform system
provided herein. Such number or numbers shall be so placed
within 90 days after publication of this ordinance. The cost of
the number or numbers shall be paid for by the property owner.
The cost of placement or replacement of any number or numbers on
any house, building, or structure, said numbers in all
instances to comply with the standards set forth herein. [Ord.
321, 624 07/12]
(9) SUFFIXES. When only one number is available for any
house or building, the owner, occupant or agent of such house or
building, who shall desire distinctive numbers for the upper and
lower portion of such house or building, or for any such house
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.07(10)
14
or building fronting on any street, such owner, occupant or
agent shall use the suffix A B C, etc., as may be required.
(10) IMPROPER NUMBERS. No person shall alter any number
or retain any improper number other than the one given, by
virtue of this section.
(11) SIZE AND LOCATION OF NUMBERS. All numbers placed on
houses, buildings or structures in accordance with this section
shall not be less than 3 inches in height, shall be uniform in
appearance, shall be of a color which contrasts with the
background of that part of the structure upon which they are
placed. All such numbers shall be clearly visible from the
adjoining street and, where not so visible, the owner shall
place adjacent to the street a post or other item located at
least 3feet above ground grade with the house, building or
structure number affixed thereto. [Ord.624 07/12]
(12) INFORMATION. The Village Clerk-Treasurer, or such
other officer as may be designated by the Village Board shall
inform any parties applying therefore the number of numbers
belonging or embraced within the limits of said lot or property
as provided herein.
(13) NEW BUILDINGS. The owner or his agent shall procure
the correct number or numbers as designated by the Village
Clerk-Treasurer, or such other officer as the Village Board may
designate, for the property, and the owner or agent shall
immediately fasten the number or numbers as assigned upon said
house, building or structure, so as to be clearly visible from
the street, and no building permit shall be issued for any
house, building or structure until the owner or his agent has
procured from the Village Clerk-Treasurer, or such other officer
as the Village Board may designate, the official number of the
premises.
(14) FAILURE TO PLACE NUMBERS ON HOUSE OR BUILDING. In
addition to the penalties for noncompliance of this Section as
provided under sec. 8.08, upon failure to place numbers upon a
house, building or structure as required under sec. 8.07(8), the
Village Public Works Director shall cause to be painted on the
curb fronting the premises the assigned house number, and the
cost thereof shall be a lien upon the premises and extended upon
the tax rolls in accordance with Sec. 66.0627, Wis. Stats.,
unless the cost thereof be paid within thirty (30) days of the
billing therefore. [Ord. 321, 523 8/02, 624 07/12]
8.08 PENALTY. Except as otherwise provided herein, any
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 8.08
15
person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any
order, rule or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in sec. 25.04 of this Municipal Code. [Ord.
152]
Revised 10/7/2019
CHAPTER 9
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
9.01 Offenses Against State Laws Subject to
Forfeiture
9.02 Discharging and Carrying Firearms and Guns
9.03 Throwing or Shooting of Arrows, Stones and
Other Missiles Prohibited
9.04 Sale and Discharge of Fireworks Restricted
9.05 Loud and Unnecessary Noise Prohibited
9.06 Obedience to Officers
9.07 Obstruction of Traffic
9.08 Burning (Repealed June 1, 1998, Ord. 474)
9.09 Storage of Junk, etc., Regulated
9.11 Littering Prohibited
9.12 Animals and Fowl
9.13 Open Cisterns, Wells, Basements or Other
Dangerous Excavations Prohibited
9.14 Abandoned or Unattended Ice Boxes, etc.,
Prohibited
9.15 Smoking Prohibited in Village Buildings
9.20 Attempts to Violate Ordinances Prohibited
9.21 Parties to Ordinance Violations
9.22 Underage Person's Misrepresentation to
Procure Fermented Malt Beverages or
Intoxicating Liquors
9.23 Regulation of the Sale of Fermented
Malt Beverages or Intoxicating Liquors by
Keepers of Places Selling Such Liquors or
Malt Beverages
9.24 Parks
9.25 Smoking Prohibited
9.26 Curfew
9.27 Fireworks Regulated
9.28 Contributing to Truancy (Repealed)
9.49 Municipal Citation - Uniform Complaint
9.50 Penalties
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.01
1
9.01 OFFENSES AGAINST STATE LAWS SUBJECT TO FORFEITURE.
The provisions of Chapters 940-947 of the Wisconsin Statutes as
from time to time amended, including but not limited to each of
the following Statutes which create and define offenses against
the peace and good order of the State, are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part hereof except to the extent such
incorporation by reference is specifically prohibited by any
section in any said Chapters, in which case such section of such
Chapter is not adopted by reference; provided the penalty for
commission of such offenses hereunder shall be limited to a
forfeiture imposed under Section 25.04 of this Municipal Code,
regardless the penalty established in such State
Statutes.[Ord.609 12/2010, Ord.610 03/2011]
29.288 Deleterious Substances Deposited Into
Waters 29.601(3)[Ord. 523 8/02]
48.45 Contributing to Delinquency or Neglect
Orders Applicable to Adults [Ord.226]
110.075(7) Producing/Using Inspection Sticker
Fraudulently [Ord. 523 8/02]
134.06 Motor Vehicles Sales/Bonus to
Chauffeur Prohibited
134.65 Cigarette and Tobacco Products
Retailers License [Ord. 477]
134.66 Restrictions on Sale or Gift of
Cigarette or Tobacco Products[Ord.477]
285.30(6)(b) Pollution by Motor Vehicle/Failure to
Repair [Ord. 523 8/02]
160.07 Careless Smoking/Posting Notice 254.76
[Ord. 523 8/02]
175.25 Illegal Storage of Junked Vehicles
218.0145 Used Cars/Prohibited Acts [Ord. 523 8/02]
218.0147 Motor Vehicles/Sale to Minor [Ord. 523
8/02]
939.05 Aiding and Abetting
939.22 Words and Phrases Defined
940.19(1) Battery; Aggravated Battery [Ord.221]
940.20 Battery; Special Circumstances
940.225(3m) Fourth Degree Sexual Assault[Ord.140,386
941.10 Negligent Handling of Burning
Materials
941.12 Interfering With or Failing to Assist
in Fire Fighting
941.13 False Alarms and Interference With
Fire Fighting [Ord. 227]
941.20 Reckless Use of Weapon [Ord. 222]
943.21 Fraud on Hotel or Restaurant Keeper
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.01
2
[Ord. 523 8/02]
941.23 Carrying Concealed Weapon
941.24 Possession of Switch Blade Knife
941.299 Restrictions On the use of Laser
[Ord.514]
943.01(1) Criminal Damage to Property [Ord.223]
943.06 Molotov Cocktails
943.13 Criminal Trespass to Land
943.14 Criminal Trespass to Dwellings [Ord.
237]
943.20 Theft (Shall only apply to theft
for a sum less than $500.00;
violation of this section
shall constitute a Mun. Ord.
forfeiture, and shall not be
punishable by imprisonment not
withstanding language to the
contrary in Section 943.20.) [Ord.
231, 363]
943.21 Fraud on Hotel or Restaurant Keeper
943.215 Absconding Without Paying Rent [Ord.
407]
943.24 Issue of Worthless Check (Shall
only apply to a sum less than
$500.00,this section shall
constitute a Municipal Ordinance
Forfeiture, and shall not be
punishable by imprisonment not
withstanding language to the
contrary in Section 943.24.) [Ord.
253, 363]
943.34 Receiving Stolen Property [Ord. 229]
943.38 Forgery [Ord. 514]
943.39 Fraudulent Writings [Ord. 514]
943.392 Fraudulent Data Alterations[Ord.514}
943.40 Fraudulent Destruction of Certain
Writings [Ord. 514]
943.41 Financial Transaction Card Crimes
[Ord. 514]
943.45 Theft of Telecommunications Service
[Ord. 514]
943.455 Theft of Commercial Mobile Service
[Ord. 514]
943.46 Theft of Cable Television Service
Ord. 51
943.47 Theft of Satellite Cable
Programming [Ord. 514]
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.01
3
943.50 Shoplifting [Ord. 232]
943.61 Theft of Library Material [Ord. 341]
944.20 Lewd and Lascivious Behavior
944.21 Lewd, Obscene or Indecent Matter,
Pictures and Performances
944.205(2)(b) Possession of Lewd, Obscene or
Indecent Matter [Ord. 523 8/02]
944.23 Making Lewd, Obscene or Indecent
Drawings
944.30 Prostitution
944.31 Patronizing Prostitutes
944.33 Pandering
944.34 Keeping Place of Prostitution
945.01 Definitions Relating to Gambling
945.02 Gambling
945.03 Commercial Gambling
945.04 Permitting Premises to be Used for
Commercial Gambling
946.40 Refusing to Aid Officer [Ord. 523 8/02]
946.41 Resisting or Obstructing
Officer [Ord. 228]
946.42 Escape
946.44 Assisting or Permitting Escape
946.65 Obstructing Justice
946.70 Impersonating Peace Officer
946.72 Tampering With Public Records and
Notices
947.01 Disorderly Conduct [Ord. 220]
947.012 Unlawful Use of Telephone
[Ord. 220, 341]
947.013 Harassment [Ord. 409]
947.015 Bomb Scares
287.81 Littering Shores [Ord. 523 8/02]
947.06 Unlawful Assemblies
947.08 Crime Comics
948.01-948.16 Crimes Against Children [Ord. 523 8/02]
948.40 Contributing to the Delinquency of a
Child [Ord. 226]
948.45 Contributing to Truancy [Ord. 514]
951.01-951.15 Crimes Against Animals [Ord. 523 8/02]
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.02
4
961.41 Prohibited Acts – Penalties [Ord. 514]
961.41(3g)(d),(e),
(em),(4)(bm) Possession of Marijuana [Ord. 514, 619
01/12]
961.573 (1) Possession of Drug Paraphernalia [Ord.
514]
961.574 Manufacture or Delivery of Drug
Paraphernalia [Ord. 514]
961.575 Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia to
Minor[Ord. 514]
9.02 DISCHARGING AND CARRYING FIREARMS AND GUNS. (1) No
person, except a law enforcement officer as defined in Wis.
Stats.165.85(2)(c), shall fire or discharge any firearm, rifle,
spring or air gun within the Village, except as might otherwise
be justified by Wis. Sec. 895.62. [Ord. 625 08/12]
(2) No person, except a law enforcement officer as
defined in Wis. Stats. 165.85(2)(c), may carry a concealed
weapon as defined in Wis. Stats. Sec. 175.60,(1)(ag) and (j),
unless the person is a "licensee" as defined by Wis. Stats.
Sec. 175.60(1)(d) or has an "out-of-state-license" as defined by
Wis. Stats. Sec. 175.60(1)(f). [Ord. 625 08/12]
(3) No person may enter or remain at a special event
while carrying a firearm if the organizers of the special event
have notified the actor not to enter or remain at the special
event while carrying a firearm or with that type of firearm.
This subsection does not apply, if the firearm is in a vehicle
driven or parked in the parking facility, to any part of the
special event grounds or building used as a parking facility.
The term "special event" has the meaning set forth in Wis.
Stats. Sec. 943.13(1e)(h). For purposes of this subsection the
organizers of the special event have notified an individual not
to enter or remain at the special event while carrying a firearm
or with a particular type of firearm if the organizers have
posted a sign that is located in a prominent place near all of
the entrances to the special event and any individual attending
the special event can be reasonably expected to see the
sign.[Ord. 625 08/12]
(4) No person may transport a firearm, bow or crossbow in
or on a vehicle or all-terrain vehicle, unless the firearm is a
handgun as defined in Wis. Stats. Sec. 175.60(1)(bm), unless the
firearm is unloaded or unless the bow does not have an arrow
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.02(4)
5
nocked, or unless the crossbow is not cocked or is unloaded and
enclosed in a carrying case. A loaded firearm, a bow that has an
arrow nocked, or a crossbow that is cocked may be placed on the
exterior of a vehicle or all-terrain vehicle provided that the
vehicle or all-terrain vehicle is stationary as that term is
defined by Wis. Stats. Sec. 167.31 (1)(fg). No firearm, except
a handgun as defined by Wis. Stats. Sec. 175.80(1)(bm), bow, or
crossbow may be loaded inside a vehicle[Ord. 619 01/12, 625 08/12]
(5) The Chief of Police may grant a permit for any
shotgun or rifle to be discharged and to be carried outside of a
carrying case or other suitable container for any lawful purpose
such as pest extermination. Any such permit shall be for a term
not exceeding 1 year, and such permits should be subject to
revocation by the Chief of Police at any time at the Chief's
discretion. Such permits shall only be issued to adult
residents of the Village of Ellsworth. [Ord. 154, 222, 386, 618
10/11, 625 08/12]
9.03 THROWING OR SHOOTING OF ARROWS, STONES AND OTHER
MISSILES PROHIBITED. (1) No person shall throw or shoot any
object, arrow, stone, snowball or other missile or projectile,
by hand or by any other means at any person or at, in or into
any street, sidewalk, alley, highway, park, playground or other
public place within the Village. [Ord. 638 04/14]
(2) No person may hunt with a bow and arrow or crossbow
within one hundred yards of any building located on another
person's land, unless the owner of the building allows the
hunter to hunt within a lesser distance from the other's
building. Any person who hunts with a bow and arrow or crossbow
must discharge the arrow or bolt from the respective weapon
toward the ground.[Ord. 638 04/14]
9.04 SALE AND DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS RESTRICTED. Sec.
167.10, Wis. Stats., regulating the sale and use of fireworks
exclusive of any penalty imposed thereby is adopted by reference
and made a part of this section as though set forth in full.
9.05 LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED. (1) No
person shall make or cause to be made any loud, disturbing or
unnecessary sounds or noises such as may tend to annoy or
disturb another in or about any public street, alley or park or
any private residence.
(2) OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES. It shall be a violation
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.05(2)
6
of this section for a person to operate a motor vehicle so as to
cause the tires thereof to squeal, the horn to blow excessively
or the motor to race excessively.
9.06 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICERS. No person shall resist or in
any way interfere with any officer of the Village while such
officer is doing any act in his official capacity and with
lawful authority, or shall refuse to assist an officer in
carrying out his duties when so requested by the officer. [Ord.
228]
9.07 OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC. No person shall obstruct the
public streets, alleys , sidewalks, street crossing or bridges
or in any other public places within the Village in such manner
as to prevent, interfere with or obstruct the ordinary free use
of said public streets, sidewalks, street crossings, bridges or
other public places by persons, pedestrians or vehicular traffic
passing along and over the same. [Ord. 418]
9.08 BURNING. (1) IN STREETS PROHIBITED. No person
shall set a fire within any street or alley in the Village.
(2) FIRE LIMITS. Except as provided in Section 11.11,no
person shall cause to be set any fire within the fire limits
ofthe Village unless it be within a stove or furnace within a
building. [Ord. 150][Repealed June 1, 1998, Ord. 474]
9.09 STORAGE OF JUNK, ETC., REGULATED. (1) No person
shall store junked or discarded property including automobiles,
automobile parts, trucks, tractors, refrigerators, furnaces,
washing machines, stoves, machinery or machinery parts, wood,
bricks, cement blocks, or other unsightly debris which
substantially depreciates property values in the neighborhood
except in an enclosure which houses such property from public
view, or upon permit issued by the Village Board. The Building
Inspector or Chief of Police may require by written order any
premises violating this Section to be put in compliance within
the time specified in such order, and if the order is not
complied with, may have the premises put in compliance and the
cost thereof assessed as a special tax against the property.
Where there is great and immediate danger to the public health,
safety, peace, morals or decency, the violation may be summarily
abated as provided in Sec. 10.06. [Ord. 157, 404]
(2) ABANDONED VEHICLES. (a) Vehicle Abandonment
Prohibited. No person shall leave unattended any motor vehicle,
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.09(2)(a)
7
trailer, semitrailer or mobile home on any public street or
highway or public or private property, for such time and under
such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear
to have been abandoned. When any such vehicle has been left
unattended on any Village street or highway or on any public or
private property within the Village without the permission of
the owner for more than 48 hours, the vehicle is deemed
abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance.
(b) Removal and Impoundment of Abandoned Vehicles.
Any vehicle in violation of this section shall be
impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of under
par. (c), except that if the Chief of Police or his
duly authorized representative determines that the
cost of towing and storage charges for the
impoundment would exceed the value of the vehicle,
the vehicle may be junked by the Village prior to
expiration of the impoundment period upon
determination by the Chief of Police or his duly
authorized representative that the vehicle is not
wanted for evidence or other reason.
(c) Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles. (1) The
provisions of Section 342.40, Wis. Stats., unless
otherwise provided herein, shall apply to the notice
and sale of abandoned vehicles.
(2) Where there is no lien holder of record,
and the owner cannot be identified or located,
the balance of the proceeds, if any, after
deducting the expense of impounding and sale,
shall be paid into the Village treasury. [Ord.
315, 410]
(d) Owner Responsible for Impoundment and Sale
Costs. The owner of any abandoned vehicle, except a
stolen vehicle, is responsible for the abandonment
and all costs of impounding and disposing of the
vehicle. Costs not recovered for the sale of the
vehicle may be recovered in a civil action by the
Village against the owner. Where the identity of the
owner is unknown, or the Chief of Police otherwise so
elects, and where the removal of the vehicle is from
private property, the owner of the private property
premises shall be responsible for all costs of
impounding and disposing of the vehicle and otherwise
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.09(2)(e)
8
eliminating any nuisance caused by such vehicle.
[Ord. 410]
(e) Notice of Sale or Disposition. Within 5 days
after the sale or disposal of a vehicle as provided
in par. (c), the Chief of Police or his duly
authorized representative shall advise the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation, Division of Motor
Vehicles, of such sale or disposition on a form
supplied by the Division. A copy of such form shall
also be given to the purchaser of the vehicle. A
copy shall also be retained on file in the Village.
[Ord. 410]
(3) DISPOSAL OF JUNKED, UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLES. (a)
No disassembled, dismantled, junked, inoperable or wrecked
vehicle or parts thereof shall be stored or allowed to remain in
the open upon public or private property, and no unlicensed or
unregistered vehicle shall be stored or allowed to remain in
the open upon private property, for more than 7 days unless in
connection with an existing and operating auto salvage yard,
junk yard, garage, auto sales lot or auto service station
located in a properly zoned area for such business. Any such
vehicle or parts thereof, shall be removed, stored and disposed
of as provided in Sec. 342.40 (3), Wis. Stats.
(b) No unregistered motor vehicle may be located
upon a highway, street or roadway for such time and
under such circumstances as to cause the motor
vehicle to reasonably appear to have been
unregistered for not less than 30 days. Any such
unregistered motor vehicle may be immobilized,
impounded and disposed of in the manner provided in
Sec. 341.65, Wis. Stats. [Ord. 208, 410]
9.11 LITTERING PROHIBITED. (1) No person shall place,
throw or discard any glass, refuse, waste, furniture,
furnishings, appliances, filth or other litter upon the street,
alleys, highways, public right of ways, sidewalks, or parks, or
in or upon any other property of the Village, or in or upon any
private property, including privately owned or leased trash bins
or garbage dumpsters, or upon the surface of any water within
the Village.
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.11(2)
9
(2) Refuse may be deposited at curbside for garbage or
recycling collection, but such refuse shall be placed only in
bags or containers authorized by the Village Board pursuant to
its refuse collection contract, and such refuse shall not be
placed at curbside more than 24 hours prior to the scheduled
collection pickup time. [Ord. 391]
9.12 ANIMALS AND FOWL. No person having in his possession
or under his control any animal or fowl shall allow the same to
run at large within the Village. [Ord.616 08/2011, Ord.660 3/2017]
9.13 OPEN CISTERNS, WELLS, BASEMENTS OR OTHER DANGEROUS
EXCAVATIONS PROHIBITED. No person shall have or permit on any
premises owned or occupied by him any open cisterns, cesspools,
well, unused basements, excavations or other dangerous openings.
All such places shall be properly filled, securely covered or
fastened, in such manner as to prevent injury to any person and
any cover shall be of a design, size and weight that the same
cannot be removed by small children. (Private well abandonment:
see section 11.07 (4)).
9.14 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED ICE BOXES, ETC., PROHIBITED.
No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any
dwelling, building, or other structure, or within any unoccupied
or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his
control in a place accessible to children, any abandoned,
unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or other container
which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock, or other locking
device which may not be released from the inside without first
removing said door or lid, snap lock or other locking device
from said ice box, refrigerator or container unless such
container is displayed for sale on the premises of the owner or
his agent and is securely locked or fastened.
9.15 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN VILLAGE BUILDINGS. (1) No
person may smoke in any enclosed, indoor area of a Village
building. (2) The definitions contained in Section 101.123,
Stats., as adopted and hereafter amended are incorporated herein
by reference. [Ord. 394]
9.20 ATTEMPTS TO VIOLATE ORDINANCES PROHIBITED. (1) No
person shall attempt to commit an ordinance violation.
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.20(2)
10
(2) An attempt to commit an ordinance violation requires
that the actor have an intent to perform acts and attain a
result which if accomplished, would constitute such ordinance
violation and that he does act toward the commission of the
violation which demonstrates unequivocally, under all
circumstances, that he formed that intent and would commit the
violation except for the intervention of another person or some
other extraneous factor.
(3) This section shall apply only to those ordinances
which specifically require intent as an element of proof of
violation thereunder. [Ord. 235]
9.21 PARTIES TO ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS. (1) Whoever is
concerned in the commission of an ordinance violation is a
principal and may be charged with and convicted of the
commission of an ordinance violation although he did not
directly commit it and although the person who directly
committed it has not been convicted or has been convicted of
some other ordinance violation based on the same act.
(2) A person is concerned in the commission of an
ordinance violation if he:
(a) Directly commits the violation.
(b) Intentionally aids and abets the commission of
it.
(c) Is a party to a conspiracy with another to
commit it or advised, hires, counsels or otherwise
procures another to commit it. Such a party is also
concerned in the commission of any other ordinance
violation which is committed in pursuance of the
intended ordinance violation and which under the
circumstances is a natural and probable consequence
of the intended ordinance violation. This paragraph
does not apply to a person who voluntarily changes
his mind and no longer desires that the violation be
ommitted and notifies the other parties concerned of
his withdrawal within a reasonable time before the
commission of the violation so as to allow the others
also to withdraw. [Ord. 234]
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.22
11
9.22 UNDERAGE PERSON'S MISREPRESENTATION TO PROCURE
FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGES OR INTOXICATING LIQUORS. (1) No
underage person shall represent that he is of age to ask for or
receive any fermented malt beverages from any keeper of any
place for the sale of fermented malt beverages, except in case
authorized by law.
(2) No underage person shall represent that he is of age
to ask for or receive any intoxicating liquors from any keeper
of any place for the sale of intoxicating liquors except in
cases authorized by law.
(3) No underage person shall procure, seek to procure,
knowingly possess or consume in public any fermented malt
beverage.
(4) No underage person shall procure, seek to procure,
knowingly possess or consume in public any intoxicating liquor.
[Ord. 74, 236]
9.23 REGULATION OF THE SALE OF FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGES OR
INTOXICATING LIQUORS BY KEEPERS OF PLACES SELLING SUCH LIQUORS
OR MALT BEVERAGES. No keeper of place for the sale of any
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages shall sell,
vend, give or deal or traffic in the sale of intoxicating
liquors or fermented malt beverages to an underage person, or to
any person intoxicated or bordering on a state of intoxication.
[Ord. 74]
9.24 PARKS. (1) This section creates regulations
governing the Summit Hill Park, the East End Park, and Cairns
Woods in the Village of Ellsworth. [Ord. 424]
(2) Village Parks shall be closed between the hours of
10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(3) The consumption of intoxicating liquors or fermented
malt beverages in Village Parks shall be restricted to the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m.
(4) The consumption of intoxicating liquors or fermented
malt beverages in the Summit Hill Park shall be restricted and
limited to the picnic area thereof and to such other areas as
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.24(4)
12
may be designated under a picnic license or beer license granted
by the Village Board. The picnic area of said Park is that part
thereof located under and immediately adjacent to the picnic
shelter at the North end of said Park, being adjacent and to the
East of the volleyball courts. [Ord. 352, 424]
(5) No fires shall be permitted in Cairns Woods at any
time or under any circumstances. No fires shall be permitted in
any other park except in cooking grills fueled by charcoal.
[Ord. 424]
(6) Overnight camping or sleeping in Cairns Woods is
prohibited. Overnight camping in other parks is allowed only
upon approval of the Chief of Police or his subordinates. [Ord.
300, 352, 424]
(7) Notwithstanding the closing hours established in
subsec. (2) above, Summit Hill Park, also known as Summit Park,
shall remain open until 11:30 p.m. on any evening when an
Ellsworth Baseball Association sanctioned baseball game is
played on the same said evening. A calendar of said games shall
be furnished the Village Clerk by the Association. [Ord. 461]
(8) No events other than baseball games are to take place
at Bob Young Field at Summit Park except upon mutual consent of
the Village Board and the Ellsworth Baseball Association. The
purpose of this subsection is to preserve the integrity of the
baseball field. [Ord. 461]
9.25 SMOKING PROHIBITED. (1) No person shall smoke in
any place in or upon the Pierce County Fairgrounds or grandstand
where a "No Smoking" sign is posted.
(2) The term "smoking" means the carrying of lighted pipe,
cigarette, cigar or other lighted tobacco in any form. [Ord. 310]
9.26 CURFEW. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of sixteen (16) years to congregate, loiter,
wander, stroll, stand or play in or upon the public street,
highways, roads, alleys, parks, public buildings, places of
amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or any public places in
the Village of Ellsworth, either on foot or in or upon any
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.26(1)
13
conveyance being driven or parked thereon, between the hours of
10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, Central Time,
unless accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian.
[Ord. 428]
(2) This Section shall not apply to a child:
(a) Who is performing an errand as directed by his
parent, guardian or person having lawful custody.
(b) Who is on his own premises or in the areas
immediately adjacent thereto.
(c) Who is returning immediately home from a
supervised school, church or civic function or from
employment.
These exceptions shall not, however, permit a child to
unnecessarily loiter about the streets, alleys or other public
places or in a motor vehicle parked or traveling on any public
street.
(3) The curfew hours for Fridays and Saturdays shall be
extended to midnight, thus running from midnight to 5 a.m. the
following Sunday morning. [Ord.412]
9.27 FIREWORKS REGULATED. (1) It is unlawful for any
person to sell, expose or offer for sale, use, keep, discharge
or explode any firecrackers, blank cartridges, toy pistols or
cannons, toy canes or cannons in which explosives are used,
contrivances using explosive caps or cartridges, sparklers,
display wheels, the type of balloon which requires fire
underneath to propel the same, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman
candles, aerial salutes, American or Chinese bombs or other
fireworks of like construction, or any fireworks containing any
explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other devices
commonly used and sold as fireworks containing nitrates,
chlorates, oxalates, sulphides of lead, barium, antimony,
arsenic, mercury, nitroglycerine, phosphorus or any compound
containing any of the same or other modern explosives, within
the Village of Ellsworth, except as hereinafter provided.
(2) Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the use of
fireworks other than those prohibited by Sub. (6) for
pyrotechnic displays given by public authorities, fair
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.27(2)
14
associations, amusement parks, park boards, civic organizations
or groups of individuals, or for the protection of crops from
predatory birds of animals by agricultural producers that been
granted a permit for such display or protective use by the
president of the village wherein the display is to be given or
the protective use is to occur, and permits issued for crop
protection shall state the type of fireworks to be used for such
purpose, and the owner or lessee of said land on which sad
fireworks are installed shall erect appropriate warning signs
disclosing the use of fireworks for crop protection.
(a) The issuing officer may require an indemnity
bond with good and sufficient sureties for the
payment of all claims that may arise by reason of
injuries to person or property from the handling, use
or discharge of fireworks under such permit.
Such bond, if required, shall be taken in the name of the
village wherein the fireworks display is to be given, and any
person injured thereby may bring an action on said bond in his
own name to recover the damage he has sustained, but the
aggregate liability of the surety to all persons shall in no
event exceed the amount of such bond. The bond, if required,
together with a copy of the permit shall be filed in the office
of the clerk of the village.
(3) Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the use of
sale of blank cartridges for circus or theatrical purposes, or
signal purposes in athletic contests or sports events, or use by
militia, police or military organizations; nor the use of sale
of colored flares or torpedoes for railway, aircraft, or highway
signal purposes.
(4) Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to
prohibit any resident wholesaler, dealer or jobber from selling
fireworks other than those prohibited by Sub. (6) at wholesale,
but only when the same are shipped or delivered directly outside
the state of Wisconsin or to an organization, agricultural
producer or group granted a permit under Sub.(2).
(5) The following provisions shall apply to places where
fireworks are stored or handled:
(a) Such premises shall be equipped with fire
extinguishers approved by the fire chief or
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.27(5)(a)
15
chief engineer or the fire department in the
community in which such premises are located;
(b) Smoking shall be prohibited where fireworks are
stored or handled;
(c) It is hereby made the duty of every wholesaler,
dealer or jobber keeping, storing or handling, within
the Village of Ellsworth, fireworks of any
description to notify the fire chief of the fire
department in the village wherein such fireworks are
kept, stored or handled, immediately of the receipt
of such fireworks, or the removal thereof from one
location to another, and the location where such
fireworks are stored. No fireworks shall be stored
in any building used for dwelling purposes or in any
building situated within 50 feet of any building used
for dwelling purposes, or in places of public
assemblage, or within 50 feet of any gasoline pump,
gasoline filling station or gasoline bulk station, or
any building in which gasoline or volatile liquid is
sold in quantities in excess of one gallon.
(6) Under no circumstances shall any person sell, keep for
sale, manufacture or bring into the village for use therein fire
ballon, mortars excepting mortars used for special display
purposes or cannon, or any explosive caps or cartridges, and
Chinese firecrackers more than 2 inches in length or more than
three-eighths inch in diameter, outside measurements of
container, or any article containing a compound of mercury or
yellow phosphorus.
(7) A parent or legally appointed guardian of any minor
who shall knowingly permit such minor to purchase or have in his
possession or to discharge any fireworks forbidden by this
ordinance shall be deemed to have violated this ordinance and
such parent or guardian shall be personally liable for any
damage caused by such possession or discharge of fireworks.
(8) Any person violating any provision of this ordinance
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than $500.00,
and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be
imprisoned in the county jail until payment of such forfeiture
and costs or prosecution, but not to exceed six months.
(9) The prohibitions and penalties provided in this
ordinance shall not apply to toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.27(9)
16
other devices in which paper caps manufactured in accordance
with the United States Interstate Commerce Commission
regulations for packing and shipping of toy paper caps are used
or to toy pistol paper caps so manufactured, the sale and use of
which shall be permitted at all times.
(10) The prohibitions and penalties provided in this
ordinance shall not apply to (a) gold star producing sparklers
on wires which contain no magnesium, chlorate or perchlorate,
and (b) toy snakes which contain no mercury; the sale and use
of which shall be permitted at all times.
(11) The prohibitions and penalties provided in this
ordinance shall not apply to smoke novelties and party novelties
which contain less than 20/500ths of a grain of explosive
mixture. [Ord. 242]
9.28 CONTRIBUTING TO TRUANCY. Repealed by Ord. 514.
See Sec. 948.45,Wis. Stats. [Ord. 514]
9.49 MUNICIPAL CITATION - UNIFORM COMPLAINT. (1) The
Village Board hereby authorizes the use of a uniform citation to
be issued for violations of Ordinances, including Ordinances for
which a statutory counterpart exists. The citation shall be in
the form of the "Uniform Complaint" attached hereto by
reference. This Complaint form may be changed from time to time
provided such changes are in substantial conformity with the
said within Complaint.
(2) The Uniform Complaint adopted in this section shall
not be used in connection with those traffic ordinances adopted
by reference where a uniform traffic citation is required to be
used. [Ord. 369]
9.50 PENALTIES. (1) Except as otherwise provided herein,
any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in sec. 25.04 of this
Municipal Code. (2) Any person who shall violate any provision
of 9.01-48.45 shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more
than $500, together with the costs of prosecution and in default
of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be
imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs
are paid, but not exceeding one year.
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.50(3)
17
(3) In addition to any penalty imposed for violation of
Sec. 9.01-943.01 any person who shall cause physical damage to
or destroy any public property shall be liable for the costs of
replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property. The
parent or parents of any unemancipated minor child who violates
sec. 9.01-943.01 (1) may also be held liable for the cost of
replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property in
accordance with Sec. 895.035, Wis. Stats.
(4) Any person who shall violate any provision of secs.
9.01-946.12 and/or 9.01-946.13 shall, upon conviction therefore,
forfeit not more than $500, together with the costs of
prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and
costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the County Jail
until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding one
year.
(5) (a) Any person who shall violate any provision of sec.
9.22 (2) and (4) shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not
more than $100, together with the costs of prosecution, and in
default of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be
imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs
are paid, not to exceed 10 days.
(b) Any person who shall violate any provision of
sec. 9.22 (2) and (4) shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not more than $100, together with the costs
of prosecution, and in default of such forfeiture and
costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the
County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid,
not to exceed 10 days. The court shall also restrict
or suspend the motor vehicle operating privileges
provided in Sec. 343.30 (6), Wis. Stats.
(6) (a) Any person violating provisions of sec. 9.23
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than $500, and
in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be
imprisoned in the County Jail until payment of such forfeiture
and costs of prosecution, but not to exceed 60 days.(b) If any
such person shall be found guilty of a second violation of any
provision of sec. 9.23, in addition to the above penalties, he
shall forthwith forfeit any fermented malt beverage or liquor
license issued to him without further notice.
PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 9.50(7)
18
(7) Where not otherwise expressly prohibited by this
Municipal Code, and where otherwise in compliance with Wisconsin
Statutes, the forfeiture imposed upon any person who shall
violate any provision of this chapter may be imposed and
assessed in a manner conforming with the forfeiture provided by
Wisconsin Statutes for a similar violation. In no event shall
these guidelines provided by the forfeiture provisions of
Wisconsin Statutes be exceeded by the forfeiture actually
imposed by the Village.
CHAPTER 10
PUBLIC NUISANCES
10.01 Public Nuisances Prohibited
10.02 Public Nuisance Defined
10.03 Public Nuisances Affecting Health
10.04 Public Nuisances Offending Morals and
Decency
10.05 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety
10.06 Abatement of Public Nuisances
10.07 Cost of Abatement
10.08 Penalty
PUBLIC NUISANCES 10.01
1
10.01 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED. No person shall
erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any public nuisance within the Village.
10.02 PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED. (1) A public nuisance
is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which
shall continue for such length of time as to:
(a) Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort,
health, repose or safety of the public;
(b) In any way render the public insecure in life or in
the use of property;
(c) Greatly offend the public morals or decency;
(d) Substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley,
highway, navigable body of water or other public way or the use
of public property. [Ord. 514]
(2) Any nuisance as described in this Section which
occurs in a multi-family dwelling (duplex, triplex, multi-family
housing unit or other like dwelling) is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance as same is likely to substantially annoy, injure
or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the other
inhabitants thereof. [Ord. 460]
10.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH. The following
acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health
nuisances coming within the definition of sec. 10.02:
(1) ADULTERATED FOOD. All decayed, adulterated or
unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the
public.
(2) UNBURIED CARCASSES. Carcasses of animals, birds or
fowl not intended for human consumption or food which are not
buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24
hours after death.
(3) BREEDING PLACES FOR VERMIN, ETC. Accumulations of
decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting
PUBLIC NUISANCES 10.03(4)
2
lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material
whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects,
rats or other vermin may breed.
(4) STAGNANT WATER. All stagnant water in which
mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply.
(5) PRIVY VAULTS AND GARBAGE CANS. Privy vaults and
garbage cans which are not fly-tight.
(6) NOXIOUS WEEDS. All noxious weeds and other rank
growth of vegetation. All weeds and grass shall be kept cut to
a height of not to exceed six (6) inches. The Village may cause
all weeds and grass to be cut and removed and brush to be
removed and the cost thereof charged to the property under sec.
66.0627, Wis. Stats. [Ord. 523 8/02, Ord.587 7/08, Ord. 624 07/12]
(7) WATER POLLUTION. The pollution of any public well
or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other body of water by
sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances.
(8) NOXIOUS ODORS, ETC. Any use of property, substances
or things within the Village emitting or causing any foul,
offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors,
gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical
senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or
inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons
within the Village.
(9) STREET POLLUTION. Any use of property which shall
cause any nauseous of unwholesome liquid or substance to flow
into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place
within the Village.
(10) AIR POLLUTION. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders,
noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash, industrial dust or other
atmospheric pollutants within the Village limits or within one
mile therefrom in such quantities as to endanger the health of
persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause
substantial injury to property in the Village.
10.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES OFFENDING MORALS AND DECENCY.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are
hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending
PUBLIC NUISANCES 10.04(1)
3
public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be
construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and
decency within the definition of sec. 10.02:
(1) DISORDERLY HOUSES. All disorderly houses, bawdy
houses, houses of ill fame, gambling houses and buildings or
structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution,
promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling
(2) GAMBLING DEVICES. All gambling devices and slot
machines. (3) UNLICENSED SALE OF LIQUOR AND BEER. All
places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are
sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or
rectified without a permit or license as provided for by the
ordinances of the Village.
(4) CONTINUOUS VIOLATION OF VILLAGE ORDINANCES. Any
place or premises within the Village where Village ordinances or
State laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or
welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally
violated.
(5) ILLEGAL DRINKING. Any place or premises resorted to
for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented
malt beverages in violation of the laws of the State of
Wisconsin.
10.05 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY. The
following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are
hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and
safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude
other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within
the definition of sec. 10.02:
(1) SIGNS, BILLBOARDS, ETC. All signs and billboards,
awnings and other similar structures over or near streets,
sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so
situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety.
(2) ILLEGAL BUILDINGS. All buildings erected, repaired
or altered in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of
the Village relating to materials and manner of construction of
building and structures within the Village.
PUBLIC NUISANCES 10.05(3)
4
(3) UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC SIGNS. All unauthorized signs,
signals, markings or devices placed or maintained upon or in
view of any public highway or railway crossing which purport to
be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device,
railroad sign or signal or which because of its color, location,
brilliance or manner of operation interferes with the
effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal.
(4) OBSTRUCTION OF INTERSECTIONS. All trees, hedges,
billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving
vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a
clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk
(5) TREE LIMBS. All limbs of trees which project over
and less than 10 feet above any public sidewalk, street or other
public place.
(6) DANGEROUS TREES. All trees which are a menace to
public safety or are the cause of substantial annoyance to the
general public.
(7) FIREWORKS. All use of display of fireworks except
as provided by the laws of the State of Wisconsin and ordinances
of the Village.
(8) DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS. All buildings or structures
so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use. Any fire damaged
dwelling, or part thereof, which remains in a state of disrepair
for a period of 30 days or longer shall be deemed a dilapidated
building with respect to which abatement is appropriate under
sec. 10.06 (4). [Ord.413]
(9) WIRES AND CABLES OVER STREETS. All wires and cables
over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less
than 15 feet above the surface thereof.
(10) NOISY ANIMALS OR FOWL. The keeping or harboring of
any animal or fowl which by frequent or habitual howling,
yelping, barking, crowing or making of other noises shall
greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood or any considerable
number of persons within the Village.
(11) OBSTRUCTIONS OF STREETS; EXCAVATIONS. All
PUBLIC NUISANCES 10.05(12)
5
obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all
excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the
ordinances of the Village or which, although made in accordance
with such ordinances, are kept
or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time
after the purpose thereof has been accomplished, or do not
conform to the permit.
(12) UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES. Any unauthorized or unlawful
use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk
or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large
crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of
the streets of sidewalks.
10.06 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES. (1) ENFORCEMENT.
The Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire Department, the
Building Inspector and Health Officer shall enforce those
provisions of this chapter that come within the jurisdiction of
their offices, and they shall make periodic inspections and
inspections upon complaint to insure that such provisions are
not violated. No action shall be taken under this section to
abate a public nuisance unless the officer shall have inspected
or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is
alleged to exist and have satisfied himself that a nuisance does
in fact exist.
(2) SUMMARY ABATEMENT. If the inspecting officer shall
determine that a public nuisance exists within the Village and
that there is great and immediate danger to the public health,
safety, peace, morals or decency, the President may direct the
proper officer to cause the same to be abated and charge the
cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
(3) ABATEMENT AFTER NOTICE. If the inspecting officer
shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private
premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to
threaten great and immediate danger to the public health,
safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall serve notice on the
person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the same
within 10 days. If such nuisance is not removed within such 10
days, the proper officer shall cause the nuisances to be removed
a provided in sub. (2).
(4) ABATEMENT OF OLD, DILAPIDATED AND OUT OF REPAIR
PUBLIC NUISANCES 10.06(5)
6
BUILDINGS. Where the nuisance sought to be abated is an old,
dilapidated or so out of repair structure/building as to be
dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use, the Village Board, upon
recommendation of the Building Inspector or Health Officer, may
raze and remove such building or part thereof and restore the
site to a dust-free and erosion-free condition, or repair same
if same can be made safe by repairs as provided in Section
66.0413, Stats. This procedure shall be followed as well with
respect to the razing and removal of a building or part thereof
with respect to which there has been a cessation of normal
construction of a building for a period of more than two (2)
years. Any action taken to abate the nuisance shall be
initiated by order of the Village Board specifying a time in
which the owner shall comply therewith and make any necessary
repairs. Service of the order and the procedure to follow in
the event of a violation of the order shall be such as is set
forth in Section 66.0413, Stats., the provisions of said section
being incorporated herein by reference. The entire cost of
razing, removal and restoration shall be assessed and collected
as a special tax, and shall be a lien upon the subject real
estate as provided in Sec. 66.0413, Wis. Stats. [Ord. 413, 510,
533 07/03]
(5) OTHER METHODS NOT EXCLUDED. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public
nuisances by the Village or its officials in accordance with the
laws of the State of Wisconsin.
10.07 COST OF ABATEMENT. In addition to any other
penalty imposed by this Chapter for the erection, contrivance,
creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be
collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and if notice to abate
the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be
assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
10.08 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this Chapter or permit or cause a public nuisance
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in sec. 25.04 of this
Municipal Code.
CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
11.01 Administration of Health and Sanitation
Laws and Regulations
11.02 Health Officer: Duties and Powers
11.03 Rules and Regulations
11.04 Health Nuisances, Abatement of
11.05 Communicable Diseases
11.06 Regulation of Nuisance-Type Businesses
11.07 Compulsory Connection to Sewer and Water
11.071 Wisconsin Fund Individual Tank Replacement
or Rehabilitation Regulatory Program
11.072 Wellhead Protection
11.073 Well Abandonment and Well Operation Permit
11.08 Milk and Milk Products
11.09 Keeping of Animals and Fowl
11.10 Solid Waste and Recycling
11.11 Burning Prohibited
11.12 Minor Possession of Cigarette Tobacco or
Electronic Nicotine Delivery System Product
11.13 Regulation of Smoking and Vaping
11.14 Village Landfill
11.15 Truancy
11.16 Housing Discrimination Prohibited
11.17 Maple Grove Cemetery
11.18 Smoke Alarms/Fire Detectors
11.19 Security Key and Vault System
11.20 Ultimate Fighting Prohibited
11.21 Sex Offender Residency Restrictions
11.22 Prohibited Conduct of Sex Offender
11.50 Penalty
Revised 10/7/2019
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.01
1
11.01 ADMINISTRATION OF HEALTH AND SANITATION LAWS AND
REGULATIONS. (1) DUTIES. The Village Board shall assume the
general administration of health and sanitation laws and
regulations in the Village, supervise the work of the Health
Officer and attend to the administration and enforcement of the
health laws of the State and the rules and regulations
prescribed by the State Department of Health and the ordinances
of the Village. [Ord. 616 08/2011]
(2) POWERS. The Board shall take such measures and make
such rules and regulations as shall be necessary and effectual
for the preservation and promotion of the public health in the
Village. [Ord. 616 08/2011]
(3) Health Officer. Where the Village President or
Village Board has not specifically designated or appointed a
Health Officer, the Village President, and in his absence, the
Chief of Police, shall serve as Health Officer. The Health
Officer may rely upon directives and recommendations of the
Pierce County Department of Public Health, and shall also assist
in the enforcement of any Orders issued by such Department where
such Department has jurisdiction in the Village. [Ord. 616
08/2011]
11.02 HEALTH OFFICER: DUTIES AND POWERS. (1)
GENERAL DUTIES. The Health Officer under the supervision of the
District State Health Officer shall:
(a) Maintain continuous sanitary supervision over
his territory.
(b) Promote the spread of information as to the
causes, nature and prevention of prevalent
diseases and the preservation and improvement of
health.
(c) Enforce the health laws, rules and regulations
of the State Department of Health and Social
Services, the State and Village including the
laws relating to contagious diseases contained
in Ch. 143, Wis. Stats.
(d) Take steps necessary to secure prompt and full
reports by physicians of communicable diseases
and prompt and full registration of births and
deaths.
(e) Keep and deliver to his successor a record of
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.02(1)(f)
2
all his official acts.
(f) Make an annual report to the State Department of
Health and Social Services and to the Village
Board and such other report as they may request.
(2) MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES. The Health Officer may
procure at the expense of the Village all record books,
quarantine cards and other material needed, except such as are
furnished by the State Department of Health and Social
Services. [Ord. 616 08/2011]
(3) SALARY. The health officer shall be paid such fees
for inspection as are from time to time established by
resolution of the Village Board. [Ord. 521 5/02]
11.04 HEALTH NUISANCES, ABATEMENT OF. The Health
Officer may abate health nuisances in accordance with Sec.
66.0413, 254.595 & Chpt. 823, Wis. Stats., which is adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. [Ord. 523 8/02, Ord. 616 08/2011]
11.05 COMMUNICABLE DISEASES. Chpt. 252, Wis. Stats.,
and Ch. HFS 145.01-145.07, Wis. Adm. Code, are adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter and the Health Officer
shall enforce the provisions thereof. [Ord. 523 8/02]
11.06 REGULATION OF NUISANCE-TYPE BUSINESSES. (1)
PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall conduct within the Village any
business which has a tendency to create a public nuisance,
except upon permit issued by the Health Officer and subject to
such conditions as he may impose.
(2) DEFINITION. A business which has a tendency to
create a public nuisance is one which unless properly regulated
may create conditions creating a public nuisance as defined in
sec. 10.02 of this Code.
11.07 COMPULSORY CONNECTION TO SEWER AND WATER. (1)
All buildings or structures (including mobile homes) used for
human habitation and located adjacent to sewer or water main, or
in a block through which one or both of these systems extend,
shall be connected with such sewer and water main as required by
the Health Officer, and in any event shall be so connected as
follows
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.07(1)(a)
3
(a) New building construction: within one year of
the date of such construction. Pre-existing
buildings or structures: within
one year of the date such sewer or water system
is completed, as determined and certified by the
project engineer or Director of Public
Works.[Ord.610 03/2011]
(b) Building or structures not hooked up as of the
effective date of this ordinance shall, where
such systems are available, be connected within
one year after the date of publication of this
ordinance.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any building currently
served by private well water may continue to be so
served provided that, in the event the Village Board
or Health Officer determine such well is contaminated
or otherwise poses a health hazard, such building
shall be connected to water main within the time
period set forth in subs. (2).
(2) The Village Clerk shall cause written notice to be
served upon any person required to connect to sewer or water
main specifying the time within which such connection is to be
made. The time specified in the notice shall not be less than
ten days. If any person fails to comply with this section after
such notice the Village may cause such connections to be made
and the expense thereof shall be assessed as a special tax
against the property of the person failing to comply, in
accordance with Sec. 281.45, Wis. Stats. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(3) Any person who desires to install a private sewage or
well system within the Village limits, including septic system
and holding tanks, shall first make application to and obtain
approval in writing from the Village Board. The application
shall be made in accordance with Section 11.073(4) [Ord. 246, 342,
628 11/12]
(4) Penalty. Any person, firm or other well owner
violating any provisions of this Section shall upon conviction
be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than
$1000.00 together with the cost of prosecution. Each 24-hour
period during which a violation exists shall be deemed and
constitute a separate offense. [Ord. 342, 356, 358, 415, 421, 628
11/12]
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.071
4
11.071 WISCONSIN FUND INDIVIDUAL TANK REPLACEMENT OR
REHABILITATION REGULATORY PROGRAM. (1) The Village of
Ellsworth shall promptly assist the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources and Wisconsin Department of Health and Social
Services, and faithfully discharge any duties owing thereto, in
connection with the installation, operation and maintenance of
septic tanks replaced or rehabilitated with funds from the
Wisconsin Fund Point Source Grant Program.
(2) All new or rehabilitated systems shall first be
issued proper permits from the Village Board or the Village of
Ellsworth.
(3) All new or rehabilitated systems must be properly
sited, designed and installed in accordance with State
regulations, as well as those regulations which may be imposed
by the Village Engineer or Health Officer.
(4) All new or rehabilitated systems must be maintained
in accordance with such schedule and program of same as the
Village Engineer or Health Officer shall require. All new or
rehabilitated systems which require pumping shall be so pumped
in accordance with the schedule for same imposed by the Village
Engineer or Health Officer.
(5) The Village Engineer and Village Health Officer shall
inspect and monitor the installation and operation of all new or
rehabilitated systems.
(a) The Village Engineer and Village Health Officer
shall make at least one visual inspection of the
system during installation of same.
(b) After installation, the Village Engineer and
Village Health Officer shall inspect the system
at least once each year.
(6) The Village Engineer, Village Health Officer or
Village Attorney shall be responsible for initiating any
enforcement actions when replacement, rehabilitation or
abatement is necessary pursuant to Sec. 145.245, Stats. [Ord.
523 8/02]
(7) The Village Clerk shall keep a central record
keepingsystem for all funds received for use in new or
rehabilitated systems from the Wisconsin Fund Point Source Grant
Program. The Village Clerk shall also keep records of all
inspections made of the subject systems.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.071(8)
5
(8) The owner of property subject to the maintenance
program established by the Village Engineer or Health Officer
under sec. 11.071 (4) shall be provided written notice of the
maintenance program requirements at the time application is made
for a Sanitary permit.
(a) The owner of the property subject to the
maintenance program must return a certification
form signed by himself and by a licensed
plumber, a licensed septage hauler or a
municipal or State official trained in on-site
wastewater disposal systems, certifying that 1)
the on-site wastewater disposal system is in
proper operating condition, and 2) the septic
tank is less than one-third full of sludge and
scum. The certification form shall be provided
by the Village Clerk. The certification must be
made no later than two years after the
installation of the system and every three years
thereafter. Records shall be maintained by the
Village Clerk showing that notification or
maintenance requirements has been given to each
applicant for a Sanitary permit. Such signed
certification forms shall be kept on file in the
office of the Village Clerk. [Ord.609 12/2010]
(9) The Village Clerk shall maintain a central record
keeping system consisting of the following items: a copy of the
State grant application, construction inspection and maintenance
reports, accounting records and minutes of Village Board
meetings concerning state grant funds for septic tanks. [Ord.25,
27, 260, 264, 443]
11.072 Title. (1) This Section shall be known, cited and
referred to as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance"
(hereinafter referred to as "WHP Ordinance"). Amended to
incorporate by reference: “Wellhead Protection Plan Amendment
No. 1, Municipal Well #4,” SEH No. ELLSW0502.00, July 2009.
[Ord. 594 9/09]
(2) Purpose, Authority and Application.
(a) Residents in the Village of Ellsworth depend
exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking
water supply. Certain land use practices and
activities can seriously threaten or degrade
groundwater quality. The purpose of this WHP
Ordinance is to institute land use regulations
and restrictions to protect the Village's
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.072(2)(b)
6
Municipal water supply and well fields, and to
promote the health, safety and general welfare
of the residents of the Village of Ellsworth.
(b) Statutory authority of the Village to enact
these regulations was established by the
Wisconsin Legislature in ss. 62.23(7)(a) and
(c), Wis. Stats. Under these statutes, the
Village has the authority to enact this
ordinance, effective in the incorporated areas
of the Village, to encourage the protection of
groundwater resources.
(c) The regulations specified in this WHP Ordinance
shall apply within the Village's corporate
limits.
(3) Definitions.
(a) Aquifer. “Aquifer” means a saturated,
permeable, geologic formation that contains,
and will yield, significant quantities of
water.
(b) Existing facilities. “Existing facilities”
means current facilities, practices and
activities which may cause or threaten to cause
environmental pollution within that portion of
the Village’s wellhead protection area that
lies within the corporate limits of the
Village. Existing facilities include but
are not limited to the type listed in the
Department of Natural Resources’ form 3300-215,
Public Water Supply Potential Contaminant Use
Inventory Form which is incorporated herein as
if fully set forth herein.
(c) Recharge Area. “Recharge area” means the land
area which contributes water to a well by
infiltration of water into the subsurface and
movement with groundwater toward the well.
This area extends beyond the corporate limits
of the Village of Ellsworth.
(d) Groundwater Protection Overlay District.
“Groundwater Protection Overlay District”
meansthat portion of the recharge area for the
Village wells that lies within the Village as
shall be shown in the map entitled “Map of
Groundwater Protection Overly District” and
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.072(3)(e)
7
incorporated herein as if fully set forth.
(e) Well Field. “Well field” means a piece of land
used primarily for the purpose of
supplying a location for construction of wells
to supply a municipal water system.
(4) Groundwater Protection Overlay District.
(a) Separation Distances. The following minimum
separation distances shall be maintained within
the Groundwater Protection Overlay District.
(1) Fifty feet between a well and storm sewer
main.
(2) Two hundred feet between a well and any
sanitary sewer main, lift station or
single family residential fuel oil tank.
A lesser separation distance may be
allowed for sanitary sewer mains where the
sanitary sewer main is constructed of
water main materials and joints and
pressure tested in place to meet current
American Waterworks Association (AWWA)
C600 specifications. In no case may the
separation distance between a well and
sanitary sewer main be less than 50 feet.
NOTE: Current AWWA C600 specifications are
available for inspection at the office of
the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources, the Secretary of State’s office
and the office of the Revisor of Statutes.
(3) Four hundred feet between a well and a
septic tank or soil adsorption unit
receiving less than 8,000 gallons per day,
a cemetery or a storm water drainage pond.
(4) Six hundred feet between a well and any
gasoline or fuel oil storage tank
installation that has received written
approval from the Wisconsin Department of
Commerce (hereafter Commerce) or its
designated agent under s. Comm 10.10,Wis.
Adm. Code.
(5) One thousand feet between a well and land
application of municipal, commercial or
industrial waste; industrial, commercial
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.072(4)(a)(5)
8
or municipal waste water lagoons or
storage structures; manure stacks or
storage structures; and septic tanks or
soil adsorption units receiving 8,000
gallons per day or more.
(6) Twelve hundred feet between a well and
any solid waste storage, transportation,
transfer, incineration, air curtain
destructor, processing, wood burning, one
time disposal or small demolition
facility; sanitary landfill; any property
with residual groundwater contamination
that exceeds ch. NR 140 enforcement
standards that is shown on the Department
of Natural Resources’ geographic
information system registry of closed
remediation sites; coal storage area; salt
or deicing material storage area; gasoline
or fuel oil storage tanks that have not
received written approval from Commerce or
its designated agent under s. Comm 10.10,
Wis. Adm. Code; bulk fuel storage
facilities; and pesticide or fertilizer
handling or storage facilities.
(b) Three Overlay District Zones. This District is
hereby divided into Zone A, B, and C.
(1) Zone A. Identified as the primary source
of water for the municipal well aquifer
and as the area most likely to transmit
groundwater contamination to the municipal
wells. Zone A is more restrictive than
Zones B or C.
(2) Permitted uses - Zone A. The following
uses are permitted uses within the
groundwater protection Zone A. Uses not
listed shall be considered prohibited
uses:
a. Parks, provided there is no on-site
waste disposal or fuel storage tank
facilities associated with this use.
b. Playgrounds.
c. Wildlife areas.
d. Non-motorized trails, such as bike.
skiing, nature and fitness trails.
e. Residential, commercial and
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.072(4)(b)(2)(e)
9
industrial property, which is
municipally sewered, and free of
flammable and combustible liquid and
underground storage tanks (USTs).
f. Fire Station
(3) Zone B. Identified as a secondary source
of water for the municipal wells because
of the large cone of depression and a
greater time of travel. Zone B is less
restrictive than Zone A, but more
restrictive than Zone C.
(4) Permitted Uses - Zone B. The following
uses are permitted uses within the
groundwater protection Zone B. Uses not
listed shall be considered prohibited
uses:
a. All uses listed as permitted uses in
Zone A.
b. Modified agricultural activities,
including any crop free of pesticides
and/or synthetic fertilizers.
c. Above-ground petroleum product
storage tanks less than 660 gallons.
All new or replaced tanks shall be
installed in compliance with ch. Comm
10, Wis. Adm. Code.
d. Residential, commercial and
industrial property which is
municipally sewered or has a stateapproved
sewer and septic system.
(5) Zone C. Identified as the Groundwater
Protection Overlay District, excluding
those areas within Zone A and Zone B.
(6) Permitted Uses - Zone C. All uses listed
as permitted in Zone A and Zone B.
Individuals and/or facilities may make a
request to the Village Board to permit
additional land uses in Zone C.
(7) Mapping. The location and boundaries of
the zoning districts established by this
Ordinance are set forth on the Village of
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.072(4)(b)(7)
10
Ellsworth Extraterritorial Zone map
adopted 07-12-04 which is incorporated
herein and hereby made a part of this
Ordinance. Said map, together with
everything shown thereon and all
amendments thereto, shall be as much a
part of this Ordinance as though fully set
forth and described herein.
(5) Review of Permit Application.
(a) The Village Board shall review all requests for
approval of permits for land uses in the
Groundwater Protection Overlay District. All
determinations shall be made by the Village
Board within sixty (60) days of any request for
approval, provided however, that this sixty
(60) day period of limitation may be extended
by the Village Board for "good cause", as
determined in the sole and absolute discretion
of the Village Board.
(b) Upon reviewing all requests for approval, the
Village of Ellsworth Village Board shall
consider all of the following factors:
(1) The Village's responsibility, as a public
water supplier, to protect and preserve
the health, safety and welfare of its
citizens.
(2) The degree to which the proposed land use
practice, activity or facility may
seriously threaten or degrade groundwater
quality in the Village of Ellsworth or the
Village’s recharge area.
(3) The economic hardship which may be faced
by the landowner if the application is
denied.
(4) The availability of alternative options to
the applicant, and the cost, effect and
extent of availability of such alternative
options. (5) The proximity of the
applicant's property to other potential
sources of contamination.
(6) The then existing condition of the
Village's groundwater public water wells
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.072(5)(b)(6)
11
and well fields, and the vulnerability to
further contamination.
(7) The direction of flow of groundwater and
other factors in the area of the
applicant's property which may affect the
speed of the groundwater flow, including
topography, depth of soil, extent of
aquifer, depth to water table and location
of private wells.
(8) Any other hydro geological data or
information which is available from any
public or private agency or organization.
(9) The potential benefit, both economic and
social, from the approval of the
applicant's request for a permit.
(c) Any exemptions granted will be made conditional
and may include environmental and/or safety
monitoring which indicates whether the facility
may be emitting any releases or harmful
contaminants to the surrounding environment.
The facility will be held financially
responsible for all environmental cleanup
costs. The Village Board may require that a
bond be posted for future monitoring and
cleanup costs if deemed necessary at the time
of granting an exemption.
(d) The applicant shall be solely and exclusively
responsible for any and all costs associated
with the application, including all of the
following:
(1) The cost of an environmental impact study
if so required by the Village of Ellsworth
or its designee.
(2) The cost of groundwater monitoring or
groundwater wells if required by the
Village of Ellsworth or its designee. (3)
The costs of an appraisal for the
property or other property evaluation
expense if required by the Village of
Ellsworth or its designee.
(4) The costs of the Village's employee's or
designee’s time associated in any way with
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.072(5)(d)(5)
12
the application based on the hourly rate
paid to the employee multiplied by a
factor, determined by the Village,
representing the Village's costs for
expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave,
holidays, overtime, vacation and other
similar benefits.
(5) The cost of Village equipment employed.
(6) The cost of mileage reimbursed to the
Village employees.
(6) Requirements for Existing Facilities and Land Uses.
(a) Existing facilities shall provide copies of all
Federal, State and local facility operation
approvals or certificates and ongoing
environmental monitoring results to the Village
of Ellsworth.
(b) Existing facilities shall provide additional
environmental or safety monitoring as deemed
necessary by the Village Board, specifically
including the production of any and all
environmental statements detailing the extent
of chemical use and storage on the property.
(c) Existing facilities shall replace equipment or
expand in a manner that improves the existing
environmental and safety technologies already
in existence.
(d) Existing facilities shall have the
responsibility of devising and/or filing with
the Village of Ellsworth, a contingency plan
satisfactory to the Village Board for the
immediate notification of the appropriate
Village of Ellsworth officers in the event of
an emergency.
(e) Property owners with an existing agricultural
use shall be exempt from requirements of this
Ordinance as they relate to restrictions on
agricultural uses, provided however, that such
exemption shall only apply to the property
owners in existence at the time of passage of
the Ordinance and this exemption shall not
constitute a covenant running with the land.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.072(7)
13
(7) Enforcement and penalties.
(a) In the event an individual and/or facility
causes the release of any contaminants which
endanger the Groundwater Protection Overlay
District, the individual/facility causing said
release shall immediately cease and desist, and
provide clean-up satisfactory to the Village of
Ellsworth.
(b) The individual/facility shall be responsible
for all costs of cleanup and the Village of
Ellsworth consultant fees at the invoice amount
plus administrative costs for oversight, review
and documentation, including all of the
following:
(1) The cost of Village employees' time
associated in any way with the clean-up
based on the hourly rate paid to the
employee multiplied by a factor determined
by the Village, representing the Village's
cost for expenses, benefits, insurance,
sick leave, holidays, overtime, vacation,
and similar benefits.
(2) The cost of Village equipment employed.
(3) The cost of mileage reimbursed to the
Village employees attributed to the cleanup.
(c) Following any such discharge, the Village may
require additional test monitoring or other
requirements as outlined in Section 6 and 7
herein.
(d) Violations: It shall be unlawful to construct
or use any structure, land or water in
violation of this Ordinance. Any person who is
specifically damaged by such violations may
institute appropriate action or proceeding to
enjoin a violation of this Ordinance.
(e) Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who
fails to comply with the provisions of this
Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not less than One Hundred and 00/100
Dollars ($100.00) nor more than Five Hundred
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.072(7)(e)
14
and 00/100 Dollars ($500.00) plus the costs of
the prosecution for each violation or in the
alternative, shall have such costs added to
their real estate property tax bill as a lien
against the property. Each day a violation
exists or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(8) Severability Clause. If any section, subsection,
sentence, clause paragraph or phrase of this Ordinance is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, or other
applicable administrative or governing body, such decision
shall not effect the validity of any other section,
subsection, sentence, clause, paragraph or phrase or portion
thereof. The Village Board of the Village of Ellsworth hereby
declares that they would have passed this Ordinance and each
section, subsection, sentence, clause, paragraph or phrase
thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more other
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, paragraphs, or
phrases may be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(9) All provisions in this Code of Ordinances in
conflict with the foregoing are hereby repealed or amended to
read and be consistent with this Ordinance. [Ord. 544 03/05; also
see Wellhead Protection Plan 11/01/04, Ord. 594 09/09]
11.073 WELL ABANDONMENT AND WELL OPERATION PERMIT (1)
Purpose. the purpose of this Section is to protect public
health, safety and welfare and to prevent contamination of
groundwater by assuring that unused, unsafe or non-complying
wells or wells which may act as conduits for contamination of
groundwater or wells which may be illegally cross-connected to
the municipal water system, are properly maintained or
abandoned.
(2) Applicability. This Section applies to all wells
located on premises served by the Village of Ellsworth municipal
water system. Utility customers outside the jurisdiction of the
municipal system may be required under contract agreement or
utility rule to adopt and enforce equivalent ordinances within
their jurisdictions for purposes stated in (1) above.
(3) Definitions.
A. "Municipal water systems" means a community water
system owned by a city, village, county, town,
town sanitary district, utility district, public
inland lake and rehabilitation district,
municipal water district or federal, state,
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.073(3)(B)
15
county, or municipal owned institution for
congregate care or correction ,or a privately
owned water utility serving the foregoing.
B. "Non-complying" means a well or pump installation
which does not comply with S. NR 812.42,
Wisconsin Administrative Code, Standards for
Existing Installations, and which has not been
granted a variance pursuant to S. NR 812.43,
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
C. "Pump Installation" means the pump and related
equipment used for withdrawing water from a
well, including the discharge piping, the
underground connections, pit less adapters,
pressure tanks, pits, sampling faucets and well
seals or caps.
D. "Unsafe" well or pump installation means one
which produces water which is bacteriologically
contaminated or contaminated with substances
which exceed the drinking water standards of
Chs. NR 140 or 809, Wisconsin Administrative
Code, or for which a Health Advisory has been
issued by the Department of Natural Resources.
E. "Unused" well or pump installation means one
which is not used for or does not have a
functional pumping system.
F. "Well" means a drill hole or other excavation or
opening deeper than it is wide that extends more
than 10 feet below the ground surface
constructed for the purpose of obtaining
groundwater.
G. "Well abandonment" means the proper filling and
sealing of a well according to the provisions of
S. NR 812.26, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(4) Abandonment Required. All wells on premises serve by
the municipal water system shall be properly abandoned in
accordance with sub. (6) of this Section no later than ninety
days from the date of connection to the municipal water system,
unless a valid well operation permit has been issued to the well
owner by the Village of Ellsworth under terms of sub.(5) of this
Section.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.073(5)
16
(5) Well Operation Permit.
1. Owners of wells on premises served by the
municipal water system wishing to retain their wells
for any use shall make application for a well
operation permit for each well no later than 90 days
after connection to the municipal water system. The
Village of Ellsworth shall grant a permit to a well
owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed 5
years providing all conditions of this Section are
met. A well operation permit may be renewed by
submitting an application verifying that the
conditions of this Section are met. The Village of
Ellsworth or its agent may conduct inspections and
water quality tests or require inspections and water
quality tests to be conducted at the applicant's
expense to obtain or verify information necessary for
consideration of a permit application or renewal.
Permit applications and renewals shall be made on
forms provided by the Clerk. All initial and renewal
applications must be accompanied by a fee as is
established from time-to-time by resolution of the
Village Board.
2. The following conditions must be met for issuance
or renewal of a well operation permit:
A. The well and pump installation shall meet
the Standards for Existing installations
described in S. NR 812.42, Wisconsin
Administration Code.
B. The well and pump shall have a history of
producing safe water evidenced by at least
1 coliform bacteria sample. In areas where
the Department of Natural Resources has
determined that ground water aquifers are
contaminated with substances other than
bacteria, additional chemical tests may be
required to document the safety of the
water.
C. There shall be no cross-connections between
the well's pump installation or
distribution piping and the municipal water
system.
D. The water from the private well shall not
discharge into a drain leading directly to
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.073(5)(2)(d)
17
a public sewer utility unless properly
metered and authorized by the sewer
utility.
E. The private well shall have a functional
pumping system.
F. The proposed use of the private well shall
be justified as reasonable in addition to
water provided by the municipal water
system.
(6) Abandonment Procedures.
1. All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of
this Section shall be done according to the
procedures and methods of S. NR 812.26, Wisconsin
Administrative Code. All debris, pumps, piping,
unsealed liners and other obstructions which may
interfere with sealing operations shall be removed
prior to abandonment.
2. The Owner of the well shall notify the Public
Works Director and Village Clerk in writing at least
7 days in advance of any well abandonment activities.
The abandonment of the well shall be observed or
verified by personnel of the municipal system.
3. An abandonment report form, supplied by the
Department of Natural Resources, shall be submitted
by the well owner to the Clerk and the Department of
Natural Resources within 30 days of the completion of
the well abandonment.
(7) Penalties. Any well owner violating any provision of
this Section shall upon conviction be subject to
forfeiture of not less than $500.00 nor more than
$1,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution.
Each day of violation is a separate offense. If any
person fails to comply with this Section for more
than 30 days after receiving written notice of the
violation, the Village may cause the well abandonment
to be performed and the expense to be assessed as a
special tax against the property. [Ord. 628 11/05]
11.08 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS. (1) LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall sell or distribute milk or any milk products to
any retailer for resale for human consumption unless suchperson
possesses a license issued hereunder. No license shall be
required for retailers who sell milk or milk products furnished
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.08(2)
18
by licensees in compliance with this section.
(2) APPLICATION; LICENSEE. Each application shall
state the name and address of the person applying for a license
and the location of each premises where milk or a milk product
is bottled, pasteurized or otherwise prepared for distribution.
A license shall be issued by the Village Clerk-Treasurer upon
payment of an annual inspection and license fee as is
established from time to time by resolution of the Village
Board. [Ord. 475]
(3) MILK PRODUCT DEFINED. "Milk Product" shall include
cream, homogenized milk, pasteurized milk, buttermilk, skim
milk, milk beverages, skim milk beverages, milk or skim milk
which has been fortified by the addition of vitamins or
minerals.
(4) STATE STANDARDS TO APPLY. No person shall sell,
offer for sale or expose to sale within the Village any milk or
milk product other than "Grade A, Pasteurized" milk or milk
product as defined in Chpt. ATCP 60, Wis. Adm. Code, or any milk
or milk product which is adulterated or misbranded. [Ord. 523
8/02]
11.09 KEEPING OF ANIMALS AND FOWL. No person shall
keep within the Village any animals or fowl, except domesticated
pets, without permit issued by the Animal Warden/Humane Officer.
In issuing a permit for animals or fowl, the Animal
Warden/Humane Officer shall consider the number of such animals
expected to be kept, the location, and the likelihood of a
public or private nuisance being created. “Domesticated pets”
include dogs, cats, mice, gerbils, hamsters, turtles, nonpoisonous
snakes and lizards. “Animals or fowl” refer to any
exotic animals and animals associated with agriculture and farm
husbandry including, but not limited to: cows, pigs, sheep,
horses, goats, llamas, buffalo, ostriches, ducks, geese,
chickens, doves. [Ord. 637 03/14, Ord. 660 03/17]
11.10 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING. (1) DEFINITIONS.
(a) Unless specifically defined in this subsection, terms and
abbreviations used in this chapter shall be interpreted in a
manner consistent with the Wisconsin Statutes and the
administrative regulations of the Department of Natural
Resources which have been or hereafter may be adopted under
those provisions.
(1) "Agricultural waste" means vegetative
residues or manures resulting from the
raising of plants and animals for food,
fiber and fuel. Agricultural waste does
not include waste pesticides or herbicides
or their containers, nor the organic
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(1)(a)(2)
19
created from industrial operations such as
food processing.
(2) "Acceptable waste" means solid waste which
can be processed by the Pierce County
resource conservation facility and includes
recyclables and compostables. Wastes not
acceptable at the facility are those which
may pose a threat to health or safety,
cause damage to the facility or impair its
operation, or that which is physically
impossible to process at the facility. The
solid waste management board may declare
categories of waste as acceptable or
unacceptable, and the facility manager is
responsible for decisions as to the
acceptability of any waste transported to
the facility.
(3) "Air contaminant" means the presence in the
outdoor atmosphere of any dust, fume, mist,
smoke, vapor, gas or other gaseous fluid,
or particulate substance differing in
composition from or exceeding in
concentration the natural components of the
atmosphere caused by the handling, storage,
processing, or disposal of solid waste.
(4) "Air pollution" means the presence in the
outdoor atmosphere of any air contaminant
or combination thereof in such quantity, or
such nature and duration, under such
conditions as would be injurious to human
health or welfare, to animal or plant life,
or to property, or to interfere
unreasonably with the enjoyment of life or
property caused by the handling, storage,
processing, or disposal of solid waste as
defined in subsection 35.
(5) "Bi-metal container" means a container that
is made primarily of a combination of steel
and aluminum.
(6) "Canister site" means one or more
commercial solid waste storage containers
(such as "green boxes" and “dumpsters”)
located to function as intermediate solid
waste facilities, and which are serviced
on a regular basis by a public or private
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(1)(a)(7)
20
solid waste hauler. A canister site shall
not include primary or preliminary
collection containers or dumpsters at the
point of generation.
(7) "Clean fill" means any material intended
for fill purposes, including but not
limited to: dirt, rock, broken clean
concrete, trees and asphalt paving
material, that is not contaminated with or
composed of any environmentally harmful
materials including but not limited to:
concrete impregnated with petroleum
products, demolition debris such as lumber
and shingles, asbestos waste and treated
wood.
(8) "Clean fill disposal site" means a location
for the disposal of clean fill.
(9) "Commercial hauler" means any person, as
defined in subsection 37, who owns,
operates, or leases vehicles for hire for
the purpose of collection and/or
transportation of any type of solid waste.
A commercial hauler does not include
persons hauling processed recyclables to an
end market.
(10) "Commercial waste" means solid waste
originating from commercial activities such
as retail business, institutions,
government office buildings and schools.
Commercial waste shall not include
agricultural waste or industrial waste.
(11) "Composting" means the controlled
biological decomposition of organic waste
in a manner resulting in an innocuous final
product.
(12) "Container board" means corrugated
paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
(13) "Demolition debris" means waste resulting
from the demolition of buildings and other
manmade structures which may include
untreated wood, masonry, glass and plastic
building parts. Demolition debris does not
include asbestos wastes, clean fill nor
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(1)(a)(14)
21
treated wood products.
(14) "Demolition debris land disposal facility"
means a site used only to dispose of
demolition debris, including the Village
landfill.
(15) "Fluorescent light bulbs" means a glass
tube coated inside with a fluorescent
substance giving off light when mercury
vapor in the tube is acted upon by
electrons from the cathode.
(16) "Foam polystyrene packaging" means
packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the
following criteria:
(a) Is designed for serving food or
beverages;
(b) Consists of loose particles intended
to fill space and cushion the package
article in a shipping container;
(c) Consists of rigid materials shaped to
hold and cushion the packaged article
in a shipping container.
(17) "Garbage" means discarded material
resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving and
consumption of food.
(18) "Generator" means a person, business,
industry, farm, corporation or other entity
having the potential to create solid waste.
(19) "Hazardous waste" means any waste or
discarded material or combinations of waste
or discarded materials in solid, semisolid,
liquid, or gaseous form which cannot
be handled by routine waste management
techniques because they pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health
or other living organisms because of their
chemical, biological or physical
properties. Categories of hazardous waste
materials include, but are not limited to,
explosives, flammables, oxidizers, poisons,
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(1)(a)(19)
22
irritants and corrosives. Hazardous waste
does not include sewage sludge; and source
material, special nuclear material or
byproduct material as defined by the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
(20) "HDPE" means high density polyethylene,
labeled by the Society of Plastics Industry
(SPI) Code No. 2.
(21) "Household hazardous waste" means any waste
of a solid, semi-solid, liquid, or gaseous
form resulting from normal and routine
household activities such as cleaning,
painting, maintenance, and sanitizing.
Such waste shall include but not be limited
to: substances which are toxic, corrosive,
flammable, irritants, or strong
sensitizers, and found in such household
products as oven cleaners, cleaning agents,
pesticides and solvents.
(22) "Incineration" means the process by which
solid wastes are burned for the purpose of
volume or weight reduction, energy recovery
or destruction of pathogens in facilities
designed for such use.
(23) "Industrial waste" means byproducts,
discards, sludge, rejects, and other waste
products created by any manufacturing
process, activity or technology, or the
performance of a service in which wastes or
a nonresidential nature are produced. Such
services include, but are not limited to,
auto body repair shops, gas stations, dry
cleaners, paint shops, furniture stripping
shops, junkyards and salvage yards.
(24) "Infectious waste" means solid waste which
may contain pathogens with sufficient
numbers and virulence so that exposure to
the waste by a susceptible host could
result in an infectious disease. Examples
of infectious waste would include, but not
be limited to, bandages, dressings,
needles and tissues, fluids or body parts
from medical, dental and veterinary sources
including clinics, hospitals, ambulances,
nursing homes and care of medical, dental
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(1)(a)(25)
23
and veterinary patients.
(25) "Land disposal facility" means a facility
where solid waste is placed in a land
spreading facility, a landfill, or surface
impoundment facility for disposal purposes.
(26) "Land pollution" means the presence in or
on the land of any waste in such quantity,
of such nature and duration and under such
condition as would affect injuriously any
waters of the state, create air
contaminants or cause air pollution.
(27) "LDPE" means low density polyethylene,
labeled by the SPI Code No. 4.
(28) "Litter" means solid waste scattered about
in a careless manner, usually rubbish.
(29) "Magazines" means magazines and other
materials printed on similar paper.
(30) "Multiple-family dwelling" means a property
containing four or more residential units,
including those which are occupied
seasonally.
(31) "Newspaper" means a newspaper and other
materials printed on newsprint.
(32) "Nonresidential facilities and properties"
means commercial, retail, industrial,
institutional and governmental facilities
and properties. This term does not include
multiple-family dwellings.
(33) "Office paper" means high grade printing
and writing papers. Printed white ledger
and computer printout are examples of
office paper generally accepted as high
grade. This term does not include
industrial process waste.
(34) "Open burning" means combustion in which
the byproducts thereof are emitted directly
into the ambient air without passing
through a properly sized stack or chimney
with sufficient pollution control devices
to control emissions to meet State of
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(1)(a)(34)
24
Wisconsin and nuisance standards and is not
capable of being licensed or permitted by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources as a solid waste incinerator.
(35) "Operation" means any site, facility or
activity relating to solid waste
management.
(36) "Other resins or multiple resins" means
plastic resins labeled by the SPI Code No.
7.
(37) "Person" means any human being, any
municipality or other governmental or
political subdivision or other public
agency, any public or private corporation,
any partnership, firm, association or
other organization, any receiver, trustee,
assignee, agent or other legal
representative of any of the foregoing or
any other legal entity.
(38) "PETE" means polyethylene terephthalate,
labeled by the SPI Code No. 1.
(39) "Plastic container" means an individual,
separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar or
carton, except for a blister pack, that is
originally used to contain a product that
is the subject of retail sale.
(40) "Post-consumer waste" means solid waste
other than:
(a) Solid waste generated in the
production of goods;
(b) Hazardous waste, as defined in Section
144.61(5), Wisconsin Statutes;
(c) Waste from construction and demolition
of structures, scrap automobiles;
(d) Or high-volume industrial waste, as
defined in Section 144.44(7)(a)1,
Wisconsin Statutes.
(41) "PP" means polypropylene, labeled by
the SPI Code No. 5.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(1)(a)(42)
25
(42) "Processed waste" means waste that is
baled, shredded, pulverized, composted,
classified, separated, combusted or
otherwise treated or altered by some means
to facilitate further transfer, processing,
utilization or disposal.
(43) "PS" means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI
Code No. 6.
(44) "Putrescible waste" means waste which
contains organic matter capable of
being decomposed by the Micro-organisms and
of such a character and proportion as to be
capable of supporting a vector population
or attracting or providing food for birds,
or which may reach a fouls state of decay
or decomposition.
(45) "PVC" means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by
the SPI Code No. 3.
(46) "Recyclable materials" means materials that
are separated from solid waste, for the
purpose of recycling, including the
following:
• Residential mail, magazines,
newspapers, phone books, paperback
books and office paper (no wrapping
paper, neon or other bright colored
paper)
• Shredded paper in a closed paper bag
• Aerosol cans (empty and cap removed)
• Paper grocery bags
• Paperboard (cereal, chip, cracker,
cake, pop, beer, tissue and frozen
food boxes)
• Pizza boxes (clean food particles and
grease from box)
• Corrugated cardboard (broken down)
• Egg cartons
• Aluminum cans, clean aluminum foil,
all tin and steel cans
• Glass food jars (any color) unbroken
• Glass beverage bottles (any color)
unbroken
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(1)(a)(46)
26
• Rinsed motor oil containers
• All plastic 1-7 including milk jugs,
kids toys, laundry detergent
containers, ketchup bottles, soda and
water bottles, tubs and dairy
containers and landscaping edging
The following items are not acceptable for
purpose of recycling:
• Porcelain, ceramics and pottery
• Plastic bags, Styrofoam, foam and
packing peanuts
• Food waste
• Deli or black takeout containers
• Window glass
• Mirrors
• Light bulbs
• Compost
• Foil gift wrapping paper [Ord. 631 02/13]
(47) "Recycling facility" means a facility where
recyclable materials are purchased or
received from generators or collectors,
processed for marketing or loaded onto
vehicles for transport to market.
(48) "Refuse" means garbage and other nonhazardous,
non-recyclable solid waste such
as is typically collected for disposal by a
licensed refuse disposal contractor.
(49) "Sanitary landfill" means a land disposal
site, permitted by the Department of
Natural Resources and Pierce County,
employing an engineered method of disposing
of solid waste on land in a manner that
minimizes environmental hazards by
spreading the solid waste in thin layers,
compacting the solid waste to the smallest
practical volume and applying cover
material at the end of each operating day,
or at intervals as may be required by the
Department of Natural Resources and Pierce
County. Engineered sanitary landfills must
have impermeable clay or membrane type
liners, leachate collection and treatment
provision and surface water diversions
according to Department of Natural
Resources and county standards.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(1)(a)(50)
27
(50) To "Scavenge" means the uncontrolled
removal of materials at any point in solid
waste management.
(51) "Shoreland" means land located within the
following distances from public water: a)
one thousand feet from the ordinary high
water mark of a lake, pond or flowage; and
b) three hundred feet from a river or
stream or the landward extent of a
floodplain designated by ordinance on such
a river or stream, whichever is greater.
(52) "Solid waste" means garbage, debris from
construction and demolition activities,
refuse, sludge from a water supply
treatment plant or a contaminant treatment
facility, non-hazardous medical waste or
other discarded waste materials and sludge
in solid, semisolid, liquid or contained
gaseous form, resulting from residential,
industrial, commercial, mining or
agriculture operations or from community
activities but does not include hazardous
waste; un-rinsed or partially filled
pesticide containers' animal waste used as
fertilizer; clean fill, sewage sludge,
solid or dissolved material in domestic
sewage or other common pollutants in water
resources such as silt, dissolved or
suspended soils or suspended solids in
industrial waste water effluents or
discharges which are point sources subject
to permits under Section 402 of the Federal
dissolved materials in irrigation return
flows; or source material, special nuclear
material or byproduct material as defined
by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended, and any other radioactive
material.
(53) "Solid waste disposal facility" means an
operation for the discharge, deposit,
injection, combustion, dumping or placing
of any solid waste into or on any land,
water or air in a manner which may permit
the solid waste or any constituent of the
solid waste to be emitted into the air, to
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(1)(a)(53)
28
be discharged into any waters of the state
or otherwise to enter into the environment.
Solid waste disposal facility does not
include the transportation, storage or
intermediate treatment of solid waste.
(54) "Solid waste management facility" means a
sanitary landfill, demolition debris
landfill, incinerator, open burn site,
recycling center, composting facility,
intermediate facility or other operation
designed to store, process or dispose of
solid waste.
(55) "Solid waste management" means the storage,
collection or removal of solid waste from
or on public or private property, its
transportation to intermediate or final
disposal facilities or its final disposal
by methods approved by the Department of
Natural Resources and Pierce County.
(56) "Sludge" means any waste that is in solid,
semisolid, or liquid form generated from a
municipal, commercial or industrial
wastewater treatment plant, water supply
treatment plant or air pollution control
facility.
(57) "Transfer station" means an intermediate
solid waste facility in which solid waste
collected from any source is temporarily
deposited to await transportation to
another solid waste management facility.
(58) "Waste tire" means a tire that is no longer
suitable for its original purpose because
of wear, damage or defect and which has
been removed from a vehicle.
(59) "Water pollution" means: a) the discharge
of any pollutant into any waters of the
state or the contamination of any waters of
the state so as to create a nuisance or
render such water unclean or noxious or
impure so as to be actually or potentially
harmful or detrimental or injurious to
public health, safety or welfare, to
domestic, agricultural, commercial,
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(1)(a)(59)
29
industrial, recreational or other
legitimate uses or to livestock, animals,
birds, fish or other aquatic life; or b)
the manmade or man-induced alteration of
the chemical, physical, biological, thermal
or radiological integrity of waters of the
state.
(60) "Waters of the state" means waters, surface
or underground, except those surface
waters which are not confined but are
spread and diffused over the land. "Waters
of the state" includes all boundary and
inland waters
(61) "White goods" means used major residential
or commercial appliances such as washers,
dryers, refrigerators, air conditions,
freezers, stoves, furnaces, boilers,
dehumidifiers, water heaters, dishwashers,
ovens and microwave ovens.
(62) "Volume based user fee systems" means fees
that are charged by the waste hauler for
solid waste collection and disposal
services in relation to the volume or
weight of the materials disposed.
(63) "Yard wastes" means the garden wastes,
leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds and other nonwoody
vegetative wastes generated at
residential or commercial properties.
(2) GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(a) No person shall cause, permit or allow land or
property to be used for solid waste management
purposes, except at an operation for which a
license has been granted by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources and subject to
approval of the Village Board.
(b) No person shall burn, dump, place, deposit, bury
or otherwise dispose of solid waste in, or cause
the littering of, any roadside, public park,
private property, waterway or other body of
water or any other geographical component of
the Village; except however, burning done
pursuant to a burning permit issued under Sec.
11.11, and except for the composting organic
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(2)(b)
30
wastes generated by a one or two family
residential unit. Organic wastes which may be
composted includes leaves, grass clippings,
garden trimmings and vegetative food and kitchen
wastes. Meat, meat scraps, bones and grease
shall not be composted because of potential
nuisance problems.
(c) Each person shall be responsible for the legal
and safe storage, collection, transportation and
disposal of solid waste generated in that
person's residence or place of business. Any
person illegally storing, collecting,
transporting or placing in final disposal solid
waste generated by that person or that person's
residence shall be responsible for proper
pickup, disposal and repair of any damages
resulting therefrom.
(d) No person shall dispose recyclable materials in
any manner other than that which will ultimately
result in said materials being collected for and
processed by a recycling facility. No
recyclable materials may be placed in bags or
other containers designed for pickup as refuse.
(e) No person shall scavenge solid waste or
recyclable materials.
(f) For the purposes of determining ownership and
responsibility for improperly or illegally
stored, transported or disposed solid waste, the
presence of three or more pieces of mail with
the same name and address shall be sufficient to
establish presumptive ownership of the solid
waste.
(g) The provisions of this Section are cumulative
limitations upon all other laws and chapters
heretofore passed or which may be passed
hereafter, covering any subject matter of this
Section.
(3) SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIAL STORAGE. (a)
Solid waste shall be stored in a manner which complies with
rules administered by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources and Pierce County. [Ord. 631 02/13]
(b) Hazardous waste shall be stored and discarded in
accordance with rules administered by the
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(3)(b)
31
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and
Pierce County and all applicable federal and
state rules.
(c) Putrescible solid waste shall not be stored on
public or private property for more than seven
days without the written approval of the
department of land management unless in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Non-putrescible wastes suitable for recycling
shall not be stored on public or private
property for more than thirty (30) days or in a
manner which creates a nuisance, blight or
health hazard. Intermediate and finished
compost are excluded from the storage
limitations.
(d) Solid waste at a solid waste storage facility
shall not be burned. Fires at any solid waste
storage facility shall be immediately
extinguished in a manner which would not result
in water pollution, land pollution or injury to
human health.
(e) Suitable containers of a type approved by the
Village and its contract Refuse/Recyclable
Materials Hauler shall be provided and used
by the property Owner or Tenant in which to
store all solid waste and recyclable materials
except for bulky or certain yard wastes as
provided herein. Only recyclable carts provided
by the Hauler and approved by the Village shall
be used for storage of recyclable materials.
Refuse shall be stored in carts provided by the
Hauler, or in bags in a size approved by the
Hauler for curbside refuse pick-up. Containers
shall provide for efficient, safe and sanitary
handling of solid wastes. They shall be
maintained in a nuisance and odor-free condition
and shall be sufficient to prevent the
scattering of contents by weather conditions or
animals. Container and canister sites shall be
screened by neat and attractive material where
exposed to public view. All such containers
shall be emptied not less than weekly.[Ord. 631
02/13]
(f) Storage areas shall be kept in a nuisance and
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(3)(f)
32
odor-free condition. Litter shall not be
allowed to accumulate. Collection crews will
not be responsible for cleaning up loose
materials from any containers which have become
ruptured or broken due to wet conditions,
animals, vandalism or other cause. The occupant
and/or owner shall be responsible for cleaning
up this litter. Litter not collected shall not
be allowed to accumulate. Violation will result
in the occupant and/or owner being notified to
clean up the affected area with continued
violation resulting in the owner being
prosecuted under the provision of this and other
Village ordinances.
(4) RESIDENTIAL REFUSE AND RECYCLING MATERIAL COLLECTION
AND DISPOSAL. (a) The Village shall contract with a
Refuse/Recyclable Materials Hauler to collect and dispose of
household refuse and recyclables from all single family, two
family and three family residences in the Village. [Ord. 393, 631
02/13].
(b) Such collection and disposal shall be by a
Hauler, as the Village Board may from timeto-
time determine. [Ord. 631 02/13]
(c) The residents of all single family, two family
and three family residences shall place the
refuse to be collected from the property in
carts approved by the Village and supplied
by its Hauler, or in plastic or similar types
garbage bags (which bags shall not exceed 33
gallons in volume). Only one recyclable
material cart shall be furnished for each
residence. Where carts are used the property
owner shall pay a monthly service fee, paid
quarterly, in accordance with a schedule of fees
from time-to-time established by the Village
Board in its contract with the Hauler. All
refuse and recyclable materials shall be placed
at the curb or Lot line of the property not
later than 6:00 a.m. on the day on which
collection is to be made. Neither refuse nor
recyclable materials may be placed at curbside
more than 24 hours prior to the scheduled pickup
time. Collection shall be made on Mondays
of each week except where Monday falls on
Christmas day, in which case pick-up shall be on
the following Tuesday. Lost, damaged or
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(4)(c)
33
destroyed carts whether used for recyclable
materials or refuse purposes, shall be replaced
at the expense of the resident.[Ord.559 10/05, 631
02/13]
(d) The Village Board hereby imposes a monthly
service charge for recycling and a per bag
collection fee to be determined from time to
time by resolution of the Village Board and/or
contract between the Village and the Hauler.
Where the resident uses a bag to dispose of
refuse, which bag shall not exceed 33 gallons,
a refuse disposal sticker must be placed on
each such bag. Such refuse disposal stickers
shall be available at the office of the Village
Clerk. [Ord. 278, 393, 443, 631 02/13].
(e) Where refuse or recyclable materials are left at
curb side and are not in proper containers, and
therefore not picked up by the Hauler, or where
refuse is left in a bag for collection without
sticker, or where the bag exceeds 33 gallons in
size and the Hauler does not pick up such refuse
or recyclable material, then the Village or its
designee may pick up and dispose of such refuse
or recyclable material and assess the property
owner a charge, as is established from time-totime
by resolution of the Village Board, for
each 33 gallon bag or refuse or recyclable
material, or its equivalent, so collected. On or
about October 15 of each year the Village Clerk
shall send a notice to the occupants of all
residences whose refuse was so picked up setting
forth the additional charge assessed against
them for the preceding fiscal year, and
directing said owner to pay the charge assessed
on or before November 1, and if not so paid, to
levy the same as a tax against the lot or parcel
or real estate in which the refuse collection
service was furnished and for which payment was
not made. All proceedings in relation to the
collection of general property taxes and to the
return and sale of property for delinquent
taxes, as provided by State Law, shall apply to
such charge if the same is not paid within the
time required by law for payment of taxes upon
real estate. [Ord. 475, 631 02/13]
(f) Household hazardous wastes shall not be placed
in refuse collection bags or carts nor in
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.10(4)(f)
34
recyclable material carts. All household
hazardous wastes shall be disposed of by the
property owner at the semi-annual collection
of such wastes by the Pierce County Recycling
Facility or in other approved manner for
disposal of household hazardous wastes. [Ord 631
02/13]
(g) White goods and all other non-recyclable refuse
too large for a 33 gallon garbage bag and not
acceptable in the Village landfill shall be
placed at curbside for pickup pursuant to prior
arrangement of a refuse disposal contractor.
[Ord. 631 02/13]
(h) Demolition debris, clean fill and yard wastes
may be disposed in the Village landfill as
provided in Section 11.14.
(5) COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL REFUSE COLLECTION AND
DISPOSAL. Commercial and industrial solid waste, and wastes
from non-residential facilities and properties, including
hazardous wastes, garbage and recyclables, shall be disposed in
compliance with local, state and federal laws by a licensed
refuse disposal contractor. [Ord. 592 06/2009]
(7) VIOLATION - PENALTY. (a) Any person who violates or
fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and upon
conviction thereof shall pay a forfeiture and costs as provided
in section 25.04 a separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each separate day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(b) This section, in addition to other remedies, may
be enforced by injunction, action to compel
performance or other appropriate action in
Circuit Court to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate violations.[Ord. 610 03/2011]
11.11 BURNING PROHIBITED. (1) No person shall burn
rubbish, garbage, or other household waste or hazardous material
in the Village Of Ellsworth. Nor shall any person keep or
maintain an open fire or flame except as follows:
(a) Fires set by the Ellsworth Fire Department for
practice and instruction of firefighters.
(b) Outdoor fires used for cooking and recreational
purposes. These are defined and limited to
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.11(1)(b)
35
charcoal and gas grills, freestanding fireplaces
(clay or metal) or fire pits.
(2) Apartment, townhouse, and condominium association
rules must be strictly followed when using charcoal and gas
grills, freestanding fireplaces (clay or metal) or fire pits.
(3) Construction and use of fire pits shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) The diameter of the pit shall not exceed three
feet.
(b) The fire pit shall be fully enclosed and
screened for safety to prevent escape of embers,
sparks and ashes.
(c) The rim of the pit shall be lined with rock,
concrete, brick or metal.
(d) Fire pits shall be located a minimum of 15 feet
from combustible structures.
(e) Fire pits must be attended by at least one
person 18 years of age or older while the
fire is burning.
(f) A fully charged and properly working fire
extinguisher or water hose (hooked up to a
water hydrant) must be available nearby at all
times. “Nearby” means close enough to extinguish
the fire in the pit.
(g) Only split firewood, tree limbs or
charcoal may be burned.
(h) When burning, all burning materials
shall be completely contained within the fire
pit and shall not extend beyond the confines of
the fire pit or freestanding fireplace.
(i) At no time shall the fire exceed 3 feet in
height. The fire shall produce little
detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the
property line on which the fire is constructed.
(j) The fire and embers must be completely
extinguished before the fire pit area is
vacated. [Ord 563 08/2006]
(4) The Fire Chief or Designee has the authority to issue
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.11(4)
36
a burning ban at any time due to weather conditions or other
hazardous conditions that may exist.
(5) Outdoor Solid Fuel Heating Devices.
(a) Outdoor Solid Fuel Heating Device defined: An
outdoor device, structure, building or
apparatus which supplies direct or indirect heat
from the burning of solid fuel, including but
not limited to wood, to another building.
(b) (1) Only Solid Fuel or Biomass Outdoor
Heating Devices which comply with Phase 2 EPA
Guidelines, and as thereafter amended, are
allowed to be installed or operated within the
Village of Ellsworth, provided, however, said
device complies with all Zoning Ordinance
Setback Requirements for accessory buildings if
located outside of a building or accessory
building. All other Solid Fuel or Biomass
Outdoor Heating Devices are prohibited within
the Village of Ellsworth.
(2) Any Solid Fuel or Biomass Outdoor Heating
Device which is in place at the time of
adoption of this Section must be brought
into full compliance with this Section on
or before November 2, 2010.
(3) Should any Solid Fuel or Biomass
Outdoor Heating Device permitted under this
Section, including any existing device
permitted to continue as per Subsec.(2)
become hazardous, harmful, noxious, or
offensive and thus a nuisance to an
adjoining neighbor or the surrounding
neighborhood as determined by the building
inspector, fire chief, and/or village
Health officer, then the owner shall
correct, improve or abate the nuisance
using whatever means are necessary in
accordance with this section. Operation of
the device shall be discontinued until a
solution to the nuisance is employed and
the nuisance this eliminated. In the event
the nuisance is not immediately abated upon
receiving directive of the building
inspector, fire chief, and/or village
health officer, then the owner of the
property shall be subject to the penalty in
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.11(5)(b)(3)
37
Section 25.04, and separate action may be commenced
against the owner for an injunction to
enjoin the use of the Outdoor Heating
Device.
4) Solid Fuel or Biomass Outdoor Heating
devices may be used only during the period
from and including September 15 to the
succeeding May 15. [Ord. 598 11/2009]
(6) Enforcement. A Violation of this ordinance shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in Section 25.04 of the
Municipal Code. In addition, the Police Department shall have
the authority to require any person or property owner to cease
and desist from violating the provisions of this ordinance.
In the event any such person or property owner fail to so
immediately cease and desist, the Police Department may
contact the Fire Department to extinguish the fire. If so
required, the cost of extinguishing the fire call be charged
against the property owner and become a lien against the
property if unpaid and entered on the tax roll as a special
tax against the property and collected as are other real
estate taxes assessed against the property. The cost of such
extinguishment shall be determined by the Fire Department,
taking into consideration the equipment and labor involved,
and in accordance with their normal fee schedule for such
services. [Ord. 563 08/06]
11.12 MINOR POSSESSION OF CIGARETTE OR TOBACCO PRODUCT
OR ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DELIVERY SYSTEMS.
(1) No child may do any of the following:
(a) Buy or attempt to buy any cigarette or
tobacco product.
(b) Falsely represent his or her age for the purpose
of receiving any cigarette or tobacco product
(c) Possess any cigarette or tobacco product.
(d) No Person under the age of 18 years may possess
electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS) or
any of their components or parts. Components or
parts of ENDS include e-liquid, cartridges,
atomizers, cartomizers and clearomizers, tank
systems, drip tips, and flavorings for ENDS.
ENDS include what are commonly referred to as
vapes, vaporizers, vape pens, hookah pens,
electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes, e-cigs and
e-pipes, which products use an “e-liquid” which
may contain nicotine as well as other
compositions. ENDS include, but is not limited
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.12(1)(d)
38
to, ENDS and their components and parts regulated
by the Federal Drug Administration, under the
rules set forth in the Federal Register, 81 FR
28973. [Ord.660 3/17, Ord 669 11/18Ord 679 10/19]]
(2) A child may purchase or possess cigarettes or tobacco
products or electronic delivery device, product, component or
part for the sole purpose of resale in the course of employment
during his or her working hours if employed by a retailer
licensed under Sec. 134.65 (1), Wis. Stats. [Ord.679]
(3) The definitions contained in Sec. 254.911 Wis.
Stats., shall govern the interpretation of this Ordinance. [Ord.
523 8/02]
(4) A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette,
tobacco product or electronic delivery device, product,
component or part involved in any violation of this Section
committed in his or her presence. [Ord. 425 Ord 679]
(5) No person shall furnish any cigarette, tobacco
product or electronic delivery device, product, component or
part to a child. [Ord. 478 Ord.679]
11.13 SMOKING AND VAPING PROHIBITED. (1) Purpose.
This Ordinance is adopted in conformity with Sec. 101.123,
Wis. Stats., and for the purpose of protecting the public
health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the people of
the Village of Ellsworth, especially recognizing the health
interest of nonsmokers.
(2) Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the
following terms have the meaning indicated:
(a) “Assisted living facility” means a communitybased
residential facility, as defined in Sec.
50.01(1g), a residential care apartment
complex, as defined in sec 50.01(1d), Wis.
Stats. Or an adult family home, as defined in
sec. 50.01(1)(b) Wis. Stats.
(b) “Bed and breakfast establishment” has the
meaning set forth in Sec. 254.61(1), Wis.
Stats.
(c) “Child care facility” shall mean any licensed
or certified child care facility, including,
but not limited to licensed family day care or
licensed group day care centers, licensed day
camps, certified school-age programs, and Head
Start programs.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.13(2)(d)
39
(d) “Cigarette” has the meaning set forth in Sec.
139.30(1), Wis. Stats.
(e) “Enclosed area” shall mean all space between a
floor and ceiling that is bounded by walls,
doors, or windows, whether open or closed,
covering more than 50 percent of the combined
surface area of the vertical planes
constituting the perimeter of the area. A wall
includes any retractable divider, garage door,
or other physical barrier, whether temporary or
permanent. A 0.011gauge screen with an 18 by 16
mesh court is not a wall.
(f) “Entrance” shall mean a doorway and adjacent
area which gives direct access to a building
from a contiguous street, plaza, sidewalk, or
parking lot.
(g) “Health care facility” has the meaning set
forth in Sec. 155.01(6), Wis. Stats. (h)
“Hotel and motel” have the meaning set
forth in Sec. 254.61(3), Wis. Stats.
(i) “Mall” shall mean an enclosed area containing
common areas and discrete businesses and stores
primarily devoted to the retail sale of goods
and services.
(j) “Medical services” has the meaning set forth in
Sec. 647.01(6), Wis. Stats.
(k) “Non-smoking” shall mean smoking is prohibited.
(l) “Place of employment” shall mean an enclosed
area controlled by the employer which employees
normally frequent during the course of
employment, including, but not limited to
common work areas, private offices, employee
lounges, restrooms, conference and meeting
rooms, classrooms, health care facilities,
cafeterias, stairways, hallways, vehicles, and
all other enclosed facilities. A private
residence in not a “place of employment” within
the meaning of this Ordinance.
(m) “Person in Charge” means the person or his or
her agent who ultimately controls, governs or
directs the activities at location where
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.13(2)(m)
40
smoking is prohibited or regulated under this
Section.
(n) “Private club” shall mean an organization,
whether incorporated or not, which is the
owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or
portion thereof used exclusively for club
purposes at all times, which is operated solely
for a recreational, fraternal, social
patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic
purpose, but not for pecuniary gain and which
only sells alcohol beverages incidental to its
operation. The affairs and management of the
private club are conducted by a board of
directors, executive committee, or similar body
chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The
private club has established bylaws and/or a
constitution to govern the club’s activities.
The private club has been granted an exemption
from the payment of federal income tax as a
club under 26 U.S.C.A. Section 501.
(o) “Private residence” shall mean a premise owned,
rented, or leased for temporary or permanent
habitation.
(p) “Public place” shall mean any enclosed area to
which the public is invited or in which the
public is permitted. A private residence is not
a public place unless it is used as a child
care facility, adult day care facility, or
health care facility.
(q) “Smoking” shall mean to inhale, exhale, carry,
possess, or control any lighted cigarette or
any lighted tobacco product in any form or in
any manner. The term “smoking” as used in this
Section shall also refer to what is customarily
referred to as “vaping”, in other words, the
use of an electronic delivery device or any
product or substance used in the device to
simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or
aerosol from the product and any of the
component parts of an electronic nicotine
delivery system. [Ord. 679]
(r) “Tobacco product” has the meaning set forth in
Sec. 139.75(12), Wis. Stats.
(s) “Electronic nicotine delivery system” or
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.13(2)(s)
41
“Electronic delivery device” means any product
containing or delivering nicotine or any other
substance intended for human consumption that
may be used by a person to simulate smoking
through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the
product. “Electronic delivery device” shall
include any such device, whether manufactured,
distributed, marketed, or sold as an ecigarette,
e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape
pen, or under any other product name or
description. Electronic delivery device shall
not include any product that has been approved
or otherwise certified by the United States
Food and Drug Administration for legal sales
for the use in tobacco cessation treatment or
other medical purposes, and is being marketed
and sold solely for that approved purpose.”
[Ord. 679]
(3) Smoking or vaping prohibited in public places.
Except as provided in Section 11.13(6) smoking or
vaping in any public place shall be unlawful,
including, but not limited to the following:
(a) Theatres, libraries, museums, auditoriums, and
convention halls which are used by or open to
the public.
(b) Child care facilities.
(c) Assisted Living facilities.
(d) Retail stores.
(e) Health care facilities.
(f) Waiting rooms, hallways, or rooms of health
care laboratories.
(g) Waiting rooms, hallways, and rooms in offices
of any physician, dentist, psychologist,
chiropractor, optometrist, optician, or other
medical service provider.
(h) Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in
apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer
parks, retirement facilities, and other
multiple-unit residential facilities.
(i) Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways,
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.13(3)(i)
42
and other common areas which are used by or
open to the public.
(j) Meeting and conference rooms in which people
gather for educational, business, professional,
union, governmental, recreational, political,
or social purposes.
(k) Polling places.
(l) Self-service laundry facilities.
(m) Restaurants.
(n) Bars, taverns, nightclubs, and cocktail
lounges.
(o) Common areas of malls, meaning those areas
within a mall customarily accessible to
patrons.
(p) Village facilities, meaning all Village owned
and operated buildings and those portions of
buildings leased and operated by the Village.
(q) Educational facilities, meaning any building
used principally for educational purposes in
which a school is located or a course of
instruction or training program is offered that
has been approved or licensed by a state agency
or board.
(r) Sports arenas, meaning sports pavilions,
stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, swimming
pools, roller and indoor ice rinks, bowling
centers, and other similar places where the
public assembles to engage in physical
exercise, participate in athletic event
competition, or witness a sporting or other
event.
(s) Common areas in bed and breakfast
establishments, hotels and motels, and rooms
thereof that are rented to guests and
designated as non-smoking rooms including
lobbies, community rooms, hallways, laundry
rooms, stairwells, elevators, enclosed parking
facilities, pool areas, and restrooms within
said facilities.
(4) Smoking or vaping prohibited in places of
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.13(4)
43
employment.
(a) Except as provided in Section 11.13(6) smoking
or vaping in any place of employment shall be
unlawful.
(b) This prohibition on smoking or vaping shall be
communicated to all existing employees prior to
the effective date of this Section and to all
prospective employees upon their application
for employment.
(5) Smoking or vaping prohibited in specified outdoor
areas. Smoking or vaping shall be unlawful in the
following areas:
(a) Within a reasonable distance of all outside
entrances to, operable windows of, or
ventilation systems of public places or places
of employment where smoking or vaping is
prohibited pursuant to Section 11.13(3) and
11.13(4) so as to prevent smoke from entering
said enclosed areas in which smoking or Vaping
is prohibited.
(b) In the seating areas of all outdoor arenas,
stadiums, and amphitheaters, as well as in the
bleachers and grandstands used by spectators at
sporting and other public events, including,
without limitation, softball, football and
baseball fields.
(c) Those portions of Village parks temporarily
posted as no smoking or vaping areas by the
Parks, Recreation, Development Committee when
necessary for the public health or safety.
(d) Those areas outside of Village facilities that
are posted as no smoking or vaping by the Chief
of Police, Public Works Director, Village
President, Village Board or designee of any
thereof.
(6) Exceptions. The following shall not be subject to
and are exempt from the smoking or vaping prohibitions of
this Section:
(a) Use of tobacco by an enrolled member of an
Indian tribe, as those terms are defined in
Sec. 139.30(4) and (5), Wis. Stats., as part of
a traditional spiritual or cultural ceremony.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.13(6)(b)
44
(b) Bed and breakfast establishments and hotel and
motel rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking or vaping rooms, provided
that not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of
the rooms rented to guests are designated as
smoking rooms. This exception does not include
common areas as defined in Sec. 11.13(3)(s).
(c) Private residences, except when used as a child
care facility, adult day care facility, or
health care facility.
(d) Private clubs, except when used for a function
to which the public is invited or permitted to
enter. This exception shall not apply to any
organization established to avoid compliance
with the Section.
(7) Signs required.
(a) Signs prohibiting smoking or vaping shall be
posted conspicuously at every public entrance
by the proprietor or other person in charge of
each building or structure regulated by Section
11.13(3) and 11.13(4). Signs in specified
outdoor areas designated as non-smoking or
vaping pursuant to Section 11.13(5) shall be
placed so the general public has reasonable
notice of the prohibition. Signs shall contain
the international symbol for no smoking or
vaping and the words “No Smoking or Vaping”
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to
remove, deface, or destroy any legally
required “No Smoking or Vaping” sign.
(8) Responsibility of Persons in Charge.
(a) No person in charge may allow any person to
smoke or vape at a location that is under the
control or direction of the person in charge.
(b) A person in charge may not provide matches,
ashtrays, or other equipment for smoking or
vaping at the location where smoking or vaping
is prohibited.
(c) A person in charge shall make reasonable
efforts to prohibit person from smoking or
vaping at a location where smoking or vaping is
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.13(8)(c)(1)
45
prohibited by doing all of the following:
1. Posting signs setting forth the
prohibition and providing other
appropriate notification and information
concerning the prohibition.
2. Refusing to serve a person, if the person
is smoking or vaping in a restaurant,
tavern or private club.
3. Asking a person who is smoking or vaping
to refrain from smoking or vaping and, if
the person refuses to do so, asking the
person to leave the location.
(d) If a person refuses to leave a location after
being requested to do so as provided in par.
(c) 3, the person in charge shall immediately
notify the Ellsworth Police Department of the
violation.
(e) A person in charge may take measures in
addition to those listed in pars. (b) and (c)
to prevent person from being exposed to others
who are smoking or vaping or to further ensure
compliance with this Section.
(9) Enforcement.
(a) No person shall retaliate against a person
because that person exercises any rights
afforded by this Section.
(b) The Village Building Inspector, Fire Department
or Police Department, shall have the power,
whenever it may deem necessary, to enter a
building, structure, or property regulated
under this Section to ascertain whether the
premises are in compliance with this Section.
The above-listed departments may issue
compliance orders and citations pursuant to the
provisions of this code.
(10) Additional private prohibitions. Nothing in this
Section shall prevent a proprietor or other person in charge
of any private place from prohibiting smoking or vaping in any
indoor or outdoor area under their control.
(11) Other applicable laws or regulations.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.13(12)
46
This Section shall not be interpreted or construed to permit
smoking or vaping where it is otherwise restricted by any
other law or regulation.
(12) Penalty. A person who smokes where it is prohibited
is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100 plus court
costs and penalty assessments nor more than $250 plus court
costs and penalty assessments for each violation. If the
person in charge of a facility fails to take any required
action to stop illegal smoking, he or she is subject to a
forfeiture of $100 plus court costs and penalty assessments
for each violation, but no more than one penalty per day. If
the person in charge has not previously received a warning
notice, then the law enforcement officer must issue a warning
for the first violation in lieu of a citation.
(13) Severability. The provisions of this Section,11.13,
are severable. If any provision of this Section is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional, or if the application of any
provision of this Section to any person or circumstance is
held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such holding shall not
affect the other provisions or applications of this Section
which can be given effect without the invalid or
unconstitutional provisions or applications. It is hereby
declared to be the intent of the Village Board that this
Section would have been adopted had any invalid or
unconstitutional provisions or applications not been included
herein. [Ord. 604 06/2010]
11.14 VILLAGE LANDFILL. (1) Only residents of the
Village of Ellsworth shall be permitted to dispose of refuse at
the Village landfill. Any resident using said landfill may
dispose only his or her own refuse, and all such refuse shall
have as its origin the Village of Ellsworth. No resident
contracting to provide or otherwise providing refuse
collectionor dumping services shall dispose of such refuse in
the Village landfill.
(2) Any person using the Village landfill shall abide by
all rules and regulations as may from time to time be
established by the Village Board or any of its designees; and
shall abide by all rules, regulations and directions as posted
at such landfill or as specified or designated by the landfill
attendant or other Village employee or officer supervising same.
(3) Any person using the Village landfill during
hourswhen same is not regularly open shall make arrangements
through the office of the Village Clerk for a Village employee
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.14(3)
47
to accompany said person to the landfill and supervise dumping
there during the entire period such person is using said
landfill; and there shall be charged to such user a sum as is
from time to time established by resolution of the Village Board
per vehicle load, dumped in the landfill during closed hours.
No keys for the landfill gate shall be given to or used by any
person other than a Village employee. [Ord. 475]
(4) No person shall go upon or use the Village landfill
during hours when same is closed except in compliance with
Subsection (3).
(5) Any person who violates a provision of this Section
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of sec. 25.04 of the
Code. [Ord. 346, 443]
11.15 TRUANCY. (1) Prohibition of Truancy. A pupil
is prohibited from being truant. A pupil is deemed to be truant
if absent from school without an acceptable excuse for part or
all of any day in which school is held during a school semester.
[Ord. 480; 482]
(2) Prohibition of Habitual Truancy. A pupil is
prohibited from being a habitual truant. A "habitual truant
shall mean a pupil who is absent from school without an
acceptable excuse for part or all of five (5) or more days on
which school is held during a semester.
(3) Definitions. (a) "Acceptable excuse" shall mean an
acceptable excuse as defined in Sections 118.15 and 118.16 (4),
Wis. Stats.
(4) Penalty. (a) Upon finding a pupil is truant, the
Court shall enter an order making one or more of the following
dispositions:
(1) An order for the person to attend
school;
(2) A forfeiture of not more than $50.00 plus
costs for a first violation, or a
forfeiture of not more than $100.00 plus
costs for any second or subsequent
violation committed within 12 months of the
first. All or part of the forfeiture plus
costs may be assessed against the person,
the parents or guardian of the person, or
both.
(b) Upon finding a pupil is a habitual truant, the
Court shall enter an order making one or more of
the following dispositions:
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.15(4)(b)(1)
48
(1) Suspension of the child's operating
privilege for up to one year;
(2) Ordering the child to attend school;
(3) A forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor
more than $500.00 plus costs, all or a
portion of which may be assessed against
the child, the parents or guardians of the
child, or both;
(4) Any other reasonable conditions, including
a curfew, restrictions as to going to or
remaining on specified premises and
restrictions on associating with other
children or adults;
(5) An order placing the child under formal or
informal supervision for up to one year;
and
(6) An Order for the child's parent, guardian
or legal custodian to participate in
counseling at the parent's, guardian's or
legal custodian's own expense or to attend
school with the child, or both.
11.16 HOUSING DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED. (1) The
provisions of Section 106.50, Stats., as amended, are hereby
adopted and made a part hereof by reference. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(2) The Village shall assist in the orderly prevention
and elimination of all discrimination in housing within the
Village of Ellsworth by implementing those enforcement
procedures set forth in Section 106.04, Stats.
(3) The Village Clerk shall maintain forms for complaints
to be filed under this Section, and shall assist persons
alleging a violation thereof to file a complaint thereunder with
the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development, Equal Rights
Division, for enforcement of Section 106.04, Stats., as amended.
[Ord. 467]
11.17 MAPLE GROVE CEMETERY (a) Maple Grove Cemetery is
a municipal owned and operated cemetery.(b) The Public Works
Director, through the Department of Public Works, shall
supervise maintenance of the cemetery, including upkeep and
plowing of roads, landscaping, tree trimming and removal,
repair of fences and equipment and removal of trash and debris
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.17(c)
49
(c) The Sexton shall have the following duties:
(1) Supervision of digging of graves.
(2) Cataloging and updating an accurate
Cemetery Lot Map and assisting the Village
Clerk in updating the Cemetery records.
These records shall be maintained in the
office of the Village Clerk who shall have
responsibility of maintenance to the
Cemetery records.
(3) Serve as the intermediary contact with
monument companies to assist them with
their activities in the cemetery.
(4) Assist in the sale of cemetery lots. The
actual sale of lots shall be conducted by
the Village Clerk; the Sexton shall assist
insofar as necessary to assure there is no
duplication of sale.
(5) Monitor maintenance and improvements needed
to make the cemetery an attractive and
accessible facility, and report thereon to
the Cemetery Committee appointed under Sec.
1.03(7), the sexton shall serve as an
advisory member thereof.”
(6) Such other duties as may be delegated to
Sexton from time to time by the Cemetery
Committee and approved by the Village
Board. [Ord. 559 10/05]
(d) The following regulations shall apply to the
Cemetery:
(1) All cemetery burial shall use a grave
liner.
(2) The standard grave site size shall be
4 feet by 11 feet and shall be sold for
such price as the Village Board from time
to time establishes by Resolution. One
body shall be permitted per grave site; or
four (4) cremains shall be allowed on each
grave site.
(3) Deeds for grave sites shall be issued by
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.17(d)(3)
50
the Village Clerk and accurate record of
the conveyance maintained in the Cemetery
Record Book.
(4) The owner of the grave site shall be
responsible for payment of the grave
opening and closing. Burial vaults shall
be buried at a minimum depth of 60 inches.
cremains shall be buried at a minimum depth
of thirty inches (30”).
(5) Grave site and lot monuments shall be
placed according to the markings and
directions made by the Sexton.
(6) The price paid for a grave site shall
include perpetual care thereof. Perpetual
care shall not include the cost of
leveling, repairing or replacing monuments.
The Village may require a lot owner to do
anything necessary to comply with the
regulations of this Section by giving
reasonable notice in writing to the owner
thereof. In the event the owner fails to
comply within (20) days thereafter the
Village may cause the thing to be done and
recover the cost from the owner. As used
in this Subsection the term “owner”
includes the estate of the decedent whose
remains are placed in the grave site.
(7) Grave site owner grievances shall be first
addressed by the Village Clerk. If not
resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the
grave site owner and Village Clerk’s office
the matter may be brought before the
Cemetery Committee for hearing and
recommendation to the Village Board. [Ord.
536 04/04]
11.18 SMOKE ALARMS/FIRE DETECTORS. (1) All
residential rental dwellings shall have installed and in good
working condition, on each main floor and on each floor upon
which there is located sleeping quarters or one or more
bedrooms, a smoke alarm or fire detector powered from a source
independent of the electrical system in said dwelling.
(2) "Residential dwelling unit" as used in this section
refers to any unit of housing, including single family, two
family and duplexes, and multifamily housing units wherein there
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.18(3)
51
reside one or more persons who are not the legal and fee owner
of the premises. [Ord. 349]
(3) The owner of the dwelling unit shall be responsible
for ensuring that the smoke alarm or fire detector required
under this section is properly installed and in good working
condition on the premises. [Ord.351]
(4) The Ellsworth Fire Association Inspectors and the
Village of Ellsworth Police Department are charged with
enforcement of this Ordinance. [Ord. 351, 559 10/05, 587 07/08]
11.19 SECURITY KEY AND VAULT SYSTEM. (1) KNOX BOX
REQUIRED. The Knox Box vault system is hereby adopted for use
by the Ellsworth Fire Department and the Ellsworth Police Dept.
in the Village of Ellsworth. A Knox Box shall be installed in
all existing or newly constructed [Ord.587 07/08]:
(a) Multiple family housing buildings containing
more than four dwelling units and in which there
is located an automatic alarm system;
(b) School buildings and school administrative
offices containing more than 18,000 square feet;
(c) All buildings and structures located on lands
zoned industrial or light industrial;
(d) Publicly owned buildings and structures
including State, County and Village buildings
and structures containing more than 18,000
square feet; and
(e) Any other building or structure access to which
the owner requests said departments to have.
(f) Commercial property in which there is located an
automatic alarm system and/or a sprinkler
system. [Ord. 587 07/08]
(2) INSTALLATION. The Knox Box shall be installed at the
expense of the owner of the building and shall be placed at such
locations as designated by the Fire Chief of the Ellsworth Fire
Department. No multiple family dwelling containing more than
four dwelling units shall be occupied until said system has been
installed. [Ord. 488, 559 10/05, 587 07/08]
11.20 ULTIMATE FIGHTING PROHIBITED (1) Prohibited
activity. It shall be unlawful to promote, host, organize,
stage, conduct and/or participate in the practice of Ultimate
Fighting or Extreme Fighting as defined in this Section in or
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.20(2)
52
upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park or any premises owned
by the Village of Ellsworth in the Village of Ellsworth.
(2) Definition. The terms “Ultimate Fighting” or
“Extreme Fighting” shall mean any activity, regardless how
named or described, or any other form of entertainment, where
the primary practice involves individuals engaged in physical
contact by striking or touching an opponent with hands, head,
feet, or body. This shall include, but not be limited to, any
contest or event where kicking, punching, martial arts, or
submission holds are permitted. Officially sanctioned and
regulated boxing under Chapter 444, Wis Stats., team sports in
which physical contact is incidental to the primary purpose of
the game, including, but not limited to, wrestling, football,
basketball, volleyball, soccer, baseball, and softball, and
martial arts training and contests sponsored by a public or
private elementary, middle or high school, or by a school
offering a regular course of instruction in martial arts, are
not included among activities prohibited by this section.
(3) Injunctive relief. The Village or its designated
representatives may institute a suit seeking injunctive relief
against any person violating this ordinance.
(4) Penalty. Any person violating this ordinance shall
be subject to the penalty set forth in section 25.04.
Separate fines may be issued to the promoter, and participants
in such an event. Every day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. [Ord. 583 04/2008]
11.21 SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
(1) Findings and Intent.
A. Findings. Studies show that sex offenders,
including sex offenders who use physical
violence or the threat thereof and sex
offenders who prey on children are sex
predators who present a serious threat to the
public safety. These offenders present an
alarming high risk of re-offending once
released. Sex offenders are extremely likely
to use physical violence when they offend; and
many sex offenders commit multiple offenses,
have more victims that are never reported, and
are prosecuted for only a fraction of their
crimes. This makes the cost of sex offender
victimization to society great, and it
justifies efforts to protect the public from
such victimization. Because reducing both
opportunity and temptation will minimize the
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.21(1)(A)
53
risk of re-offense for those Sex Offenders who
are likely to re-commit sex offenses especially
those against children, there is a compelling
need to separate Sex Offenders from places
where children congregate or play in public
places.
B. Intent. This Section is a regulatory measure
aimed at protecting the health and safety of
children in the Village from the risk that
convicted sex offenders may re-offend in
locations close to their residence and parks,
schools, daycares and churches where they are
cared for, recreate, study or worship. The
Village establishes these regulations in order
to provide protection to children in the
Village by minimizing immediate access and
proximity to children and thereby reducing
opportunity and temptation for recidivism. It
is the intent of the Village Board to protect
the safety and welfare of its citizens by
creating zones around places where children
regularly gather, in which certain Sex
Offenders are prohibited from establishing
Residency. It is expressly not the intent of
the Village Board to impose additional
punishment on Sex Offenders.
(2) Definitions. The following words, terms and
phrases, when used in Section 11.21 and 11.22,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them below:
A. “Child” or “children” or “minor” means a person
who has not attained the age of 18 years, for
purposes of this Section.
B. “Child Care Facility” means a childcare
facility that is operated by a person under
Wis. Stat. §48.65 or certified under s.48.651
or that is established or contracted for under
Wis. Stat. §120.13(4), or a group home as
defined in Wis. Stat. §48.02(7).
C. “Child Safety Zone” in this Section 11.21 means
an area within 1,000 feet of any school, park,
child care facility licensed pursuant to Wis.
Stat. §48.65, or certified under Wis. Stat.
§48.65(1) or that is established or contracted
for under Wis. Stat. §120.123(4), group home as
defined in Wis. Stat. §48.02(7), or youth
center within the Village of Ellsworth.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.21(2)(D)
54
D. “Park” means a children’s playground or park,
including one having athletic facilities used
by children, or a recreational trail, owned or
maintained by the State or by a City, Village,
Town or County, or by a homeowners association,
condominium association, church, or school.
E. “Residence” means a place where a person
resides or dwells, or is used by a person as
the primary location for basic life functions
such as sleeping or eating, whether short-or
long-term, but for an aggregate of 14 or more
days in an one-year period.
F. “School” means a public, parochial or private
school as defined in Wis. Stat. §115.001(15m)
which provides an educational program for one
or more grades between grades 4-K and 12 and
which is commonly known as a pre-school,
elementary school, middle school or high
school.
G. “Sex Offender” means any person who is or was
required to register under Section 301.45,
Wisconsin Statutes, for any sexual offense
against a child, or any person who is or was
required to register under Section 301.45,
Wisconsin Statutes, and who has been designated
a Special Bulletin (SBN) sex offender pursuant
to Sections 301.46(2) and (2m), Wisconsin
Statutes.
H. “Youth Center” means any center, including one
sponsored by or at a church, that provides, on
a regular basis, recreational, vocational,
academic, service group (such as 4H, Boy
Scouts, Girl Scouts) or social service
activities for children and their families.
(3) Residence Restriction, Exceptions. No Sex
Offender shall establish or maintain a Residence
within a Child Safety Zone, except under the
following circumstance:
A. It is specifically ordered that the Sex
Offender reside within a Child Safety Zone by a
circuit court having competent jurisdiction.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.21(3)(B)
55
B. The Sex Offender established the Residence
within 1,000 feet of a school, park, child care
facility, group home or youth center, and
reported and registered the Residence pursuant
to Wis. Stats §301.45, before the effective
date of this ordinance, that being November 6,
2017.
C. The person is excepted from sex-offender
registration pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§301.45(1m).
D. The school, park, child care facility, group
home or youth center around which a Child
Safety Zone exists first existed after the Sex
Offender established Residence and reported and
registered the Residence pursuant to Wis.
Stats. §301.45.
E. The Sex Offender’s Residence is within a jail,
juvenile facility or other correctional
facility at which the Sex Offender is servicing
a court-ordered sentence.
F. The Sex Offender is a Minor or ward under
guardianship, or is a person under age 21 and
currently enrolled in high school, and is
residing with his or her parent or guardian.
In such cases involving a Minor or ward placed
in accordance with this exception, when the
Minor or ward turns 18 years of age, the Minor
or ward shall be allowed to continue to reside
at the already established residence.
(4) Measurement of Distances. The boundaries of
the Child Safety Zone shall be determined by
measuring from the outer property boundary of
schools, parks, child care facilities, or group
homes along the shortest line to the outer
property boundary of a Sex Offender’s Residence.
If any portion of a property is within a Child
Safety Zone, then the entire property shall be
deemed within the Child Safety Zone.
(5) Map. A map depicting the above-enumerated uses
and resulting residency restriction distances
shall be adopted by Resolution of the Village
Board, and which map may be amended from time to
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.21(6)
56
time, is on file in the Office of the Village
Clerk for public inspection.
(6) Notification. A Sex Offender must notify the
Police Department a minimum of twenty-eight (28)
days prior to establishing a Residence within the
Village of Ellsworth.
(7) Property Owners Prohibited from Renting Real
Property to Certain Sexual Offenders and Sexual
Predators. It shall be unlawful for any property
owner to lease or rent any place, structure,
mobile home, trailer or any part thereof, with the
knowledge that it will be used as a Residence by
any person prohibited from establishing a
Residence therein pursuant to this Section, if
such place, structure, or mobile home, trailer or
any part thereof, is located within a Child Safety
Zone as defined in Section 54-20(b)(5).
(8) Public Nuisance. Any violation of this Section
shall be deemed a public nuisance affecting peace
and safety, and the Village may proceed to abate
the nuisance under Chapter 10 and/or 25 of the
Code of Ordinances and/or Chapter 823 of the
Wisconsin Statues.
(9) Injunction for Violation of Residence
Restrictions. If an offender establishes a
Residence in violation of subsection (c) above,
the Chief of Police may refer the matter to the
Village Attorney. The referral shall include a
written determination by the Chief or Police that,
upon all of the facts and circumstances and the
purpose and intent of this Section, such violation
interferes substantially with the comfortable
enjoyment of life, health, and safety of another
or others. Upon such referral, the Village
Attorney shall bring an action in the name of the
Village in Circuit Court to permanently enjoin
such Residence as a public nuisance.
(10) Severability. Should any section, paragraph,
sentence, clause or
phrase of this Section be declared
unconstitutional or invalid, or be
repealed, it should not affect the validity of
this Section as a
whole, or any part thereof, other than the part
so declared to be invalid or repealed.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.21(11)
57
(11) Appeal for an Exemption.
A. A Sex Offender may seek an exemption from
this Section by appealing to the Sex
Offender Residency Board (the “Appeals
Board”).
B. The Appeals Board shall consist of three
citizens and one alternate who are residents
of the Village. For the initial appointments
to the Appeals Board, the Village President
shall appoint three members to staggered
terms of one, two or three years, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board and one
alternate to a term of three years. Terms
will end on April 30. After the initial
appointment of members to a term of one, two
and three years respectively, the Village
President shall annually, between the first
Monday of April and the first Monday of May,
appoint one member for a term of three years
and one alternate for a term of three years
every third year, subject to confirmation by
the Village Board. At the first meeting
held by the Appeals Board after the first
Monday of May of each year, the members of
the Appeals Board shall vote by majority to
select a chair for its meetings and any
appeal that come before it.
C. The Appeals Board shall approve an official
appeal form, establishing filing procedures,
a hearing schedule and deadlines for filing
an appeal. A Sex Offender seeking an
exemption shall complete this official form
and submit it to the Village Clerk, who
shall forward it to the Appeals Board.
Notice in the form of an agenda shall be
posted and/or published as required by law
and provided to the Appeals Board.
D. The Village elects not to be bound by
Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes with
respect to administrative procedure in the
appeal process. The Appeals Board shall
hold a hearing on each appeal to conduct an
individual risk assessment in each case,
during which the Appeals Board may review
any pertinent information and may accept
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.21(11)(D)
58
oral and written statements from any person.
The Sex Offender that filed the appeal shall
appear at any hearing held, unless otherwise
approved by the Appeals Board. The Appeals
Board shall consider the public interests as
well as the applicant’s presentation and
concerns, giving the applicant a reasonable
opportunity to be heard. The Appeals Board
shall also consider any oral, emailed, and
written statements from any person at the
hearing or received in advance of the
hearing. The Sex Offender shall be given
copies of same prior to the hearing. The
Appeals Board shall consider the specific
facts and circumstances of each applicant
and determine whether the Sex Offender
presents a threat to public safety if he or
she resides at that proposed location. The
Appeals Board shall consider factors which
may include, but are not limited to the
following:
1. Circumstances surrounding the offense.
2. Relationship of offender and victim.
3. Presence or use of force.
4. Presence of enticement.
5. Need to protect victim or similarly
situated individuals.
6. Current dangerousness of the offender.
7. Proximity in time from original
offense.
8. Any criminal offenses, ordinance or
rule violations committed since offense
including failures to register or
comply with restrictions set by a bond,
parole or probation.
9. Time out of incarceration.
10. Current supervision status by the
Department of Corrections.
11. Counseling and treatment history.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.21(11)(D)(12)
59
12. Credibility of offender.
13. Remorse
14. Proximity of proposed residence to a
Child Safety Zone.
15. Support network of offender near
proposed Residence.
16. Alternative options for housing.
E. The Appeals Board shall decide by majority
vote to grant or deny any exemption. An
exemption may be unconditional or be
conditional to a certain address or period
of time. In the case of an approval or
denial, the Appeals Board shall provide a
written copy of the decision containing the
reasons therein for its decision to the
Village Attorney and to the Sex Offender.
The decision of the Appeals Board may be
appealed to the Pierce County Circuit Court
by any aggrieved party within 30 days of
filing of the final decision of the Village
Clerk’s office, a copy of which shall be
mailed to the Sex Offender who appealed.
The review shall be a review by certiorari
and the Circuit Court may affirm or reverse
the final decision, or remand to the
decision maker for further proceedings
consistent with the Court’s decision.
a. Penalties. Any Person who violates any
provision of this Section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty
provided in Section 25.04. [Ord. 664 11/2017]
11.22 PROHIBITED CONDUCT OF SEX OFFENDER
(1) Findings and Intent.
A. Findings. Repeat sex offenders, sex
offenders who use physical violence or threat
thereof, and sex offenders who prey on
children are sex predators who present a
serious threat to the public safety. Sex
offenders are extremely likely to use
physical violence when they offend, and many
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.22(1)(A)
60
sex offenders commit multiple offenses, have
more victims that are never reported and are
prosecuted for only a fraction of their
crimes. This makes the cost of sex offender
victimization to society great, and it
justifies efforts to protect the public from
such victimization. Reducing both
opportunity and temptation will minimize the
risk of re-offense for those Sex Offenders
who in the absence of such reduction would be
likely to re-commit sex offenses against
children. Therefore, there is a compelling
need to separate Sex Offenders from places
where children congregate or play in public
places.
B. Intent. It is the intent of the Village
Board to protect the safety and welfare of
its citizens by creating Child Safety Zones
around places where children regularly
gather. Sex Offenders are prohibited from
establishing Residency. It is not the intent
of the Village Board to impose additional
punishment on Sex Offenders.
(2) Definitions. The phrase “Child Safety Zone” in
this Section 11.22 means an area within 250 feet
of any school, park, child care facility, licensed
pursuant to Wis. Stat. §48.65, or certified under
Wis. Stat. §48.65(1) or that is established or
contracted for under Wis. Stat. §120.123(4), group
home as defined in Wis. Stat. §48.02(7), or youth
center within the Village of Ellsworth.
To the extent not otherwise delineated above, any
facility for children [which means a public or
private school or group home, as defined in Wis.
Stat. §48.02(7); a residential care center for
children and youth, as defined in Wis. Stat.
§48.02(15d); a shelter care facility, as defined
in Wis. Stat.§48.02(17); a foster home, as defined
in Wis. Stat.§48.02(6); a treatment foster home,
as defined in Wis. Stat.§48.02(17q); a daycare
provider certified under Wis. Stat.§48.651; a
youth center, as defined in Wis.
Stat.§961.01(22)].
(3) No Presence Areas. No Designated Sex Offender
shall enter upon or be present in a Child Safety
Zone.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.22(4)
61
(4) Holiday Events Prohibited. It is unlawful for
any Sex Offender to participate in a holiday event
involving children unless the Offender is the
parent or guardian of the children involved, and
no non-familial children are present.
Participation is defined as actively taking part
in the event and shall include, but is not limited
to, distributing candy or other items to children
on Halloween, wearing a Santa Claus costume, or
wearing an Easter Bunny costume. Where a Sex
Offender accompanies his/her children to a Holiday
Event, but does not actively participate in it
(such as distributing candy or other items), that
shall not be considered participation in the
event; and, further, if the event takes place in a
Child Safety Zone the Offender may be present with
his/her children notwithstanding the prohibition
in sub. 3 above.
(5) Exceptions. A Sex Offender may be present in a
Child Safety Zone under any of the conditions set
forth in Section 11.21(3), as well as the
following instances:
A. The Sex Offender is accompanied at all times
by a minor child of which they have legal
custody and the Department of Corrections or
Department of Human Services has authorized
the contact, as required by the conditions of
the person’s release.
B. The Sex Offender’s presence on the property
of a school is for the purpose of discussing
the education of a minor child of which they
have legal custody, and their presence is
with the prior knowledge and consent of the
school official with whom the person is
meeting and the Department of Corrections or
Department of Human Services has authorized
the visit, as required by the conditions of
the person’s release.
C. The Child Safety Zone also serves a use
lawfully attended by a Sex Offender’s natural
or adopted child(ren) or natural or adopted
grandchild(ren), which child’s use reasonably
requires the attendance upon the property of
the Sex Offender as the child’s parent or
grandparent, subject to the following
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.22(5)(c)(i)
62
conditions:
i. Entrance and presence upon the
property occurs only during hours of
activity related to the use as posted to
the public; and
ii. Written advance notice is given by
the Sex Offender to an individual in
charge of the use upon the property, and
approval from the individual in charge
of the use upon the property as
designated by the owner of the use upon
the property is made in return, of the
attendance by the Sex Offender.
D. The Child Safety Zone also serves as a
polling location in a local, State, or
Federal election, subject to the following
conditions:
i. The Sex Offender is eligible to vote;
ii. The designated polling place for the
Sex Offender is an enumerated use; and
iii. The Sex Offender enters the polling
place property and proceeds to cast a
ballot with whatever usual and customary
assistance is provided to any member of
the electorate, and the Sex Offender
vacates the property immediately after
voting.
E. The Child Safety Zone also serves as a school
attended by a Sex Offender as a student,
under which circumstances the Sex Offender
who is a student may enter upon the property
supporting the school at which he or she is
enrolled, as is reasonably required for the
educational purposes of the school.
F. The Sex Offender is within a motor vehicle in
transit.
G. The Sex Offender is transporting his/her
natural or adopted child(ren) or natural or
adopted grandchild(ren) to or from school or
a daycare facility, provided there is prior
knowledge and consent of the school or
facility and the Department of Corrections or
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 11.22(5)(G)
63
Department of Health Services has authorized
the transport as required by the condition of
the person’s release.
(6) Severability. Should any section, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase of this section be
declared unconstitutional or invalid, or be
repealed, it shall not affect the validity of this
Section as a whole, or any part thereof, other
than the part so declared to be invalid or
repealed.
(7) Penalties. Any person who violates any
provision of this Section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalty provided in
Section 25.04.[Ord. 664 11/2017]
11.50 PENALTY. Unless otherwise provided in any Section
of this Chapter or any order, rule or regulation
made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in sec.25.04 of this Code. [Ord. 628 11/2012]
CHAPTER 12
LICENSES AND PERMITS
12.01 Licenses and Permit Fees
12.02 Issuance and Revocation of Licenses
12.04 Public Dances
12.05 Animal Control
12.06 Alcohol Beverages
12.08 Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
12.10 Direct Sellers
12.11 Storage Tanks
12.12 Public Works Construction Permits
12.13 Taxicabs and Drivers
12.14 Street Use Permits
12.50 Penalty
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.01
1
12.01 LICENSES AND PERMIT FEES. A license shall be
required for the sale of each of the following or the conduct of
the business or activity at the indicated license fee. The
license fees shall be for a period of one year unless otherwise
indicated. The application for license under this Chapter shall
be filed with the Village Clerk not less than 15 days prior to
review and action by the Village Board.[Ord. 627 09/2012]
12.02 ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES. Unless
otherwise specifically provided by the laws of the state or
ordinances of the Village, the following provisions shall apply
to the issuance, transfer and revocation of all licenses and
permits issued under the provisions of this Code.
(1) CLERK-TREASURER TO FURNISH FORMS. All applications
for licenses or permits shall be made upon regular forms
approved by the Village Board and furnished by the Village
Clerk-Treasurer to the applicant.
(2) FEES TO BE PAID IN ADVANCE. The amount of the
license or permit fee shall be first paid to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer and his receipt therefore shall be attached to the
application.
(3) APPLICATION TO BE SIGNED: WHEN NOTARIZED. The
application shall be signed by the applicant and, where
required, shall be sworn to before a Notary Public, or other
public officer authorized to administer oaths, and filed with
the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
(4) CONSIDERATION AND HEARING. The Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall present such application to the Village Board at
its next meeting held after the filing thereof, except when some
Village officer, board or commission is first required to
examine or report upon such application, in which case the
Clerk-Treasurer shall refer the application for report to such
officer, board or commission and shall present the application
and report thereon to the Village Board as soon as reasonably
possible thereafter. Opportunity shall be given by the Village
Board to any person to be heard for or against the granting of
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.02(5)
2
any license or permit.
(5) ISSUANCE. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue
such license or permit only after its issuance has been
authorized by the Village Board or proper officer.
(6) ISSUANCE BY ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITIES. When
administrative authority to issue any license or permit is
delegated to any Village officer, board or commission under the
terms of this Code, such officer, board or commission shall
grant such license or permit when proper application has been
made in accordance with the provisions of this code unless the
granting of the same appears to be contrary to the health,
safety, morals or general welfare of the public, in which case
the reasons for denial shall be reduced to writing and delivered
or mailed to the applicant; such applicant may at any time
within 30 days thereafter request the Village Board to review
such determination or any failure to make the same, which action
shall be taken by the Village Board within 8 days after written
request therefore has been filed with the Village Clerk-
Treasurer.
(7) CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
(a) License Restrictions.
(1) Delinquent taxes, assessments, etc.
(a) Premises. No initial or renewal
alcohol beverage license shall be
granted for any premises for which
taxes, assessments or other claims
for the Village are delinquent and
unpaid.
(b) Persons. No initial or renewal
alcohol license shall be granted to
any person:
(1) Delinquent in payment of any
taxes, assessments or other
claims owed to the Village.
(2) Delinquent in payment of a
forfeiture resulting from a
violation of any ordinance of the
Village.
(3) Delinquent in payment to the
State of any state taxes owed
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.02(7)(b)
3
[Ord. 305]
(b) Consent to Inspection of Premises. As a
condition of the granting of any license or permit, the licensee
or permittee shall agree in writing that during the period of
such license or permit, the Chief of Police, police officers or
other duly authorized officials of the Village may at all
reasonable hours enter into and upon the licensed premises for
the purpose of inspecting such premises to ascertain if all
Village ordinances and State laws are being obeyed, and such
person shall also consent to the removal from said licensed
premises without warrant, of all things and articles there had
in violation of Village ordinances or State laws and to the
introduction and receipt of such things and articles in any
prosecution or proceeding for violation of any provision of
Village ordinances or State law.
(8) TRANSFER OF LICENSE OR PERMIT. Licenses or permits
may be transferable from one person to another and may be
transferred from one location to another by approval of the
Village Board. A fee as established from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board shall be charged for any such
transfer. [Ord. 475]
(9) REPLACEMENT OF LOST OR DESTROYED LICENSE OR PERMIT.
Whenever any license or permit shall be lost or destroyed
without fault on the part of the holder or his agent or
employees, a duplicate in lieu thereof may be issued by the
Village Clerk-Treasurer upon satisfying himself of the facts,
upon payment of a fee from time to time established by the
Village Board pursuant to Resolution. [Ord. 559 10/05]
(10) REVOCATION OF LICENSES OR PERMITS. Except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, any license or permit issued
by the Village Board or any officer or department of the Village
may be revoked by the Village Board at any regular or special
meeting by a majority vote in favor of such revocation, provided
that no license or permit shall be revoked until the holder
thereof has been given an opportunity to be heard by the Village
Board. Notice of such hearing shall be given to such permit or
license holder either personally or by registered mail by the
Village Clerk-Treasurer in the time and manner as directed by
the Village Board. Any license or permit issued by the Village
Board, any Village officer or department shall be and remain the
property of the Village and upon revocation thereof, the same
shall be returned, after demand, the Village reserves the right
to institute suit against the holder or anyone having possession
of such license or permit for the return of the same. Any
person failing to return any such license or permit after
revocation thereof and demand having been made as herein
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.04
4
provided, shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of
this chapter and shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Sec. 25.04 of this Municipal Code. Whenever any license or
permit shall be revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of
the fee paid therefore shall be made.
12.04 PUBLIC DANCES. (1) No person shall hold,
conduct or be present at a public dance within the Village
except such as may be held under license from the Village Board.
(2) DEFINITIONS. (a) "Public Dance" means any dance to
which admission may be had by the public, generally although not
exclusively, upon payment of an admission fee, including all
dances held in a street or upon Village property. [Ord. 247]
(b) "Public Dance Hall" means any room, place, or
space where public dances are regularly and customarily held and
sponsored by the same owner, tenant or affiliated owners or
tenants. [Ord. 254]
(c) "Special Event Public Dance" means any public
dance, other than one held at a public dance hall, for which
permission has been granted by the Village Board of the Village
of Ellsworth.
(3) LICENSE APPLICATION. Application for a license shall
be made in writing on a petition signed by an owner or tenant of
the public dance hall for which a license is sought, or signed
by a representative of the organization or body sponsoring the
proposed special event public dance, and filed with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer. [Ord. 254]
(4) FEE. The license fee charged for public dances shall
be as set forth in Section 12.01. [Ord. 475]
(5) All public dances shall be conducted in an orderly
manner, and no disorderly, riotous, and indecent conduct shall
be allowed at any time on any licensed premises.
(6) No public dance shall be held on Sunday between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. The Village Board may,
however, from time to time, grant permission to one duly
licensed under this section to conduct a public dance on a
Sunday during the Pierce County Fair or during other special
events or occasions, each such permission to be in the
discretion of the Village Board. [Ord. 254]
12.05 ANIMAL CONTROL. (1) LICENSE REQUIRED. No
person shall own, harbor or keep a dog more than 6 months of age
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(1)(a)
5
without complying with the provisions of Secs. 174.05 through
174.07, Wis. Stats., relating to the listing, licensing and
tagging of dogs. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(a) The dog license tax, payable hereunder, for the
current year and for each succeeding year, shall be in such
amount as is from time to time established by resolution of the
Village Board. [Ord. 475]
(2) DEFINITIONS. The following terms shall mean: (a)
Amphibian. A class of vertebrates between fish and reptiles,
i.e., frogs, toads, and salamanders. [Ord. 660 3/2017]
(b) Owner. The term “owner” shall mean any person,
group of persons or corporation owning, keeping, harboring,
having charge or control of, or permitting any animal to
habitually be or remain on or be lodged or fed within such
persons' residence, yard, or premises for a period of five (5)
days or longer. This term shall not apply to veterinarians or
kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their premises
animals owned by others.
(c) Own. The term “own” unless otherwise specified
shall be deemed to mean keep, harbor, have, control, charge or
custody of an animal for a period of five (5) days or longer.
This term shall not apply to veterinarians or kennel operators
temporarily maintaining on their premises animals owned by
others.
(d) Dog. The term “dog” shall apply to canine
animals, male or female, altered or unaltered.
(e) Stray. Any unlicensed animal, the owner of
which is unknown, which is at large.
(f) At large. An animal is “at large” when it is
off the property of its owners and not under restraint.
(g) Restraint. An animal is under “restraint”
within the meaning of this ordinance if it is controlled by a
leash or by a competent person and immediately obedient to that
person's command or within a vehicle being driven or parked on
the streets or roads or within the property limits of its owner.
(h) Nuisance Dog. Any dog which by frequent and
habitual howling, yelping, barking, or other, shall cause
serious annoyance or disturbance to persons or to a neighborhood
or habitually pursues any bicycle or vehicle upon any public
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(2)(i)
6
street or highway. The provision of this ordinance shall not
apply to duly authorized hospitals or clinics conducted for the
treatment of small animals.
(i) Dangerous Animal or Dog. (1) Any animal or dog
which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or to
domestic animals by virtue of a known history to endanger life
or cause serious injury by an unprovoked assault so as to cause
serious injury and has, on two separate occasions, off the
owner's property and without reasonable cause, caused serious
injury to a person or domestic animal as defined by Wis.
Stat.§174.001(2q). [Ord. 559 10/05, Ord. 617 09/11, Ord. 626 09/12]
(2)A dog trained, owned or harbored for the q
purpose, primarily or in part, of dog fighting.
(3)A dog shall not be deemed dangerous if:
(a) It bites, attacks, or menaces anyone
assaulting the owner.
(b) It bites, attacks, or menaces a
trespasser on the property of the owner.
(c) It bites, attacks, or menaces any
person or other animal who has tormented or
abused it.
(d) It is otherwise acting in defense of
an attack from a person or other animal
upon the owner or other person.
(e) It is protecting or defending its
young or other animal.
(j) Abused Animal. Any animal which is:
(1) Mistreated, beaten, tormented or
teased.
(2) Deprived of sufficient and wholesome
water, food, or shelter
(3) Kept under unhealthy conditions.
(4) Trained for fighting other animals.
(k) Guard dog. Any dog which has been trained to
attack persons independently or upon command.
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(2)(l)
7
(l) Proper Enclosure. A fence or structure of
suitable height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to
prevent the entry of any young children. Such enclosure shall be
locked and shall be designed with secure sides to prevent an
animal from escaping from the enclosure.
(m) Individual Dog Owner. The term “individual dog
owner” means a place where no more than three (3) dogs over five
(5) months of age are kept on the premises occupied for
residential purposes.
(n)Private Dog Kennel. The term “private kennel”
means a place where more than three (3) but less than eleven
(11) dogs over the age of five (5) months are kept and where the
business of selling, boarding, breeding, grooming or training
dogs is conducted, and where the keeping of such animals is
incidental to the occupancy of the premises for residential
purposes, and is not the primary source of income of the
occupant or owner of the property.
(o) Commercial Dog Kennel. The term “commercial dog
kennel” means a place where over ten (10) dogs over the age of
five (5) months are kept by a corporate or individual owner,
lessor, breeder of dogs who trains, grooms, boards, breeds
and/or sells animals for resale, individually or in litter lots
for any purposes other than guides for the blind or public
service dogs. A place where the business may be the primary
source of income of the occupant or owner of the property.
(p) Wild Animal. Any animal other than domesticated
household pets such as dogs, cats, mice, gerbils, hamsters,
turtles, and non-poisonous snakes and lizards, and other than
farm livestock (cattle, horses, mules, goats, swine) and
poultry. Wild animals includes fur-bearing animals, game, game
animals and game birds described in Chapter 29, Wis. Statutes.
(q) Exotic Animal. Any animal not native to
Wisconsin or to the United States and is imported from another
country. Exotic animals includes but is not limited to tigers,
lions. pandas, llamas, ostriches, and peacocks.
(r) Village. The term “Village” as used in this
ordinance shall mean the Village of Ellsworth, Pierce County,
Wisconsin.
(s) Animal Shelter. Any premises designated by the
action of the Village Board for the purposes of impounding and
caring for all animals found in violation of this ordinance.
[Ord 672 3/2019]
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(2)(t)
8
The
(t) Humane Officer. The Humane Officer shall be
certified as required under §173.05, Stats., and shall be the
person or persons appointed by the Village Board under §1.02(12)
to enforce this Ordinance and shall include any agent who may be
appointed or designated from time to time by the Humane Officer
or Village Board to enforce this Ordinance. This Ordinance may
also be enforced by the Chief of Police or the Village Health
Officer. The Humane Officer shall be paid such fee or salary
for services as is established from time to time by resolution
of the Village Board. [Ord. 521 05/02, 547 02/05]
(3) RESTRAINT. The owner shall keep his/her dog under
restraint at all times. No dog shall be at large. The owner
of any dog which is at large shall be liable for the penalty
provided in §12.05 (16) (b). [Ord. 462]
(4) LICENSING OF DOGS. (a) Vaccination by a
veterinarian against rabies is required of all dogs within
thirty days after a dog reaches five (5) months of age.
Revaccination is required when the certificate of vaccination
expires. A certificate of current vaccination must be presented
when obtaining a dog license. An owner who fails to have a dog
vaccinated against rabies as required by statute or ordinance
may be required to forfeit not less than $50 nor more than $100,
as described in Wis. Stats. 95.21 [Ord. 609 12/2010, Ord.610 03/2011]
(b) No person shall own any dog within the Village
limits unless such dog is licensed, except as provided under
“Exceptions.” Written application shall be made to such person
or persons as designated by the Village and shall include all
pertinent documentation as required for such license.
(1) Exceptions. (a) Hospitals, clinics, and
other premises operated by licensed
veterinarians exclusively for the care and
treatment of animals are exempt from the
provisions of this ordinance, except where such
duties are expressly stated.
(b) The licensing requirement of this
ordinance shall not apply to any dog
belonging to a non-resident and kept within
the Village for less than thirty (30) days,
provided that all such dogs shall at all
times be kept under restraint.
(c) Any dog owned, kept or harbored by an
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(4)(b)(1)(d)
9
individual or corporation holding either a
Private or Commercial Kennel license need
not be individually licensed.
(d) Every dog specially trained to lead
blind or deaf persons or to provide support
for mobility impaired person is exempt from
the dog license fee and every person owning
such a dog shall receive annually a free
dog license.
(e) Any dog owned by a person that is kept
only for education or scientific purposes.
(c)There shall be three (3) types of dog licenses
issued:
1. Individual Dog
2. Private Dog Kennel
3. Commercial Dog Kennel.
(5) TYPES OF LICENSES AND FEES. (a) Individual Dog.
Written application shall be made on a form to be furnished by
the Village. As a condition for the issuance of said license,
the owner shall submit a current certificate of rabies
vaccination for the dog/dogs. At the time of application a
numbered durable tag/tags shall be issued to the owner.
(1) License Fee.
(a) The fee shall be as is established
pursuant to Section 12.05 (1) (a). The
individual annual license fee for each dog
over the age of five (5) months that is
“whole” or unspayed or unneutered. [Ord. 475]
(b) The fee shall be established pursuant
to Section 12.05 (1)(a). The individual
annual license fee for each dog over the
age of five (5) months that is either
spayed or neutered. Written documented
proof of spay or neuter must be presented
at the time of license issue.
(c) Delinquent license fees shall be
collected in the manner specified in Sec.
74.11, Wis. Stats., et. seq., for
collecting personal property taxes. There
shall be assessed against the owner a late
fee as is established from time to time by
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(5)(a)(3)
10
resolution of the Village Board for any
license not obtained by April 1. [Ord. 475,
ord.609 12/2010, Ord. 610 03/2011]
(3) Deceased Transfer Fee. If a dog dies
within the license year and another is secured
to replace the dog so dying, the annual license
for the deceased dog may be transferred (free of
charge) to the replacement dog for the remainder
of the licensing year.
(4) Change of Ownership. Where the owner of a
dog no longer owns the dog because of death,
sale, transfer or otherwise, and there is no
license transfer, the owner shall complete and
file with the Village Clerk an 'Affidavit of
Death or Disposal of Dog' in such form as
required by the Village Clerk. If there is a
change of ownership of a dog, the new owner
must, within thirty (30) days notify the Village
Treasurer and have the license transferred to
his/her name. [Ord. 619 01/12]
(5) Miscellaneous. (a) Any person who secures
a dog five (5) months of age or older shall be
allowed thirty (30) days to obtain a license.
Any dog owner upon becoming a resident of the
Village shall be allowed thirty (30) days to
obtain a dog license.
(b) Upon complying with the provisions of
this ordinance, there shall be issued to
the owner a durable tag, stamped with a
number and the year for which issued.
(c)Every owner is required to keep a valid
tag securely fastened to the dog's collar
or harness which must be worn by the dog at
all times except when the dog for which the
license is issued is indoors or on the
premises of the owner or covered by an
Exception.
(b) Private Dog Kennel. (1) Any place with more
than 3 and less than 11 dogs over the age of 5 months shall be
required to have a Private Kennel license. A Private Dog Kennel
license shall not be issued unless the application for such
license is accompanied by the written approval thereof by the
occupants of all privately owned real estate abutting the
premises on which such kennel is to be located or unless the
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(5)(b)(2)
11
applicants kennel is 300 feet or more from any adjacent owner's
property line. Approval of abutting property owners is necessary
only for the initial licensing. The Village Board of the Village
of Ellsworth may grant a Private Dog Kennel license only upon
issuance of a Conditional Use Permit under sec. 46.04. [Ord.
508]
(2) The fee for a Private Dog Kennel shall be
paid annually in an amount established from time
to time by resolution of the Village Board.
[Ord. 475]
(c) Commercial Dog Kennel. (1) Any place with more
than 10 dogs over 5 months old shall be required to have a
Commercial Kennel license. A Commercial Dog Kennel license
shall not be issued when located less than 700 feet from any lot
line shared with premises devoted to residential uses, by
persons other than that of the owner of such kennels, his
family, agents, employees, or tenants.
(2) The Village Board of the Village of
Ellsworth may grant a Commercial Dog Kennel
license only upon issuance of a Conditional Use
Permit under sec. 46.04. [Ord. 508]
(3) The fee for a Commercial Dog Kennel license
shall be paid annually in an amount as is
established by resolution of the Village Board.
[Ord. 475]
(d) Provisions of Dog Kennel Licenses. (1) All dog
kennel licenses shall be issued for one (1) year beginning on
January 1. Application for licenses may be made sixty (60) days
prior to the start of the licensing year and thereafter during
the licensing year.
(2) A dog kennel license may be revoked by
reason of any violation of the ordinance or by
reason of the violation of any health or
nuisance ordinances, order, law or regulation as
may be determined by the Village Board.
(3) Before revoking a dog kennel license, the
licensee shall be given notice of the meeting at
which such a revocation shall be considered and
a copy of the complaint. If the licensee is
present at such meeting, he/she shall be first
given an opportunity to be heard. Notice of
such meeting shall be given to the licensee in
writing, mailed to the address of the licensee
as set forth in the licensee application for the
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(5)(d)(4)
12
dog kennel at least ten (10) working days prior
to the date of the meeting.
(4) All dog kennels shall be kept in a clean
and healthful condition and at all reasonable
times shall be open to inspection by the Village
Board, any health officer, animal control
officer, Chief of Police or other person or
person charged with the enforcement of this
ordinance or any health or sanitary regulation
order, rule or statute of the Village of
Ellsworth or Pierce County or the State of
Wisconsin.
(5) All dog kennels shall be insulated to serve
as noise abatement. All dogs shall be confined
to indoors at night in individual pens. During
daylight hours, dogs may be let out into
individual fenced areas known as “runs”.
(6) Dogs in cages shall be monitored as
necessary to keep the cage free of urine and
fecal matter and excreta.
(7) Shelter from sunlight shall be provided for
dogs kept outside. When sunlight is likely to
cause heat exhaustion to an animal tied or caged
outside, and particularly during the months of
May through September, inclusive, sufficient
shade by natural or artificial means shall be
provided to protect the animal from direct
sunlight.
(8) The minimum space for dogs kept in pens
(not cages), excluding the shelter space (the
cage or house) shall be as follows:
small medium large
# of dogs to 25 pounds 25-50 pounds over 50 pound
1 21 sq ft 60 sq ft 80 sq ft
2 32 sq ft 80 sq ft 96 sq ft
3 45 sq ft 96 sq ft 140 sq ft
Enclosures shall be constructed and maintained so as to provide
sufficient space to allow each animal adequate freedom of
movement. Inadequate space may be indicated by evidence of
debility, stress or abnormal behavior patterns. Space available
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(5)(d)(9)
13
to the mammal, reptile, or bird shall be useable, maintained in
a safe and healthful manner and be free of standing water,
accumulated waste and debris.
(9) Dogs and cats kept outdoors shall be
provided with access to shelter to allow them to
remain dry during rain or snow.
(10) Dog houses. Every person in charge or
control of any dog which is kept outdoors or in
an unheated enclosure shall provide such dog, as
a minimum, with shelter and bedding as described
in the following:
(a) Such shelter shall include an
insulated, moisture proof and windproof
structure of suitable size to accommodate
the dog's postural adjustments yet small
enough to allow retention of body heat,
made of durable material, with a solid
floor raised at least 2" from the ground
with the entrance facing away from
prevailing winds during the appropriate
season.
(b) Structural strength. The housing
facility shall be structurally sound and
maintained in good repair to protect
animals from injury.
(c) During the winter season the following
shall apply: The entryway shall be
protected by a self-closing door, an offset
outer door or a flexible flap made of
windproof material. The shelter shall be
shaded during the hot months. Bedding,
such as cedar shavings, straw or other nonabsorbent
material, shall be provided in
sufficient quantity for insulation against
cold and damp. Bedding shall be kept dry.
(d) If doghouses with chains are used as
primary enclosures for dogs kept outdoors,
the chains used shall be so placed or
attached that they cannot become entangled
with the chains of other dogs or objects
which will prevent the animals from
entering the shelter.
(e) If dogs are tethered, the chain, rope
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(5)(d)(10)(f)
14
or appliance shall be equipped with a
swivel to prevent tangling.
(f) Free access to porches, garages or
port-a-doors with special areas within
shall be considered satisfactory shelter.
(g) Proper drink shall mean clean, rust
and algae free, drinkable water available
at all times.
(h) All water receptacles shall be kept
clean and sanitary, be of appropriate
design and size for the animal and be
positioned or affixed to prevent spills.
(11) The following shall be the minimum
standards for dogs kept indoors:
(a) Ambient temperatures. The ambient
temperature shall be compatible with the
health of the animal.
(b) Ventilation. Indoor housing facilities
shall be adequately ventilated by natural
or mechanical means to provide fresh air
and prevent moisture condensation.
(c) Heat and light. Natural or artificial
lighting and heat shall be supplied to
provide for the health of the animal at all
times.
(d) Lighting of primary enclosures shall
be designed to protect animals from
excessive illumination. The duration of
illumination shall be appropriate for the
species involved.
(e) Holding areas shall be constructed to
allow a free flow of fresh air.
(12) Cage confinement of dogs and cats is
restrictive and stressful and shall only be used
for temporary confinement. Dogs and cats should
not be caged except upon veterinary advice,
transport and/or other professionally accepted
practices. Dogs kept in cages for these
reasons shall be removed from them and exercised
a minimum of twice a day--once in the morning
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(5)(d)(13)
15
and once in the afternoon--for a minimum of half
an hour each time or once a day for a minimum of
two hours. This allows the animal to eliminate
outside the cage.
(13) Application for dog kennel licenses shall
be made to the Village Treasurer on a form
approved by the Village Treasurer. No license
shall be issued until there has been an
inspection of the premises for which license is
sought. The inspection shall be conducted by
the Village Board, its agents or the Animal
Warden. From time to time during the term of
the license the Village Board, its agents or the
Animal Warden may give reasonable notice to the
owner (licensee) that there shall be an
inspection of the premises and animals kept
there. Thereupon, the owner shall cooperate in
all manner with the Village Board, its agents or
the Animal Warden in allowing an inspection of
the premises.
(6) IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS.
(a) Any dog found to be unlicensed, running at
large, or otherwise in violation of this section may be taken
and impounded in the designated animal shelter and there
confined in a humane manner for a period of not more than seven
(7) days. If not claimed prior thereto by its owner it shall
thereafter become the property of the animal shelter and may be
disposed of in a humane manner or sold to an individual desiring
to purchase the dog as a pet (after signing an agreement to spay
or neuter). If a dog is destroyed pursuant to this ordinance,
the license for such dog shall expire.
(b) Immediately upon the impounding of a dog wearing
a current license, tatoo, or other identification, the
designated animal shelter shall make reasonable efforts to
notify the owner of such dog of the impoundment and of the
conditions whereby the owner may regain custody of the dog. Any
verbal notices shall be confirmed in writing.
(c) Not withstanding anything contained herein to
the contrary, if a critically injured animal is at large
pursuant to this ordinance, it may be destroyed, but only after
reasonable efforts have been made to contact its owner.
(d) Any animal impounded hereunder being held for
suspected disease (except rabies) may be reclaimed by the owner
within seven (7) days upon payment of the owner to the animal
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(6)(e)
16
shelter any applicable forfeitures in addition to the costs for
keeping such an animal during the impoundment, providing that
the licensing requirements of this ordinance are complied with.
(e) Impoundment and Redemption Fines and
Forfeitures.
(1) When impoundment is not at the Village of
Ellsworth Pound in the Village of Ellsworth the
impoundment fee shall be in such amount as is
invoiced to and paid by the Village to the
animal shelter or pound holding said animal.[Ord.
609 12/2010]
(2) When impoundment is at the Village of
Ellsworth pound in the Village of Ellsworth the
impoundment fee shall be in such amount as is
established by resolution of the Village Board
per day for each day or fraction of a day the
dog is impounded. [Ord. 475, 547 2/05]
(3) In addition to the fees set forth
hereinabove, the owner shall be liable for all
other actual costs of impoundment (e.g., vet
fees) and apprehension of the animal.
(f) Quarantine. (1) Any animal that has bitten a
person shall immediately be impounded for at least ten (10) days
and kept apart from other animals, under the supervision of a
veterinarian or at the Village designated animal shelter, until
it is determined whether such animal had or has a disease which
might have been transmitted by such bite.
(2) Any animal which has been bitten by a rabid
or suspected rabid animal shall be impounded
and kept in the same manner for a period of six
(6) months, unless the animal has been
vaccinated for rabies within the previous year,
then the impoundment period shall be sixty (60)
days. The owner of an animal which has been
bitten by a rabid animal shall notify the
Village Board in the event of the animal's
illness or death during quarantine.
(3) The owner shall pay all costs of
quarantine.
(4) See Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 95.21 for
additional rabies control guidelines.
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(7)
17
(7)RECORDS. (a) It shall be the duty of the Village
Treasurer to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed
records of the licensing of dogs in the Village of Ellsworth.
(b) It shall be the duty of the Village Treasurer to
serve as the municipal listing and collecting official pursuant
to Sections 174.06(2) and 174.065(1), Stats., and to keep, or
cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the licensing
of dogs in the Village. [Ord. 487, 523 8/02]
(c) It shall be the duty of the animal shelter to
keep accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and
disposition of all animals taken into its custody, including the
breed, age, color, date of pickup, and date, place and manner of
disposition.
(d) It shall be the duty of the animal shelter to
keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all
bite cases reported to them and their investigation of the same.
A copy of the report shall be given to the Police Department.
(8) INVESTIGATION. (a) For the purpose of discharging
the duties imposed by this ordinance and to enforce its
provisions, the Village Board shall fully cooperate and assist
the animal shelter which has held or does hold the animal in
custody, the Department of Agriculture, and authorized state
health officials in identifying and locating animals which pose
a risk and/or danger to the public and/or are in need of humane
treatment. To such extent as is permitted by State statute, the
Village Board or its agent, any law enforcement officer, or the
humane society is empowered to enter upon the premises upon
which an animal is kept or harbored and to demand the exhibition
by the owner of such animal and/or license for such animal.[Ord.
609 12/2010]
(b) It is further provided that the Village Board
shall fully cooperate and assist the Department of Agriculture,
authorized health officials and designated humane societies in
identifying and locating animals which are being kept in
reportedly cruel and/or inhumane manner. To such extent as is
permitted by State statute, including but not limited to Sec.
951.15, WI Stats., the Village Board or its agent, any law
enforcement officer, or the humane society is empowered to enter
upon the premises where any animal is kept in a reportedly cruel
and/or inhumane manner and demand to examine such animal and to
take possession of such animal when it requires humane
treatment.
(c) The Village Board shall cooperate and assist any
law enforcement officer in the discharge of his duties with
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(8)(d)
18
respect to animal control.
(d) The Humane Officer, and any other appointee of
the Humane Officer or Village Board, including the Chief of
Police and the Village Health Officer, may investigate
violations of §12.05 in the manner and under the authority
provided by §173.09 and §173.10, Stats.(see minutes of 3/7/2005
Board Meeting) [Ord.547 2/05]
(9) INTERFERENCE. (a) No person shall interfere with,
hinder or molest the Village Board or the animal shelter which
has held or does hold the animal in custody in the performance
of the duties of his/her/its office or seek to release any
animal in the custody of the Village Board or the animal shelter
which has held or does hold the animal in custody except as
herein provided. [Ord. 609 12/2010]
(b) Any such action shall constitute a violation of
this ordinance.
(10) ORGANIZED ANIMAL FIGHTING PROHIBITED. (a) No dog
fighting, cock fighting, bull baiting, bear baiting or other
setting of or other fighting of one animal against another shall
be permitted in the Village of Ellsworth.
(11) ABANDONMENT OR ABUSE OF ANIMALS. It shall be
unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon or abuse any animal.
Each person who does abandon or abuse knowingly or willingly
permits this abandonment or abuse or aids in the abandonment or
abuse of any animal shall be in violation of this ordinance and
shall be subject to the penalties as herein provided.
(12) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PRECAUTIONS TO BE TAKEN
BY OWNERS OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS. (a) Whenever a dangerous dog
is outside of its enclosure as provided in 12.05 (2)(l) (Proper
Enclosure), but it is on the owners property, it must be
attended by its owner and restrained by a secure collar and
leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape.
(b) No dangerous dog shall be chained, tethered, or
otherwise tied to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, or
building, outside of its own enclosure as provided for in 12.05
(2)(l) (Proper Enclosure).
(c) In addition to the requirements in 12.05 (2)(l)
(Proper Enclosure) for owners of dangerous dogs who maintain the
dog out-of-doors, a portion of their property shall be fenced
with a perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter fence,
the dangerous dog must be humanely confined inside a pen or
kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(12)(d)
19
fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must
have secure sides; a secure top attached to all sides; the sides
must either be buried two (2) feet into the ground, sunken into
a concrete pad, or securely attached to a wire bottom. The gate
to the kennel must be securely locked at all times.
(d) Except when being transported in and securely
confined within a vehicle, no dangerous dog shall be permitted
off the property of its owner except when it is attended by its
owner or designated custodian and is restrained by a secure
collar and leash (not to exceed six (6) feet in length). Both
collar and leash must be of sufficient strength to prevent
escape and muzzled by any means sufficient to prevent biting
other persons or domestic animals.
(e) Whenever a dangerous dog has caused serious
injury to a person or domestic animal on two separate occasions
off the owner's property, without reasonable cause, and the
owner of the dog was notified or knew prior to the second injury
that the dog caused the first injury, the dog shall be
permanently removed from the Village or humanely euthanized.
Such removal shall take place within 72 hours of the second bite
inflicted by the dog and the keeper or owner thereof shall
submit proof of such removal or euthanization to the Village
Clerk or Police Department, and shall surrender the license and
license tags for the dog, within said 72-hour period. [Ord. 617
09/11, 626 09/12]
(13) ENFORCEMENT OF RESTRICTION ON DANGEROUS DOGS. (a)
In the event that the Village Board or Police Dept. has received
information that a dangerous dog is being harbored in violation
of this ordinance, it may:
(1) Notify the owner or keeper of the violation
and order the violation immediately corrected.
(2) If the violation cannot be immediately
corrected and the dog is posing an imminent
serious threat to human beings or other domestic
animals, the dog may be seized and impounded at
the owner's expense. At the owner's request and
expense, such impoundment may be at a
veterinarian or licensed kennel of the owner's
choosing.
(3) If the owner or keeper of the dangerous dog
fails to either provide proof that the dog will
now be kept restrained or confined in compliance
with the provisions of this ordinance, or fails
to reclaim it from the designated Village
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(13)(a)(4)
20
shelter after impoundment and if it cannot be
adopted by someone providing proof that it will
be kept restrained or confined as specified in
this ordinance, it will be humanely euthanized.
(4) Where the owner or keeper of a dangerous
dog fails to provide timely proof of compliance
with Sec. 12.05(12)(e) with respect to a dog
which has twice bitten a person or separate
persons, then the Village Board, Humane Officer
or Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee,
shall cause to be issued to the dog's owner or
keeper such citations as are deemed appropriate
and shall take action to abate the nuisance as
provided under Sec. 12.05(16). Where abatement
is necessary because of failure to comply with
Sec. 12.05(12)(e), abatement shall require
immediate seizure and impoundment of the
dangerous dog until it can be humanely
euthanized. [Ord.617 09/2011]
(5) Where a dangerous dog has on two separate
occasions caused serious injury to a person or
domestic animal off the owner's property without
reasonable cause, the Village Board or Chief of
Police or their appointees or their designees
may commence a civil action to obtain a judgment
from the Court ordering an officer to kill the
dog in a proper and humane manner. [Ord. 626
09/12]
(14) WARNING SIGNS, GUARD DOGS AND DANGEROUS DOGS. (a) All
owners, keepers, or harborers of any guard or officially
determined dangerous dog shall display in a prominent place on
their premises and at each entrance or exit to the area where
such a dog is confined, a sign easily readable by the public
using the words: “BEWARE OF DOG”.
(15) DUTIES OF ALL ANIMAL OWNERS. (a) It shall be the
duty of every owner of any animal or anyone having any animal in
their possession or custody, to exercise reasonable care and to
take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other
people, property, and animals from injuries or damage which
might result from their animal's behavior, regardless whether
such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness, or
ferocity.
(b) It shall be the duty of every owner of any
animal, or anyone having any animal in their possession or
custody, to ensure that the animal is kept under restraint and
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(15)(c)
21
that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the
animal from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits
of its owner, possessor or custodian.
(c) It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal
or anyone having an animal in their possession to keep the
animal under restraint and control at all times while the animal
is off the real property limits of the owner, possessor, or
custodian.
(d) Failure to keep any animal confined or under
restraint as provided for in this Section shall be unlawful and
shall be punishable as herein provided.
(e) No person shall keep or harbor any nuisance dog,
nor shall any person keep or harbor any animal or fowl which by
frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing, or
making of other noises shall cause serious annoyance or
disturbance to persons or to a neighborhood.
(f) No person shall keep or harbor any dog which
habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or
highway.
(g) Fecal matter. (1) Any person owning, keeping
or harboring any dog or companion animal will be responsible to
keep his/her property clean of all fecal matter from said
animal(s). All animal waste shall be removed so as to keep the
surrounding area free from obnoxious odors.
(2) Disposition of all animal waste, including
urine, fecal matter and excreta shall be in a
manner that is consistent with the maintenance
of human and animal health. Animal waste shall
be disposed of in a manner that does not pollute
or contaminate ground water or soil. Acceptable
methods for disposing of animal waste include
flushing down an indoor toilet where the
property is connected to a municipal sewer
utility, disposing in a holding tank, composting
with suitable quantities of leaves, grass and
other organic debris (fecal matter to be less
than 20% of gross weight of composted material)
or spreading over land after being first treated
with lime, provided any crop grown is for nonhuman
use and the spreading is at least 100
yards from the nearest domicile. Disposition of
animal waste in an on-site landfill, burying the
waste, burning or incineration of the waste or
in a private septic system shall not constitute
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(15)(g)(3)
22
a permitted disposition; except, however, an
incinerator approved by the Department of
Natural Resources may be used to burn and
incinerate waste provided all necessary state
and local agency licenses have been obtained.
(3) Any fecal matter deposited by any dog, cat,
horse or other animal on any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public or private property
within the Village of Ellsworth shall be
immediately removed by the owner or person in
charge of the animal. This section shall not
apply if the fecal matter is deposited on the
animal owner’s own property; except, however,
such owner shall be responsible to keep his/her
property clear of all fecal matter as provided
in Subsection (1) above.[Ord.609 12/2010]
(4) Any individual accompanying any dog, cat,
horse or other animal in the Village of
Ellsworth which is not on the property of the
animal’s owner, shall carry a plastic bag or
other receptacle to enable such individual to
immediately remove any feces deposited by such
animal away from the animal owner’s property.
Any such individual shall, upon demand by a
Village police officer, produce such bag or
receptacle for inspection.
(5) It shall constitute an exception to the
requirements of this ordinance when any dog,
cat, horse or other animal is a participant in a
parade approved or sponsored by the Village of
Ellsworth as a local civic event. [Ord. 476, 575
6/07]
(h) No wild animals or exotic animals may be kept
within the Village of Ellsworth except under such conditions as
shall be fixed by the Village Board provided that wild animals
and exotic animals may be kept for exhibition purposes by
circuses, zoos, or educational institutions, in accordance with
such regulations as shall be established by the Village Board.
(16) ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES. (a) Unlicensed dog:
$50.00 forfeiture penalty together with costs of prosecution
plus cost of license.[Ord.547 3/05]
(b) Any person who violates any other provision of
this ordinance may be subject to a forfeiture penalty
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.05(16)(c)
23
of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 together with the
costs of prosecution.
(c) Abatement. The Humane Officer or Chief of
Police, or their appointees or their designees, shall
have the power to abate violations of §12.05 in
accordance with §173.11, Stats. The Village
President or Chief of Police may modify or withdraw
abatement orders issued hereunder, or under §173.11,
Stats.[Ord.547 3/05]
(17) SEVERABILITY AND CONFLICT. If any section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Ordinance
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed
a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such
holding shall not effect the validity of the remaining
portions. [Ord. 441]
12.06 ALCOHOL BEVERAGES. (1) STATE STATUTES
ADOPTED. The provisions of Chapter 125, Wis. Stats., relating
to the sale of, possession of and licensing for sale of
intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages, exclusive of
any provisions for the penalty to be imposed for violations of
said Chapter, are hereby adopted and made a part of this
Section by reference. A violation of any such provisions
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Sec. 25.04,
unless otherwise provided herein. [Ord. 327]
(2) LICENSES. (a) When Required. No person except as
provided by Secs. 125.04, 125.17, 125.25, 125.26, 125.27,
125.28, 125.31, 125.32, 125.51, and 125.68, Wis. Stats., shall
distribute, vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail or
wholesale, deal or traffic in, or for the purpose of evading any
law or ordinance, give away any intoxicating liquor or fermented
malt beverage, or cause the same to be done, without having
procured a license as provided in this section, nor
without complying with all the provisions of this section, and
all statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state and
Village applicable thereto. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(b) Separate License Required for Each Place of
Sale. A license shall be required for each stand, place, room
or enclosure or for each suite of rooms or enclosure which are
in direct connection or communication to each other where
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are kept, sold
or offered for sale and no license shall be issued to any
person for the purpose of possessing, selling or offering for
sale any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in
dwelling house, flat or residential apartment.
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(2)(c)
24
(c) Quota on "Class A" Licenses for Sale of
Intoxicating Liquors. There shall be no quota limitation on
issuance of "Class A" licenses for sale of intoxicating liquors
in the Village of Ellsworth. Issuance of such licenses shall
be in the sound discretion of the Village Board. [Ord. 633
06/2013]
(d) "Class B" License, Sale in Original Container.
A retail "Class B" license for the sale of intoxicating liquor
authorizes the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original
package or container, in multiples not to exceed 4 liters at any
one time, and to be consumed off the premises where sold. Wine
may be sold for consumption off the premises in any quantity.
(e) License Limit on "Class B" Liquor Licenses. No
more than one retail "Class B" intoxicating liquor license shall
be granted to and issued for each 500 inhabitants or fraction
thereof in the Village, such population to be determined by the
last preceding national census or official estimate thereof by
the Bureau of Census of the United States government.
(f) Delinquent Taxes, Assessments, Forfeitures. (1)
PREMISES. No initial or renewal alcohol beverages license shall
be granted for any premises for which taxes, assessments or
other claims for the Village are delinquent and unpaid.
(2) PERSONS. No initial or renewal alcohol
license shall be granted to any person:
(a) Delinquent in payment of any taxes
assessments or other claims owed to the
Village.
(b) Delinquent in payment of a forfeiture
resulting from a violation of any ordinance
of the Village.
(c) Delinquent in payment to the State of
any State taxes owed.
(3) FEES. The following fees for issuance of a license
under this section shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board [Ord.643 05/15]:
(a) Class "A" Retail License -
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06 (3)(b)
25
(Fermented Malt Beverages)
(b) “Class A" Retail Licenses –
(Intoxicating Liquors)
(c) “Class B" Retail Licenses –
(Fermented Malt Beverages)
(Intoxicating Liquors)
(d) Wholesaler's License -
(e) Operator's License –
Temporary Operator’s License
Provisional License
(f) “Reserve Class B" Retail License -
(Fermented Malt Beverages)
(Intoxicating Liquor)
(g) “Class C” Retailer’s License –
(Wine)
(h) Class “B” Picnic or Special Events Licenses
[Ord. 396; Ord. 468; Ord. 475, Ord. 585 06/2009 Ord. 592 06/2009, Ord. 662
9/2017]
(4) LICENSE APPLICATION. (a) Form. Application for a
license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverages shall be made in writing on forms prescribed by the
State Department of Revenue and filed with the Village Clerk-
Treasurer. In addition to information required on the forms
prescribed by the State Department of Revenue, the Chief of
Police or the Health and Welfare Committee may require such
further information as may be deemed necessary to make an
appropriate review of the license application, including date of
birth and place of past residence. The premises shall be
physically described to include every room and storage space to
be covered by the license, including all rooms joined by
connecting entrances or not separated by a solid wall. [Ord.
271]
(b) Application. Applications, except those for a
manager’s or operator’s license, shall be signed and sworn
to by the applicant. [Ord. 559 10/05]
(c) Duplicate. Upon approval, a copy of each
application shall be forwarded by the Village Clerk-
Treasurer to the State Department of Revenue.
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(4)(d)(1)
26
(d) Examination and Report. (1) Upon receipt of a
license application to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor
or fermented beverages, including an application for
operator’s license, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall refer
same within three (3) days to the Chief of Police.
Applications for Operator’s Licenses and Temporary
Operator’s Licenses shall be reviewed and acted upon by the
Village Board. All such Applications must be filed with
the Village Clerk-Treasurer at least 15 days prior to the
Board Meeting at which the License Application shall be
considered. Applications for Provisional Licenses shall be
made to the Village Clerk-Treasurer and issued in
accordance the standards set forth in this Section 12.06
and in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Wis.Stat.§125.17(5).[Ord. 662 09/2017]
(2)The Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation
of the applicant to determine whether the applicant is
a suitable candidate for issuance of the license
requested. The Chief of Police shall submit his report
to the Village Clerk-Treasurer within seven (7) days of
receipt of the License Application from the Village
Clerk-Treasurer. The applicant shall execute a release
of information, if requested by the Chief of Police,
permitting the Chief of Police to obtain information
and records from local, State and Federal law
enforcement or government agencies concerning the
applicant and to obtain information from any person the
Chief, or his designee, chooses to contact or interview
concerning relevant background of the applicant
[Ord.470, Ord. 537 04/2004, Ord. 662 09/2017]
(3)The Village Board shall refuse to issue or renew
an alcohol-related license for any of the following
reasons:
(a) The applicant has a felony conviction or is
an habitual Offender pursuant to Sec. 125.04(5)(b),
Stats., where the offense(s) is substantially related
to the alcoholic beverage licensing activity. [Ord. 610
03/2011,Ord 662 09/2017]
(b) The applicant has been convicted within the
5 year period preceding the date of the application
of a non-alcohol related misdemeanor offense which
is substantially related to the licensed activity
with respect to which a license is requested.
Examples of such substantially similar activity
include the following: gambling, drug offenses under
Wis. Stat.§961.41, disorderly conduct upon a
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(4)(d)(3)(c)
27
licensed premises, or battery upon a licensed
premises. [Ord.560 11/05, Ord. 610 03/2011, Ord 662 09/2017]
(c) The applicant fails to provide complete,
accurate and truthful information on any license
application. In such instance no reapplication for a
license shall be allowed until a period of 60 days
has elapsed from the date of the previous
application. In such instance no reapplication for a
license shall be allowed until a period of 60 days
has elapsed from the date of the previous
application. [Ord. 606 9/2010 Ord 609 12/2010,Ord 662 9/2017]
(4)The Village Board shall refuse to issue or renew
an alcohol-related license to a person with two or more
convictions within the preceding 2 year period of the
following violations, or similar violations which are
substantially related to the activity with respect to
which licensure is sought [Ord. 610 03/2011,Ord 662 9/2017]:
(a) Loitering on licensed premises.
(b) Possession of false identification.
(c) Underage consumption/possession of alcohol.
(d) Furnishing or sale of alcohol to minors.
(e) Any other offense related to the illegal
sale of alcohol beverages.
(f) Conviction of any substance abuse violation
Conviction of a first-time operating under the
influence of a controlled substance. [Ord. 560 11/05]
(g) Sale of alcohol beverages to an intoxicated
person.
(h) Sale of alcohol beverages or keeping a
licensed premise open after closing hours.
(i) Sale of alcohol beverages with-out a
license.
(j) Conviction of any crime or ordinance
involving cooperation with law enforcement officials,
including, but not limited to, any offence of making
false alarms, obstructing a police officer, resisting
arrest, bribery of public officers or employees,
misconduct in public office, perjury, false swearing,
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(4)(d)(4)(k)
28
assault by a prisoner, escape from custody, bail
jumping or bomb scares.
(k) Conviction of any crime or ordinance
involving dishonesty, theft or misappropriation of
funds, including, but not limited to, burglary, entry
into a locked vehicle, theft, fraud on hotel or
restaurant keeper, fraud upon or theft from landlord,
issuance of a worthless check, receiving or
transferring stolen property, loan-sharking, robbery,
forgery or retail theft.
(l) The applicant has been convicted within the
5 year period preceding the date of the application
of any disorderly conduct or battery where alcohol
has been involved. [Ord. 537 04/04 Ord. 560 11/2005, Ord
662 9/2017]
(5) The phrase “alcohol-related license” includes any
license related to alcohol beverages or fermented
malt beverages, and any reference to “alcohol
beverages, and any reference to “alcohol
beverages” or “alcoholic beverages” shall be
deemed to include “fermented malt beverages”.[Ord.
537 04/04, Ord 662 9/2017]
(6) In the event the Village Board denies a License
Application the Applicant shall be notified
in writing of the reasons for the denial. The
Action of the Village Board in denying a License
of the Village Board in denying a License
Application or failing to renew same, may be
reviewed upon application by the Applicant
to the Circuit Court for Pierce County in
accordance with Wis.Stat.§123.12(2)(d).[Ord.662 9/2017]
(e) Responsible Beverage Server Training Course.
(1) No operator's license shall be issued to any person who has
not reached the age of 18 years. All applicants for an
operator's license must complete a responsible beverage server
training course as provided in Sec. 125.17 (6), Stats. No
license may be issued unless the applicant has successfully
completed such course or unless the applicant fulfills one of
the following requirements: Where the applicant is renewing an
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(4)(e)(2)
29
operator's license, where the applicant has held a Class A or
Class B license or permit or manager's or operator's license
within the past two years, or where, within the past two years,
the applicant has completed such training course. An applicant
may be issued a provisional (temporary) license where the
applicant has not completed a responsible beverage server
training course, and said provisional license shall be issued
for a period of 60 days. Upon filing by the applicant with the
Village Clerk proof of completion of a responsible beverage
server training course, by the applicant, the Village clerk
shall issue an operator's license to the applicant. If an
applicant who has been issued a provisional operator's license
has failed to successfully complete a responsible beverage
server training course within sixty (60) days of the issuance
thereof, said license shall expire and be void. All licenses
shall expire on June 30 in the year of expiration.
(2) Before the Village Clerk shall issue any
provisional license the Clerk shall first refer the license
application to the Chief of Police as provided in Section 12.06
(4)(d)(1), and the Chief of Police shall conduct the
investigation specified in Section 12.06 (4)(d)(2). The
criteria to be used by the Chief of Police in determining
whether to issue a license shall be the same as those set forth
in Sec.12.06(2)(g)(4)(d)(2). If the Village Clerk receives a
directive from the Chief of Police to issue the license, the
license shall be issued. No operator’s license shall be issued
until the applicant has completed the Responsible Beverage
Server Training Course. [Ord. 396, 417, 434, 443, 537 04/04]
(f) Fee. The fee for the license shall accompany
the application. [Ord. 643 05/15, Ord 672 3/2019]
(5) LICENSE RESTRICTIONS. In addition to the "any other"
restriction contained in Chapter 125, the following shall apply:
(a) Violation of Liquor or Beer Law or Ordinance.
No retail "Class B" license shall be issued to any person who
has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State liquor
or fermented malt beverage laws or of the provisions of this
section during a period of one year prior to said application. A
conviction of a member of a partnership or of the partnership
itself shall make the partnership or any member thereof
ineligible for such license for one year.
(b) Class "B" Licensed Premises to be on Street
Level. Retail Class "B" licenses shall be issued only for that
portion of a premises located on the street level. This
restriction shall not apply to a bona fide club,
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(5)(c)
30
society or lodge in existence not less than 6 months prior to
application nor prohibit any hotel holding a State permit from
supplying beverages in original containers to bona fide patrons
in rooms rented by such patrons.
(c) Health and Sanitation Requirements. No retail
Class "B" license shall be issued for any premises which do not
conform to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the
State Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations
pertaining to building and plumbing and the rules and
regulations of the State Department of Health applicable to
restaurants and to all such ordinances and regulations adopted
by the Village.
(d) Corporations. No license shall be granted to
any corporation when more than 50% of the voting stock interest,
legal interest or beneficial interest is held by any person or
persons not eligible for a license under this section.
(6) LICENSES; EXPIRATION. (a) Fee Charged. Licenses
for Class "A" or Class "B" retail sales, when issued for a
period less than one year, shall be prorated according to the
number of months or fractions thereof remaining until the
following June 30.
(b) Form and Expiration of Licenses. All licenses
shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the
date of issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee,
and, unless sooner revoked, shall expire on June 30 thereafter
except as provided otherwise in this section.
(7) POSTING LICENSES. Every license issued under this
section shall be posted and at all times displayed as provided
in Section 125.04 (10) Stats. No person shall post such license
or permit any other person to post it upon premises other than
those mentioned in the application, or knowingly deface or
destroy such license.
(8) REGULATION OF LICENSED PREMISES AND LICENSES. (a)
Gambling and Disorderly Conduct Prohibited. Each licensed
premises shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner,
and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be allowed
at any licensed premises.
(b) Closing Hours. The closing hours
for licensed premises shall be as follows:
(1) No premises for which a Class "B" license
or permit has been issued may remain open
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(8)(b)(2)
31
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
except on Saturday and Sunday no premises may
remain open between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and
6:00 a.m., and on January 1 premises operating
under such a license are not required to close
See Sections 125.32(3) and 125.68(4), Wisconsin
Statutes. [Ord. 443]
(2) No holder of a "Class A" retail fermented
malt beverage or intoxicating liquors license
shall sell or offer for sale any such beverage
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.[Ord.473,619]
(c) Safety and Sanitation Requirements. Each
licensed premises shall be maintained and conducted in a
sanitary manner and shall be a safe and proper place for the
purpose for which used.
(d) Underage Persons. (1) Any underage person who
does any of the following is guilty of a violation:
(a) Procures or attempts to procure
alcohol beverages.
(b) Knowingly possesses or consumes
alcohol intoxicating liquor.
(c) Enters or is on licensed premises in
violation of Section 125.07, Stats.
(d) Falsely represents his or her age for
the purpose of receiving alcohol beverages
from a licensee or permittee.
(2) Any underage person not accompanied by his
or her parent, guardian or spouse who has
attained the legal drinking age who knowingly
possesses or consumes fermented malt beverages
is guilty of a violation.
(3) No underage person shall intentionally
carry an official identification card not
legally issued to him or her, or an official
identification card obtained under false
pretenses, or an official identification card
which has been altered or duplicated to convey
false information. For purposes of this section
a license issued by the Department of
Transportation shall be deemed an official
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(8)(d)(4)
32
identification card in addition to the card
referred to in Section 125.08, Stats.
(4) No underage person shall make, alter or
duplicate an official identification card.
(5) No underage person shall present false
information to an issuing officer in applying
for an official identification card.
(6) No person shall misrepresent or misstate
his or her age or the age of any other person or
misrepresent his or her age through the
presentation of any document purporting to show
such person to be of legal age to purchase
fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor.
(7) The penalty for violation hereunder shall
be a forfeiture and suspension of operating
privileges as set forth in Section 125.07
(4)(c), and Section 343.30 (6)(b), Stats.
(9) CONSUMPTION ON PUBLIC STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
PROHIBITED. (a) No person shall consume, carry, transport or
have in his possession any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverage on public sidewalks or streets in the Village unless
such intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage is in an
unopened, sealed container.
(b) No person shall sell intoxicating liquors or
fermented malt beverages when he knows that the intention of the
buyer is to consume such intoxicating liquors or fermented malt
beverages on the public sidewalks or streets of the Village or
to allow any person or persons to leave any licensed
establishment with opened, unsealed containers of intoxicating
liquor or fermented malt beverages.
(c) The provisions of this section may be waived
from time to time by resolution of the Village Board as it shall
deem advisable for specific occasions and events conducted on
the streets or sidewalks of the Village. [Ord. 211]
(10) TRANSFER OF LICENSES. Licenses may be transferred as
provided in Sec. 125.04 (12).
(11) TAVERN KEEPER SHALL REQUIRE PROOF OF AGE. (a) Any
person in premises operating under a "Class A" or "Class
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(11)(b)
33
B" retail license for the sale of fermented malt beverages or in
premises operating under a "Retail Class A" or a "Retail Class
B" license for the sale of intoxicating liquor shall upon demand
of the person in charge of such premises or of any law
enforcement officer show an identification card or other form of
identification, Sec. 125.085, Wis. Stats., or be regarded as a
person underage. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(b) Every retail "Class A" and retail "Class B"
license shall cause a book to be kept and such licensee or his
employee, or both, shall require any person who has shown
documentary proof of age which substantiates his age to allow
the legal purchase of fermented malt beverages or intoxicating
liquor, to sign such book if the age of such person is in
question. The book shall show the date of purchase, the
identification used in making the purchase, the address of the
purchaser and his signature.
(c) The establishment of the following facts by a
person making a sale of fermented malt beverages or intoxicating
liquors to a person not of legal age shall constitute prima
facie evidence of innocence and a defense to any prosecution
therefore:
(1) That the purchaser falsely represented in
writing and supported with other documentary
proof that he was of legal age to purchase
fermented malt beverages.
(2) That the appearance of such purchaser was
such that any ordinary and prudent person would
believe him to be of legal age to purchase
fermented malt beverages.
(3) That the sale was made in good faith and in
reliance upon the written representation and
appearance of the purchase in the belief that
the purchaser was of legal age to purchase
fermented malt beverages. [Ord. 185, 218]
(12) POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL BEVERAGES ON SCHOOL GROUNDS
PROHIBITED. The provisions of Sec. 125.09 (2), Wis. Stats., are
adopted in their entirety, prohibiting a person from possessing
or consuming alcohol beverages on school premises, in a motor
vehicle if a pupil attending the school is in the motor vehicle,
or while participating in a school-sponsored activity. In
addition to the penalties provided in Sec. 25.04, the provisions
of Sec. 938.344 and 125.07 (4)(c) and (d) provide applicable
penalties for underage persons. [Ord. 523 8/02]
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(13)
34
(13) SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS PROHIBITED. No person,
licensee or permittee may procure for, sell, dispense or give
away alcohol beverages to a person who is intoxicated, nor deal
or traffic in same with a person who is intoxicated. [Ord. 238]
(14) BARTENDER ON DUTY. No licensed premises may be open
for business unless there is upon the premises a licensee,
agent, person who has an operator's license or member of the
licensee's immediate family as provided in Section 125.32 (2)
and 124.68 (2), Wis. Stats.[Ord. 523 8/02]
(15) UNDERAGE. (a) Selling, Furnishing to Underage
Person. No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away
any alcohol beverages to any underage person not accompanied by
his or her parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal
drinking age. [Ord. 238]
(b) Underage person prohibited on licensed premises.
An underage person not accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age may
not enter or be on any premises for which a license or permit
for the retail sale of alcohol beverages has been issued, except
as provided in Sec. 125.07 (3)(a), Wis. Stats.
(c) Licensee or Permittee, Furnishing Alcohol
Beverages. No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or
traffic in alcohol beverages to any underage person not
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or spouse who has
attained the legal drinking age.
(16) PRESENCE IN NONALCOHOLIC BAR PERMITTED. An underage
person may enter or remain on "Class A" or "Class B" licensed
premises on a date specified by the license or permittee during
times when no alcohol beverages are consumed, sold or given
away. During those times the licensee, the agent named in the
license if the licensee is a corporation or a person who has an
operator's license shall be on the premises unless all alcohol
beverages are stored in a locked portion of the premises. The
licensee shall notify the local law enforcement agency, in
advance, of the times underage persons will be allowed on the
premises under this subsection. [Ord. 443]
(17) REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSES. (a) The
provisions of Sec. 125.12, Wis. Stats., shall govern the
revocation, suspension and refusal to issue or renew licenses
under this section.
(b) A violation of this section by a duly authorized
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(18)
35
agent or employee of a license or permit holder shall constitute
a violation by the license or permit holder. [Ord. 337]
(18) IMPROPER EXHIBITIONS. (a) It shall be unlawful for
any person to perform, or for any licensee or manager or agent
of the license to permit any employee, entertainer or patron to
engage in any live act, demonstration, dance or exhibition on
the licensed premises which:
(1) Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair,
buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair
region; or
(2) Expose any device, costume or covering
which gives the appearance of or simulates
genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region; or
(3) Exposes any portion of the female breast at
or below the areola thereof; or
(4) To engage in or simulate sexual intercourse
and/or any sexual contact including the touching
of any portion of the female breast or the male
and/or female genitals.
(b) SAFETY AND SANITATION REQUIREMENTS. Each
licensed premises shall be maintained and conducted in a
sanitary manner and shall be a safe and proper place for the
purpose for which used. [Ord. 445]
(19) PROVISIONAL RETAIL LICENSES. (a) The Village
Clerk may issue a provisional retail license to a person who has
applied for a Class “A”, Class “B”, “Class A”, “Class B” or
“Class C” License. Any such license so issued shall authorize
only the activities authorized by the type of retail license for
which application has been made.
(b) The fee for a provisional retail license shall
be as established from time to time by the Village Board but
shall not exceed the maximum amount provided by law. The
provisional license may be issued only where an application has
been made for one of the licenses enumerated in subsec. (a) and
where it appears the application for said retail license is in
proper form and it appears to the Village Clerk it is likely
same shall be approved by the Village Board.
(c) A provisional retail license issued under this
Section shall expire 60 days following its issuance or at such
time as the retail license for which application was made
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(19)(d)
36
has been issued to the holder, whichever is sooner. The Village
Clerk may revoke the provisional retail license if he or she
discovers the holder made a false statement on the application.
(d) No person may hold more than one provisional
retail license for each type of license for which application
has been made by the holder per year. [Ord. 509]
(20) WINE SAMPLING. (a) The holders of “Class A”
licenses may provide wine taste samples of not more than 3 fluid
ounces each, free of charge, to customers and visitors for
consumption on the premises. No “Class A” licensee may provide
more than 2 wine taste samples per day to any one person.
Samples may be given only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.
(b) No wine taste samples may be provided to any
underage person.
(c) No Class A” licensee may provide as taste
samples under this Section wine which the “Class A” licensee did
not purchase from a wholesaler. [Ord. 513]
(21) “CLASS B” PREMISE EXTENSION PERMIT. (1) Definition.
As used in this paragraph “premise extension” shall mean an
open, unroofed area where beer and other alcohol beverages are
served and consumed, and provided such area is connected to a
premises to which a “Class B” fermented malt beverage and
intoxicating liquor retail license has been issued.
(2) Permit Required. No person shall keep, maintain,
conduct or operate any premise extension without first obtaining
a permit.
(3) License Fee. The license fee for a premise extension
permit shall be that amount as is determined from time to time
by resolution of the Village Board.
(4) Application. The application for a premise extension
shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall be submitted to the
Village Board for issuance and approval as the Board, in its
discretion, deems appropriate. No premise extension shall be
permitted within 100’ of land zoned for residential purposes.
The permit shall be posted conspicuously in the premise
extension at all times that it shall be in use.
(5) Restrictions. No premise extension shall be
permitted, maintained or operated, except in conformity with the
following regulations:
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(21)(5)(a)
37
(a) The premise extension area shall be particularly
described, adjacent to and operated as a part of a premises
license to sell alcohol beverages for consumption on the
premises. The premises for which the premise extension permits
are issued must be owned by the licensee.
(b) If any part of the premise extension is not
blocked by a building, there shall be maintained or constructed
a fence not less than 6 feet high with maximum spacing in
openings of two inches or double fencing of not less than four
(4) feet high with six (6) feet between the fencing, surrounding
the premise extension area. The fencing shall contain the
required fire exit or exits. Each gate or exit shall be not
less than four (4) feet high for double fencing and six (6) feet
high for single fencing, shall swing free to egress, shall be
equipped with proper hardware and shall swing free and clear of
public sidewalks. The premise extension fence shall comply with
all Village ordinances regarding vision clearance and distances
from corners.
(c) All electrical wiring shall comply with
national, State and Village electrical codes.
(d) The premise extension shall be maintained to
comply with all fire code provisions.
(e) The noise emanating from any premise extension
shall not violate any of the regulations of this Municipal Code
pertaining to noise.
(f) If the permit allows any food to be served in
the premise extension, the permittee or his/her agent must
comply with Ch.50, Wis. Stats.
(g) Restroom facilities must be provided to
adequately accommodate the maximum capacity of persons in both
the licensed premises and the premise extension.
(h) Only alcohol beverages to be consumed on the
premises and not in their original containers may be carried
into the premise extension area.
(i) The licensee or his/her agent shall be
responsible for preventing violations of this paragraph and for
supervising the outdoor area at all times.
(j) Any necessary security for the premise
extension, including any security as a condition of the permit,
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.06(21)(5)(k)
38
shall be the sole responsibility of the licensee.
(k) The licensee shall maintain adequate liability
insurance for the premise extension area and proof of such
insurance shall be furnished to the Village before a permit is
issued.
(l) The licensee is responsible for all clean-up and
removal of debris and rubbish from the premise extension and any
adjoining area which has suffered a spillover of debris and
rubbish.
(6) Time Period. The date and hours during which a
premise extension permit shall be valid will be determined by
the Village Board. [Ord. 555 06/05]
(22) ABANDONMENT OR NONUSE. If a license or permit issued
under this chapter is not used within one hundred eighty (180)
days after its issuance, or its usage is discontinued for a
period of one hundred eighty (180) days or more, such nonuse
shall be grounds for denial, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal
of the license or permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the laws of the State of
Wisconsin. Except with respect to operators licenses and Class
“B” picnic or special events licenses, a license or permit is
not “used” under this subsection where the applicant is not
selling alcohol beverages at retail or wholesale on a regular
basis at or from a licensed premises which is open for such
sales on a regular and routine basis. [Ord. 643 5/15]
(25) PENALTY. In addition to the penalties provided in
Sec. 25.04 of this Municipal Code, any person, partnership or
corporation who violates any of the provisions of Sec. 12.06
shall be subject to liquor license suspension, revocation or
non-renewal as provided in Sec. 12.06 (17). A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation
occurs or continues to occur. [Ord. 445]
12.08 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS. (1)
DEFINITIONS. Whenever used in this section, unless a different
meaning appears from the context:
(a) "Mobile Home" is that which is, or as originally
constructed, was designed to be transported by any motor vehicle
upon a public highway and designed, equipped and used primarily
for sleeping, eating and living quarters, or is intended to be
so used; and includes any additions, attachments, annexes,
foundations and appurtenances; and includes any double-wide or
modular unit. [Ord. 267]
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.08(1)(b)
39
(b) "Unit" means a mobile home unit.
(c) "Nondependent unit" means a mobile home that has
bath or shower and toilet facilities.
(d) "Mobile home park" means any park, court, camp,
site, plot, parcel, or tract of land designed, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of supplying a location or
accommodations for more than 2 mobile homes and shall include
all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment
thereof whether or not a change is made for the use of the
mobile home park and its facilities. "Mobile home park" shall
not include automobile or mobile home sales lots on which
unoccupied mobile homes are parked for purposes of inspection
and sale.
(e) "Space" means a plot of ground in a mobile home
park of not less than 4,000 square feet of space, with a minimum
width of 42 feet, designed for the location of only one
automobile and/or one mobile home.
(f) "Person" includes an individual, partnership,
firm, company, corporation, whether tenant, owner, lessee,
licensee or their agent, heir, or assign.
(g) "Licensee" means any person licensed to operate
and maintain a mobile home park under this section.
(h) "Park" means mobile home park.
(2) LOCATION OUTSIDE PARKS. (a) Prohibited. Except as
provided in this section, no person shall park any mobile home
on any street, alley, or highway, or other public place, or on
any tract of land owned by any person, within the village,
except in a licensed mobile home park, or except as provided in
the Village of Ellsworth Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Code with
respect to parking unoccupied mobile homes in accessory garage
buildings or rear yards. [Ord. 267]
(b) Emergency or Temporary Stopping. Emergency or
temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street, alley
or highway for not longer than one hour subject to any other and
further prohibitions, regulations, limitations imposed by the
traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street,
alley or highway.
(c) Special Permit for Location Outside of Mobile
Home Park. (1) The Village Board may issue special written
permits allowing the location of a mobile home outside of a
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.08(2)(c)(1)(a)
40
mobile home park. Any permit so issued shall particularly
describe the premises upon which the mobile home may be parked.
The person to whom such permit is granted shall be subject to
the parking permit fee provided in this section. The permit
shall be granted only upon the written consent of the owner,
legal agent of the owner or the lessee of the location for which
the permit is issued, and only after application having first
been made by the mobile home owner or occupant. Any such permit
so issued shall be for a period not to exceed one year, and
shall be issued only after a public hearing, notice of said
hearing having been first published at least once in the
official Village newspaper prior to such hearing. A permit
granted hereunder may be renewed only once by any owner or
occupant of a mobile home. No permit allowing the location of a
mobile home on any particular premises may be renewed more than
once, regardless whether occupancy or ownership of the premises
or mobile home has changed. Not more than two (2) mobile homes
shall be granted permits to locate on any one premises outside a
mobile home park. [Ord. 247]
(a) Notwithstanding the language in the
publicly owned lands or tax exempt
lands, where the principal use is
associated with a purpose other use of
same as a dwelling or residence, upon
approval by the Village Board. A permit
so issued shall be for an initial term of
one year. Thereafter, said permit may be
renewed for additional five year periods
upon application to the Village Board.
Such permits may be renewed more than
once. [Ord. 365]
(2) Application for the permit shall be made to
the Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall be
accompanied by an inspection fee as established
from time to time by resolution of the Village
Board and shall state the name and permanent
address of the occupants of the mobile home, the
license number of their mobile home and towing
vehicle, place of last stay, intended purpose of
stay at requested location, whether the
occupants are nonresident tourists, whether any
occupant is employed in this state, the location
of the premises, the name of the owner and the
occupant of any dwelling on the premises and the
owner's and/or occupant's permission to locate;
a statement of the nature and location of
sanitary facilities and the permission of the
occupant of the dwelling house for their use;
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.08(2)(c)(3)
41
and a statement that all wastes from mobile home
occupancy will be disposed of in a sanitary
manner. Application for location on a vacant
lot or parcel of land shall be accompanied by a
statement of the nature and location of sanitary
facilities, which must include a safe water
supply and toilet within 200 feet of the
proposed location of the mobile home; and a
statement of permission from the owner for their
use. [Ord. 475]
(3) All occupants of any mobile home located
outside of a mobile home park shall register
with the Village Clerk-Treasurer as provided in
sub. (9). All provisions of this section
governing the location, use and sanitation of
mobile homes located in a licensed mobile home
park shall so far as they are applicable, apply
to any mobile home located outside of such
mobile home park. [Ord. 160]
(d) Certain Lands Annexed, Exception. (1) With respect
to those premises described in subparagraph (2) herein, mobile
homes may be located on same without the special permit required
by Sec. 12.08 (2)(c)(1) and (2). Mobile homes can be replaced,
moved or altered on said premises.
(2) The premises to which this permit exception
applies are: Lots 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 of Block 1,
Campbell's Addition to the Town of Ellsworth;
Block 3 and Block 4, Campbell's Addition to the
Town of Ellsworth; also, those premises
described in Volume 82 of records, page 137, as
doc. no. 252355, Pierce County Register of
Deeds; also one mobile home may be located upon
that part of the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) of
the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) of Section 20,
Township 26 North, Range 17 West, commencing
49.5 feet South of the Northwest corner of said
forty, thence North 87 degrees East 490 feet to
a point due South 49.5 feet from the Southwest
corner of Block 4, Campbell's Addition to the
Village of Ellsworth, thence South 180 feet to
the point of beginning, thence North 87 degrees
East 220 feet, thence South 180 feet, thence
South 87 degrees West 220 feet,thence North 180
feet to the point of beginning; also Lot 2 of
that Certified Survey Map recorded in Vol. 2 of
C.S.M., pg. 66, being a part of the Northeast
Quarter (NE¼) of the Northeast Quarter (NE¼)
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.08(2)(e)
42
of Section Twenty (20), Township Twenty Six
(26) North, Range Seventeen (17) West. [Ord. 308,
390, 438, 472]
(e) Where a mobile home is already located outside
of a mobile home park as of December 5, 1983, then same may be
replaced with a mobile home which otherwise complies with the
Zoning Ordinance, including lot size and set-back requirements
and further provided express permission is so granted by the
Village Board. The requirements of this Subsection shall not
apply to those lots described in Sec. 12.08 (2)(d)(2). [Ord.
377]
(3) MOBILE HOME PARK; LICENSE, APPLICATION AND
ISSUANCE.
(a) No person shall establish, operate, or
maintain, or permit to be established, operated, or
maintained upon any property owned, leased, or controlled
by him, a mobile home park within the Village without having
first secured a license for each such park from the Village
Board pursuant to this section. Such license shall expire
one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed under
the provisions of this section for additional periods of one
year.
(b) The application for such license or the renewal
thereof shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer and
shall be accompanied by a fee as is established from time to
time by resolution of the Village Board for each 50 spaces or
fraction thereof within the mobile park. The application shall
be accompanied by a bond which shall guarantee the collection by
the licensee of the monthly parking permit fee and the payment
by the licensee of any fine or forfeiture including legal costs
imposed upon or levied against said licensee for a violation of
the ordinances of the Village and shall also be for the use and
benefit and may be prosecuted and recovery had thereon by any
person who may be injured or damaged by reason of the license
violating the provisions of this section. A fee of $10.00 shall
be paid for each transfer of a license. [Ord.408; Ord. 475]
(c) The application for a license or a renewal
thereof shall be made on forms furnished by the Village Clerk-
Treasurer and shall include the name and address of the owner in
fee of the tract (if the fee is vested in some person other than
the applicant, a duly verified statement by that person, that
the applicant is authorized by him to construct or maintain the
mobile home park and make the application), and such a legal
description of the premises, upon which the mobile home park is
or will be located as will readily identify and definitely
locate the premises. The application shall be accompanied by
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.08(4)
43
two copies of the park plan showing the following, either
existing or as proposed: 1. The extent and area used for park
purposes; 2. Roadways and driveways; 3. Location of units for
mobile homes; 4. Location and number of sanitary conveniences,
if any, including toilets, washrooms, laundries and utility
rooms to be used by occupants of units; 5. Method and plan of
sewage disposal; 6. Method and plan of garbage removal; 7. Plan
for water supply; 8. Plan for electrical lighting of units; 9.
Location of all sewer and water pipes and connections.
(4) INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT. No mobile home park
license (or permit for location outside of a licensed mobile
home park) shall be issued until the Village Clerk-Treasurer
shall notify the Chief of Police, Health Officer, Chief of the
Fire Department, and Building Inspector or their authorized
agents of such application, and these officials shall inspect or
cause to be inspected each application and the premises to
determine whether the applicant and the premises on which mobile
homes will be located comply with the regulation, ordinances,
and laws applicable thereto. These officials shall furnish to
the Village Board in writing the information derived from such
investigation, and a statement as to whether the applicant and
the premises meet the requirements of the department for whom
the officer is certifying. No license shall be renewed without
a re-inspection of the premises. For the purpose of making
inspections and securing enforcement such officials or their
authorized agents may enter on any premises on which a mobile
home is located, or about to be located, to inspect the same and
all accommodations connected therewith, at any reasonable time.
(5) LOCATION OF MOBILE HOME PARK. (a) No mobile home or
mobile home park shall be located in any fire district.
(b) No occupied mobile home within the Village shall
be located between the recognized set-back line for the zoning
district in which such mobile home is located and the street or
highway nor less than 10 feet from any building or other mobile
home or from the boundary line of the premises on which located,
and shall be at least 20 feet back from the curb or curb line of
the street on which located.
(6) MOBILE HOME PARK PLAN. (a) Every mobile home or
mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained area, and
the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the
accumulation of storm or other waters. No mobile home or mobile
home park shall be located in any area that is situated so that
the drainage from any barnyard, outdoor toilet, or other source
of filth can be deposited in its location.
(b) Mobile home spaces shall be clearly defined
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.08(6)(c)
44
and shall consist of a minimum of 4,000 square feet and a width
of not less than 42 feet. The park shall be so arranged that
all spaces shall face or abut on a driveway of not less than 30
feet in width, giving easy access from all units to a public
street. Such driveway shall be graveled or paved and maintained
in good condition, having natural drainage, be well lighted at
night, and shall not be obstructed.
(c) The park shall be so laid out that no dependent
unit shall be located farther than 200 feet from the toilets and
service buildings provided for herein, and walkways to such
buildings shall be graveled or paved and well lighted at night.
(d) Every mobile home space shall be furnished with
an electric service outlet. Such outlet shall be equipped with
an externally operated switch or fuse of not less than 30
amperes capacity, and a heavy duty outlet receptacle, electrical
outlets shall be weatherproof and all power lines within the
park shall be underground.
(e) No mobile home unit shall be parked in a park
outside the designated space.
(f) No mobile home park shall contain mobile homes
which do not have bathroom or shower, and toilet facilities.
(7) WATER SUPPLY. (a) An adequate supply of pure
water, furnished through a pipe distribution system connected
directly with the public water main, shall be furnished for
drinking and domestic purposes in all parks.
(b) Individual water service connections shall be so
constructed that they will not be damaged by the parking of such
units. Such system shall be adequate to provide 20 pounds
pressure per square inch and capable of furnishing a minimum of
125 gallons per day per space.
(c) No common drinking vessels shall be permitted,
nor shall any drinking water faucets be placed in any toilet
room.
(8) WASTE AND GARBAGE DISPOSAL. (a) All liquid waste
from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets, lavatories, etc.
shall be discharged into a sewer system extended from and
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.08(8)(b)
45
connected with the public sewer system.
(b) Every space shall be provided with sewer
connections which shall comply with the state plumbing code.
The sewer connection shall be provided with suitable fittings so
that watertight connection can be made. Such connections shall
be so constructed so that they can be closed when not connected
and trapped in such a manner as to be maintained in an odor-free
condition.
(c) All sanitary facilities in any unit which are
not connected with a public sewer system by approved pipe
connections shall be sealed, and their use is unlawful.
(d) Each faucet shall be equipped with facilities
for drainage of waste and excess water.
(e) Every mobile home unit shall be provided with a
substantial fly-tight, water-tight metal garbage depository from
which the contents shall be removed and disposed of in a
sanitary manner by the park custodian at least twice weekly
between May 1 and October 15, and otherwise weekly.
(9) MANAGEMENT. (a) In every mobile home park there
shall be located in the office of the attendant or person in
charge of such mobile home park a copy of the mobile home park
license and of this section shall be posted therein and the
mobile home park register shall at all times be kept in said
office.
(b) The attendant or person in charge, together with
the licensee shall:
(1) Keep a register of all guests, to be open
at all times to inspection by state and federal
officers and the mobile home committee, which
shall show for all guests:
(a) Names and addresses.
(b) Number of children school age.
(c) State of legal residence.
(d) Dates of entrance and departure.
(e) License numbers of all mobile homes
and towing or other vehicles.
(2) Maintain the park in a clean, orderly and
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.08(9)(b)(3)
46
sanitary condition at all times.
(3) Insure that the provisions of this section
are complied with and enforced and report
promptly to the proper authorities any
violations of this section or any other
violations of law which may come to his
attention.
(4) Report to the Health Officer all cases of
persons or animals affected or suspected of
being affected with any communicable diseases.
(5) Maintain in convenient places, approved by
the Fire Chief, hand fire extinguishers in the
ratio of one to each 8 units.
(6) Collect the monthly parking permit fee
provided for in sub. (11). A book shall be kept
showing the names of the persons paying such
charges and the amount paid.
(7) Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the
premises.
(10) APPLICABILITY OF PLUMBING, ELECTRICAL AND BUILDING
ORDINANCES. All plumbing, electrical, building, and other work
on or at any park licensed under this section shall be in
accordance with the ordinances of the Village and the
requirements of the State plumbing, electrical, and building
codes and the regulations of the State Department of Health.
Licenses and permits granted under this section grant no right
to erect or repair any structure, to do any plumbing work, or to
do any electrical work.
(11) MONTHLY PARKING FEE. (a) There is imposed on each
owner of a nonexempt, occupied mobile home in the Village a
monthly parking permit fee determined in accordance with Sec.
66.0435(3), Wis. Stats., which is hereby adopted by reference
and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein. The
licensee shall collect the proper amount from each mobile
homeowner. Licensees and owners of mobile homes permitted to be
located on land outside a mobile home park shall pay to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer such parking permit fees on or before
the 10th of the month following the month for which such fees
are due in accordance with this section and such regulations as
the Clerk-Treasurer may reasonably promulgate. [Ord. 523 8/02]
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.08(11)(b)
47
(b) Licensees of mobile home parks and owners of
land on which are parked any occupied, nonexempt mobile homes
shall furnish information to the Village Clerk-Treasurer and the
Village Assessor on such homes added to their park or land
within 5 days after arrival of such home on forms furnished by
the Village Clerk-Treasurer in accordance with Sec. 66.0435
(3)(c) and (e), Wis. Stats. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(c) Owners of nonexempt, occupied mobile homes, upon
receipt of notice from the Village Clerk-Treasurer of their
liability for the monthly parking permit fee, shall remit to the
Village clerk-Treasurer a cash deposit in an amount as is
established from time to time by resolution of the Village Board
to guarantee payment of such fees when due to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer. The licensee of a mobile home park shall collect
such cash deposits from each occupied, nonexempt mobile home
therein and remit such deposits to the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
Upon receipt of a notice from the owner or licensee that the
nonexempt, occupied mobile home has been or is about to be
removed from the Village, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall
apply such cash deposit to reduce any monthly parking permit
fees for which such owner is liable and refund the balance, if
any to such owner. [Ord. 475]
(12) REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION. The Village Board may
revoke any license or permit issued pursuant to this section in
accordance with Sec. 66.0435, Wis. Stats. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(13) LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF MOBILE HOMES.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the number
of mobile homes in the Village shall be limited to 20% of the
number of single family or two family homes assessable as real
estate at the end of the preceding calendar year. [Ord. 267, 292]
(14) PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF ORDINANCE. Any person who
shall violate any provision of this section upon conviction
thereof be subject to a penalty as provided in Sec. 25.04 of
this Code, provided the forfeiture for violation of sub.(11)(c)
shall not exceed $25.00. Each day of violation shall constitute
a separate offense. [Ord. 186]
12.10 DIRECT SELLERS. (1) Registration Required. It
shall be unlawful for any direct seller to engage in direct
sales within the Village of Ellsworth without being registered
for that purpose as provided herein.
(2) Definitions. In this ordinance:
(a) "Direct seller" means any individual who, for
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.10(2)(b)
48
him/herself, or for a partnership, association or corporation,
sells goods, or takes sales orders for the later delivery of
goods, at any location other than the permanent business place
or residence of said individual, partnership, association or
corporation, and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers,
solicitors and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes
donations required by the direct seller for the retention of
goods by a donor or prospective customer.
(b) "Permanent merchant" means a direct seller who,
for at least one year prior to the consideration of the
application of this ordinance to said merchant, a) has
continuously operated an established place of business in this
village, or b) has continuously resided in this village, and
now does business from his/her residence.
(c) "Goods" shall include personal property of any
kind, and shall include goods provided incidental to services
offered or sold.
(d) "Charitable organization" shall include any
benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary person,
partnership, association or corporation, or one purporting to be
such.
(e) "Clerk" shall mean the Village Clerk.
(3) Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from all
provisions of this ordinance:
(a) Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy
products or bakery goods to regular customers on established
routes;
(b) Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers
in such goods;
(c) Any person selling agricultural products which
such person has grown;
(d) Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who
takes orders away from the established place of business for
goods regularly offered for sale by such merchant within this
county and who delivers such goods in their regular course of
business;
(e) Any person who has an established place of
business where the goods being sold are offered for sale on a
regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contact
with, and specifically requested a home visit by, said person;
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.10(3)(f)
49
(f) Any person who has had, or one who represents a
company which has had, a prior business transaction, such as a
prior sale of credit arrangement, with the prospective customer;
(g) Any person selling or offering for sale a
service unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of goods;
(h) Any person holding a sale required by statute or
by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide
auction sale pursuant to law;
(i) Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable
organization who engages in direct sales for or on behalf of
said organization, provided that there is submitted to the clerk
proof that such charitable organization is registered under Sec.
440.41, Stats., or which is exempt from that statute's
registration requirements, shall be required to register under
this ordinance;
(j) Any person who claims to be a permanent
merchant, but against whom complaint has been made to the clerk
that such person is a transient merchant; provided that there is
submitted to the clerk, proof that such person has leased for at
least one year, or purchased, the premises from which he/she is
conducting business, or proof that such person has conducted
such business in this village for at least one year prior to the
date complaint was made.
(4) Registration. (a) Applicants for registration must
complete and return to the clerk a registration form furnished
by the clerk, which shall require the following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone
number, and temporary address, if any:
(2) Age, height, weight, color of hair and
eyes;
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the
person, firm, association or corporation that
the direct seller represents or is employed by,
or whose merchandise is being sold;
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from
which business will be conducted, if any;
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a
brief description of the goods offered, and any
services offered;
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.10(4)(a)(6)
50
(6) Proposed method of delivery of goods, if
applicable;
(7) Make, model and license number of any
vehicle to be used by applicant in the conduct
of his/her business;
(8) Last cities, villages, town, not to exceed
three, where applicant conducted similar
business;
(9) Place where applicant can be contacted for
at least seven days after leaving this village;
(10) Statement as to whether applicant has been
convicted of any crime or ordinance violation
related to applicant's transient merchant
business within the last five years, the nature
of the offense and the place of conviction.
(b) Applicants shall present to the clerk for
examination:
(1) A driver's license or some proof of
identity as may be reasonably required;
(2) A state certificate of examination and
approval from the sealer of weights and measures
where applicant's business requires use of
weighing and measuring devices approved by state
authorities;
(3) A certificate from a State or Local Health
Officer, or the Pierce County Department of
Public Health where applicant's business
involves the handling of food or clothing and is
required to be certified under state law; such
certificate to state that applicant is
apparently free from any contagious or
infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days
prior to the date the application for license is
made. [Ord. 616 08/2011]
(c) At the time the registration is returned, a fee
as is established from time to time by resolution of the Village
Board per person per month shall be paid to the clerk to cover
the cost of processing said registration which shall be valid
for a period of one month. The applicant shall sign a statement
appointing the clerk his/her agent to accept service of process
in any civil
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.10(5)(a)
51
action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or
service performed by the applicant in connection with the direct
sales activities of the applicant, in the event the applicant
cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally. Upon
payment of said fee and the signing of said statement, the clerk
shall register the applicant as a direct seller and date the
entry. Said registration shall be valid for a period of one
month from the date of entry. [Ord. 367., Ord. 475 06/1998, Ord. 616
08/2011, Ord 621 05/2012]
(5) Investigation. (a) Upon receipt of each
application, the clerk shall refer it immediately to the Chief
of Police who shall make and complete an investigation of the
statements made in such registration.
(b) The clerk shall refuse to register the applicant
if it is determined, pursuant to the investigation above, that:
application contains any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement; complaints of a material nature have been
received against the applicant by authorities in the last
cities, villages and towns, not exceeding three, in which the
applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was
convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation
within the last five years, the nature of which is directly
related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling.
[Ord. 621 05/2012]
(6) Appeal. Any person denied registration may appeal
the denial through the appeal procedure provided by ordinance
or resolution of the Village Board, or if none has been adopted,
under the provisions of Secs. 68.07 through 68.16, Wis. Stats.,
as amended.
(7) Regulation of Direct Sellers. (a) Prohibited
Practices.
(1) A direct seller shall be prohibited from:
calling at any dwelling or other place between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by
appointment; calling at any dwelling or other
place where a sign is displayed bearing the
words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of
similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any
dwelling place; or remaining on any premises
after being asked to leave by the owner,
occupant or other person having authority over
such premises.
(2) A direct seller shall not misrepresent or
make false, deceptive or misleading
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.10(7)(a)(3)
52
statements concerning the quality, quantity or
character of any goods offered for sale, the
purpose of his/ ion he/she represents. A
charitable organization direct seller shall
specifically disclose what portion of the sale
price of goods being offered will actually be
used for the purpose for which the organization
is soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed
as a percentage of the sale price of the goods.
(3) No direct seller shall impede the free use
of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and
vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles,
all traffic and parking regulations shall be
observed.
(4) No direct seller shall make any loud noises
or use any sound amplifying device to attract
customers if the noise produced is capable of
being plainly heard outside a one-hundred foot
radius of the source.
(5) No direct seller shall allow rubbish or
litter to accumulate in or around the area in
which he/she is conducting business.
(b) Disclosure Requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any
other statement is made to a prospective
customer, a direct seller shall expressly
disclose his/her name, the name or the company
or organization he/she is affiliated with, if
any, and the identity of goods or services
he/she offers to sell.
(2) If any sale of goods is made by a direct
seller, or any sales order for the later
delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the
buyer shall have the right to cancel said
transaction if it involves the extension of
credit or is a cash transaction of more than
$25.00, in accordance with the procedure as set
forth in Sec. 423.203, Stats.; the seller shall
give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed
notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform
to the requirements of Secs. 423.203(1)(a)(b)
and (c), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats.
(3) If the direct seller takes a sales order
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.10(7)(c)
53
for the later delivery of goods, he/she shall,
at the time the order is taken, provide the
buyer with a written statement containing the
terms of the agreement, the amount paid in
advance whether full, partial or no advance
payment is made, the name, address and telephone
number of the seller, the delivery or
performance date and whether a guarantee or
warranty is provided and, if so, the terms
thereof.
(c) The direct seller shall carry upon his or her
person the permit required under this ordinance when he or she
is engaged in direct sales governed by this ordinance. [Ord.
367]
(8) Records. The Chief of Police shall report to the
clerk all convictions for violation of the ordinance and the
clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the
registrant convicted.
(9) Revocation of Registration. (a) Registration may be
revoked by the Village Board after notice and hearing, if the
registrant made any material omission or materially inaccurate
statement in the application for registration, made any
fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or
representation in the course of engaging in direct sales,
violated any provision of this ordinance or was convicted of any
crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly
related to the registrant's fitness to engage in direct selling.
(b) Written notice of the hearing shall be served
personally on the registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time
set for the hearing; such notice shall contain the time and
place of hearing and a statement of the acts upon which the
hearing will be based.
(10) Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any
provisions of this ordinance shall forfeit not less than twentyfive
dollars nor more than one-hundred dollars for each
violation plus costs of prosecution. Each violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
(11) Severance Clause. The provisions of this ordinance
are declared to be severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for any reason be held
to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this ordinance; they shall remain in
effect, it being the legislative intent
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.11(1)
54
that this ordinance shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity
of any part. [Ord.225, 317]
12.11 STORAGE TANKS. (1) The Village of Ellsworth
Volunteer Fire Department, as local Program Operators under
Chpt. COMM 10, Wis. Adm. Code, may conduct safety inspections of
petroleum or chemical storage tanks located within the Village
of Ellsworth. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(2) Any removal of a chemical or petroleum storage tank
in the Village of Ellsworth shall be done pursuant to permit
issued by the Local Program Operator. Application shall be on
form available through the Ellsworth Volunteer Fire Department.
(3) The Local Program Operator shall be paid a permit fee
for the following tank removals as is established from time to
time by resolution of the Village Board:
Up to 1,100 gallon capacity
1,101 to 4,000 gallon capacity
4.001 and greater gallon [Ord. 475]
(a) The fee shall be doubled where the removal is
initiated prior to issuance of a permit. [Ord. 432, 443]
12.12 PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION, WATER AND SEWER
CONNECTION PERMITS, STREET OPENING PERMITS. (1) PERMIT
REQUIRED. (a) A public work construction permit shall be
required for any of the following activities on public property:
sidewalk construction, removal or replacement; curb and gutter
construction, removal or replacement (including curb cuts for
driveway); street or alley paving; street lighting; storm
sewers; bridges and culverts; pedestrian ways; erosion control;
street grading, paving or other modification of a street or
alley; storm drainage improvements on public property, or on
private property where same have an impact on public property;
earth moving, landscaping and other disturbance of the soil as
may or will result in increased surface or subsurface drainage
or runoff from the site (whether on public or private property),
or as may or will alter preexisting surface or subsurface
drainage or runoff patterns from the site to public or private
property; and all other improvements to public property.
(b) Such permits shall be required with respect to
all construction including residential construction. [Ord. 483]
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.12(1)(c)
55
(c) A permit shall be required for all of the
activities listed above except for public improvement projects
undertaken by the Village or by developers in an approved
subdivision as part of the development agreement or approved
development plan.
(2) WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION PERMITS. (a) Purpose.
The purpose of water and sewer connection permits are to ensure
that connections to public utilities are made in accordance with
all applicable rules and regulations and that the costs incurred
by the Village in these activities are reimbursed in full.
(b) Permit Required. All new connections to the
public water and sewer systems, including mains and laterals,
shall require a permit. Replacement or changes to services
requested by property owners where the Village performs any
services or provides materials shall also require a permit,
however the permit fee may be waived on these occasions.
(3) STREET OPENING PERMIT. (a) Purpose. The purpose of
the street opening permit is to protect the integrity of public
streets by ensuring the openings are kept to a minimum, that the
street is restored in a proper manner and that costs incurred by
the Village opening the street and the cost of the street
restoration, are paid for by the permittee. [Ord. 443]
(b) Permit Required. A street opening permit shall
be required of all openings into paved public rights of way.
Openings in boulevards, graveled street or alleys or other
unpaved surfaces shall not require a permit.
(c) Specification for Street Opening in the Village
of Ellsworth. If the street to be opened has an asphalt or
concrete surface, the edge of the opening shall be cut with a
saw, jack hammer or any other tool or machine that will produce
a clean straight edge. Size at the opening shall be estimated
according to the type of material and depth of the ditch. Back
fill shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the Public Works
Director. Back fill surface of the opening shall be left in
condition satisfactory to the Public Works Director or direction
of the public works.
(4) FEES. The application for a public works
construction permit shall be obtained from the Village Clerk. A
fee as is established from time to time by resolution of the
Village Board is required for the following permits:
Public Works Construction Permit (excluding street
opening permit, water connection permit and sewer
connection permit) No Charge
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.12(5)(a)
56
Street Opening Permit
Water Connection Permit
Sewer Connection Permit
With respect to water connection and sewer connection permits,
there shall be a further and additional charge for each
multifamily unit over and above the initial unit. [Ord. 475]
(5) PERFORMANCE BOND. (a) Any applicant for permit
under this Section shall provide the Village a performance bond,
letter of credit or other surety, as deemed satisfactory by the
Village, as required under Sec. 45.03 (1)(b) and said bond shall
be released in the manner provided in said Sec. 45.03 (1).
(b) The requirement of a performance bond hereunder
shall not apply to single family or two family (duplex, twin
home) units except where the cost of any activity regulated
under this Section is estimated by the Public Works Director to
exceed that sum from time to time established by the Village
Board.
(6) APPLICATION. An applicant shall complete a Public
Works Construction Application and return same to the Village
with a site plan, of the work involved and the appropriate fee.
Incomplete applications will not be accepted or processed.
(7) APPROVAL. The application, along with a service
order (a separate service order for water and sewer) shall be
provided to the Director of Public Works for review and
approval, and he may approve, disapprove or approve same with
conditions. If approved the Director of Public Works shall issue
the permit card (both water and sewer may be included on the
same card) which shall be displayed on site during the
construction activities. [Ord. 387, 443, 483, Ord. 610 03/2011]
12.13 TAXICABS AND DRIVERS. (1) DEFINITION. A
"taxicab" is a motor vehicle for which public patronage is
solicited, excepting such vehicles as operate on established
routes and are regulated by the State Public Service Commission,
are rented to be driven by the person so renting or his agent,
or are operated solely as funeral cars.
(2) LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall transport
passengers for hire within the Village nor shall any person
solicit passengers to be transported for hire without first
having obtained a license therefore as herein provided. In the
interest of public convenience, the general prosperity, public
health and safety, no license shall be issued unless
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.13(3)
57
the applicant agrees in writing at the time of submission of the
application to provide full service. "Full service" is
transport available to and returning from destinations within
the Village and from destinations outside the corporate limits
to which the licensee has first transported or agreed to
transport the passenger.
(3) APPLICATION. Application for a license to convey
passengers for hire, commonly known as taxi service, shall be
made in writing to the Village Clerk on blanks furnished by the
Clerk and shall give the address from which the business is to
be conducted and shall be signed by the owner of the business.
If the owner is a partnership, the form shall state the name of
the company, the names and addresses of the partners and the
application shall be signed by one of the partners. If the
owner is a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal
officers must be given and the application shall be signed by
one of the duly elected officers of the corporation. The
application must also state the make, model and year of
manufacture, the engine number, factory number and capacity for
passengers and the State certificate of title number and license
number for the current year of each motor vehicle to be used in
such business. No license shall be issued until the applicant
presents a policy or certificate of liability insurance herein
required to the Village Clerk.
(4) FEES. Fees for a taxicab license shall be in an
amount as is established from time to time by resolution of the
Village Board. The Board may establish a lesser fee for each
additional vehicle operated by the same business. [Ord. 475]
(5) LICENSES NOT TRANSFERABLE. No license issued under
this section shall be transferable from the owner described in
the original license to another person.
(6) ISSUANCE. Upon filing with the Village Clerk proof
of payment of all fees, the policies or certificates of
insurance and a certificate of inspection as provided herein,
the Clerk shall issue a license for the operation of such
vehicle or vehicles and each license granted shall be given a
number and shall give the number and an adequate description of
the taxicab licensed thereunder and such license shall be
carried in the taxicab for which it has been issued.
(7) INSPECTION. No license shall be issued for any
vehicle until it has been inspected and found in compliance with
the Motor Vehicle Equipment Code Chpt. 347, Wis. Stats.; clean;
of good appearance; and well painted. The applicant shall
present to the Clerk a certificate signed by a competent and
experienced mechanic showing the taxicab is
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.13(8)(a)
58
in good mechanical condition, it is safe for transportation of
passengers and it is in neat and clean condition. Such similar
certificate may be required from time to time during the license
period. In lieu of such certificate the Clerk may accept the
report of the Chief of Police relative thereof.
(8) INSURANCE. (a) Required. No license shall be
issued for any vehicle under this section until the applicant
deposits a policy or certificate of liability insurance covering
each vehicle for which a license is sought with the Village
Clerk. Such policy of insurance shall be issued by an insurance
company licensed to do business in the State and
shall contain the factory number, makers number and the number
of the State license for each vehicle covered by the policy
(which license number when changed by the issuance of a new
State license shall be indicated by a rider thereto), and such
policy shall indemnify the applicant in the amount of one
million dollars ($1,000,000) for bodily injury and property
damage. [Ord. 620 2/2012]
(b) Form Approval and Expiration Notice. The policy
shall contain a provision that the same may not be cancelled
before the expiration of its term except upon 30 days written
notice to the Village. Further, the licensee shall assure that
the insurance carrier provides the Village copies of all
insurance expiration and cancellation notices and copies of all
notification of reinstatement of insurance coverage.
(c) Automatic Revocation of License. The
cancellation or other termination of any insurance policy issued
in compliance with this section shall automatically revoke and
terminate all licenses issued for any vehicle covered by such
policy unless another policy complying with this section is
provided and in effect at the time of such cancellation or
termination.
(d) Responsibility of Licensee and Surety. In any
event, the licensee and the surety will be held responsible for
and shall save the Village, its employees and agents harmless
from all liability for injury and damages occasioned by the taxi
operation, or which may result therefrom, or which may result in
any way from the negligence or carelessness of the licensee, his
agents, employees or workers; or by reason of obstacles,
encountered in the service delivery; and they shall indemnify
the Village, its employees and agents for and save it harmless
from all claims and liabilities, actions and causes of action,
and liens for materials furnished or labor performed in service
delivery, and from all costs, charges and expenses incurred in
defending such suits or actions, and from and against all claims
and liabilities for injury or damages to persons or property
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.13(8)(e)
59
emanating from defective or careless work methods or accidents.
(e) Workers Compensation Insurance. Workers
compensation coverage shall be provided for all employees of the
licensee, and proof thereof filed with the Village Clerk.
(9) TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED. Every person
driving a taxicab must be licensed as such and each applicant
for a driver's license shall fulfill the following requirements:
(a) Be at least 17 years old.
(b) Complete the application form provided by the
Village Clerk supplying all information required.
(c) Fees for a taxi cab driver's license shall be in
an amount as is established from time to time by resolution of
the Village Board. [Ord. 621 05/2012]
(10) RATES. Each applicant shall file with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer, before a taxicab license is issued or renewed,
a schedule of proposed maximum rates to be charged by him during
the licensed period for which the application is made. The
schedule of proposed maximum rates, or a compromise schedule
thereof, shall be approved by the Village Board before granting
the license. Such schedule shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the taxicab in full view of passengers riding therein.
Nothing herein shall prevent a taxicab licensee from petitioning
the Village Board for review of such rates during the licensed
period, and the Village Board may likewise consider such
petition and make new rates effective at any time. No taxicab
licensee shall charge rates in excess of maximum rates approved
by the Village Board.
(11) REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSE. Any license
issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked where the
licensee's operator's license (driver's license) has been
suspended or revoked or where the licensee has been found guilty
of an offense relating to the operation of a motor vehicle.
[Ord. 453]
12.14 STREET USE PERMITS. (1) PURPOSE. The streets
in possession of the Village are primarily for the use of the
public in the ordinary way. The Village Board may grant a
permit for street use, subject to reasonable municipal
regulation and control. Therefore, this Section is enacted to
regulate and control the use of streets pursuant to a street use
permit to the end that the health, safety and general welfare of
the public and the good order of the Village can be protected
and maintained.
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.14(2)
60
(2) APPLICATION. A written application shall be
submitted no less than 60 (sixty) days prior to the event for
which a street use permit is sought. It shall be submitted by
the persons, groups or organizations desiring same, shall be
made on a form provided by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, and
shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. The
application shall set forth the following information regarding
the proposed street use;
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the
applicant or applicants.
(b) If the proposed street use is to be conducted
for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and
telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of
the authorizing responsible heads of such organization.
(c) The name, address and telephone number of the
person or persons who will be responsible for the proposed use
of the street during the period of such street use and/or
closure.
(d) The date and duration of time for which the
requested use of the street is proposed to occur.
(e) An accurate description of that portion of the
street proposed to be used.
(f) The approximate number of persons for whom use of
the proposed street area is requested or anticipated.
(g) The proposed use, described in detail, for which
the street use permit is requested.
(3) REPRESENTATIVE AT MEETING. The person or
representative of the group or organization making application
for a street use permit shall be present when the Village Board
gives consideration to granting of said street use permit to
provide any additional information which is reasonably necessary
to make a determination whether a permit should be granted.
(4) DENIAL OF STREET USE PERMIT. (a) An application for a
street use permit shall be denied if:
(1) The proposed street use is primarily for
private or commercial gain.
(2) The proposed street use would violate any
federal or state law or any ordinance of the
Village.
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.14(4)(a)(3)
61
(3) The proposed street use will substantially
hinder the movement of police, fire or emergency
vehicles, constituting a risk to persons or
property.
(4) The application for a street use permit does
not contain the information required above.
(5) The application requests a period for the
use of the street in excess of five days.
(6) The proposed use could equally be held in a
public park or other location.
(b) In addition to the above, the Village Board may
deny a permit for any other reason or reasons if it concludes
that the health, safety and general welfare of the public will
not adequately be protected and maintained if the permit is
granted.
(5) INSURANCE. The applicant for a street use permit will
be required to indemnify, defend and hold the Village and its
employees and agents harmless against all claims, liability,
loss, damage or expense incurred by the Village on account of
any injury to or death of any person or any damage to property
caused by or resulting from the activities for which the permit
is granted. As evidence of the applicant's ability to perform
the conditions of the permit, the applicant will be required to
furnish a certificate of comprehensive general liability
insurance with the Village of Ellsworth in an amount not less
than $1,000,000.00 (One Million Dollars), or such larger amount
as the Village may deem appropriate and necessary. The
applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond prior to
being granted the permit.
(6) TERMINATION OF STREET USE PERMIT. A street use permit
for an event in progress may be terminated by the Village
President (or his/her designee) or a law enforcement officer if
the health, safety and welfare of the public appear to be
endangered by activities generated as a result of the event or
the event is in violation of any of the conditions of the permit
or provisions of the Municipal Code of the Village of Ellsworth.
The Village President (or his/her designee) or a law enforcement
officer has the authority to revoke a permit or terminate an
event in progress if the event organizers fail to comply with
any of the regulations in the street use policy or conditions
stated in the permit. [Ord. 632 04/2013]
LICENSES AND PERMITS 12.50
62
12.50 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision
of this chapter or who shall fail to obtain a license or permit
as required hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in Sec. 25.04 of this Municipal Code, provided that the
forfeiture for violation of Sec. 12.08 (11)(b) shall be $10.00.
[Ord. 317, 443]
CHAPTER 13
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
13.01 Water and Sewer Combined
13.02 Water and Sewer Utility Rates
13.03 Unpaid Utility Charges
13.04 Water & Sewer Connection Charges
13.041 Cross Connection Control
13.042 Backflow Prevention
13.05 Extension Outside Village Limits Prohibited
13.06 Utility Rules and Regulations
13.07 Introduction of Fluorides
13.08 Connections to Sewer System; Excavations
13.09 Penalty
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 13.01
1
13.01 WATER AND SEWER COMBINED. The water works plant and
system and the sewage disposal plant and system of the Village
are combined into a single public utility pursuant to Sec.
66.077, Wis. Stats.
13.02 WATER AND SEWER UTILITY RATES. The rates for water
and sewer utility service of the combined water and sewer
utility of the Village of Ellsworth shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the Village Board. Water rates
shall be subject to approval of the Public Service Commission.
[Ord. 144, 153, 157, 486]
13.03 UNPAID UTILITY CHARGES. (1) All payments for water
and sewer service rentals shall be paid to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer. Payments shall be due on the first day of the second
month succeeding the end of the calendar quarter. Bills for
service shall be issued quarterly. Therefore, the due dates for
quarterly billings shall be May 1, August 1, November 1 and
February 1. [Ord. 168, 443, 471]
(2) If such water and sewer service rental is not paid by
the first day of the second month succeeding the end of the
calendar quarter in which payment becomes due, the Village may
refuse to furnish water or sewer service to the premises for
which such rental is due and unpaid. Owners or occupants of the
premises to which water or sewer service has been refused may
again receive water and sewer service by the payment of all
amounts due, such fee as is from time to time adopted by the
Village Board pursuant to resolution or authorized by the Public
Service Commission of Wisconsin pursuant to Commission order.
[Ord.559 10/05]
(3) On October 15th in each year, notice shall be given to
the owner or occupant of all lots or parcels or real estate to
which water or sewer service has been furnished prior to October
1 by the Village and payment for which is owing and in arrears
at the time of given such notice. Such notice shall be given by
the Clerk-Treasurer, shall be in writing and shall state the
amount of such arrears, including any penalty assessed pursuant
to the rules of such water-sewer utility; that unless the same
is paid by November 1 a penalty of 10% of the amount of such
arrears will be added thereto; and that unless such arrears,
with any such added penalty, shall be paid by November 15, the
same will be levied as a tax against the lot or parcel of real
estate to which water or sewer service was furnished and for
which payment is delinquent. Such notice may be served by
delivery to either such owner or occupant at the post office
address of such lot or parcel. Each such delinquent amount,
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 13.04
2
including such penalty, shall on November 16, become a lien upon
the lot or parcel of real estate to which water or sewer service
was furnished and payment for which is delinquent, and the
Clerk-Treasurer shall insert the same as a tax against such lot
or parcel. All proceedings in relation to the collection of
general property taxes and to there turn and sale of property
for delinquent taxes, as provided by Wisconsin statutes, shall
apply to said tax if the same is not paid within the time
required by law for payment of taxes upon real estate. [Ord. 98,
168]
13.04 WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES. (1) There
shall be charged to the owner of any property for initial
connection to the water utility system or sewer utility system a
charge for sewer hookup and for water hookup as is established
from time to time by resolution of the Village Board. These
connect charges shall apply to hookup to each residence or
structure, except accessory structures attached to or part of a
primary dwelling. Payment of such connect charges shall be made
prior to actual connection. Where any building is caused to be
connected under Section 11.07, this charge shall be assessed
against the property as a special tax. [Ord. 155; 475]
(2) The owner of the premises to which sewer or water
connection is made shall pay for all actual costs of same.
(3) There shall be charged to the owner of each residence
or building a disconnection and reconnection fee for water
service as is established from time to time by resolution of the
Village Board. [Ord. 342; 475]
13.041 CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL.
(1) Definition of Cross Connection. A cross connection is
defined as any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water
from the Village of Ellsworth's public water system, and the
other of which contains water from a private source, water of
unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals,
whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, with
the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential
between the two systems.
(2) Unprotected Cross Connection Prohibited. No person,
firm, or corporation may establish or maintain, or permit to be
established or maintained, any unprotected cross connection.
Cross connection shall be protected as required in ch. SPS 382,
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 13.041(3)
3
(3) Inspection. The water utility may inspect or arrange
for an inspection of, property served by the public water system
for cross connections. As an alternative, the water utility may
require a person, firm, or corporation who owns, leases or
occupies property to have their plumbing inspected, at their own
expense by a State of Wisconsin Certified Cross Connection
Inspector/Surveyor. The frequency of inspections shall be
established by the water utility in accordance with Wisconsin
Administrative Code. Any unprotected cross connections
indentified by the inspection shall be promptly corrected.
Failure to promptly correct an unprotected cross connection
shall be sufficient cause for the water utility to discontinue
water service to the property, as provided under sub (6) of this
Section.
(4) Right of Entry. Upon presentation of credentials, a
representative of the water utility shall have the right to
request entry, at any reasonable time, to a property served by
a connection to the public water system for the purpose of
inspecting the property for cross connections. Refusing entry
to such utility representative shall be sufficient cause for the
water utility to discontinue water service to the property, as
provided under sub (6) of this Section. If entry is refused , a
special inspection warrant under Wis. Stats. Sec. 66.0119, may
be obtained.
(5) Provision of Requested Information. The water utility
may request an owner, lessee, or occupant of property served by
a connection to the public water system to furnish the water
utility with pertinent information regarding the piping systems
on the property. Refusing to provide requested information
shall be sufficient cause for the water utility to discontinue
water service to the property, as provided under sub (6).
(6) Discontinuation of Water For Violation. The water
utility may discontinue water service to any property wherein
any unprotected connection in violation of this Section exists,
and take other precautionary measures deemed necessary to
eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
system. Water service may be discontinued, however, only after
reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under Chapter 68,
Wisconsin Statutes, except as provided in sub (6). Water
service to such property shall not be restored until the
unprotected cross connection has been eliminated.
(7) Emergency Discontinuance. If it is determined by the
water utility that an unprotected cross connection or emergency
endangers public health, safety, or welfare, and requires
immediate action, and if a written finding to that effect is
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 13.041(8)
4
filed with the Village Clerk and delivered to the customer's
premises, water service may be immediately discontinued. The
customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under Wis. Stats.
Chapter 68, within 10 days of such emergency discontinuance.
Water service to such property shall not be restored until the
unprotected cross connection has been eliminated.
(8) Penalty. Any well owner violating any provision of
this Section shall upon conviction be subject to forfeiture of
no less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 together with the
costs of prosecution. Each day of violation is a separate
offense. If any person fails to comply with this Section for
more than 30 days after receiving written notice of the
violation, the Village may cause the well abandonment to be
performed and the expense to be assessed as a special tax
against the property.[Ord. 628 11/12]
13.042 BACKFLOW PREVENTION. (1) All newly constructed
buildings, dwellings or other structures in the Village of
Ellsworth shall be and are required to have installed in the
plumbing/water system therein a backflow valve or backflow
preventer, same to be installed at or near the water meter
measuring the flow of water to the said premises. The valve or
preventer so used shall be in conformity with such regulations
as the Director of the Village utility shall provide, and shall
be approved by him.
(2) The installation of a backflow valve or backflow
preventer in new construction shall be a condition precedent to
connection to the Village water utility by the owner of the
subject premises.
(3) Any structure, building or dwelling hereafter
constructed without the backflow valve or backflow preventer
required under this section, or with respect to which the
backflow valve or backflow preventer has been removed, damaged
or altered so as to make same inoperable, shall be deemed in
violation of this section.
(4) The Village may undertake such inspections as it deems
appropriate, upon reasonable advance notice to the owner, of new
construction to determine whether compliance has been had with
this section.
(5) Any violation of this section shall require
discontinuance of the public utility water connection to the
subject premises. Where such disconnection is contemplated by
the Village, the owner of the premises shall be given 10 days
written notice stating that said public utility service shall be
discontinued unless compliance is had with this section before
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 13.042(6)
5
the expiration of said 10 day period.
(6) In addition to subsection 5, any person violating this
section shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Sec.
25.04. Each day a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate
violation of this section. [Ord. 284]
13.05 EXTENSION OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS PROHIBITED. (1)
No extensions of sewer mains or water mains by the Village shall
be made outside of the corporate limits of the Village. [Ord.
187, 325]
(2) No structure, dwelling, residence, or other use shall
be permitted to hook up or connect to Village water or sewer
mains or lines, if such structure, dwelling, residence or other
use is located outside the corporate limits of the Village;
except that, any present connections to the Village system
located outside the Village may remain where state regulations
so provide. [Ord. 325]
13.06 UTILITY RULES AND REGULATIONS. (1) All persons
receiving sewer service from the sewer utility or who may
hereafter make application therefore, shall be considered to
have agreed to be bound by the rules and regulations filed with
the State Public Service Commission or any other regulatory
agency, if any, and to all of the rules and provisions of this
Chapter and as are from time to time adopted by the Village
Board by ordinance or resolution [Ord. 147; 486]
(2) DEFINITIONS. (a) Sewage. Sewage is the water
carried waste created in and conducted away from residence,
industrial and commercial premises, public buildings and other
structures and premises, together with such surface or drain
water as may be included.
(b) Industrial Wastes. Industrial wastes are those
particular liquid or other wastes resulting from any process of
industry, manufacture, trade or business or the development of
any natural resource.
(c) Sewage System. Sewage system includes all
street laterals, main and intercepting sewers, and structures by
which sewage or industrial waste is collected, transported,
treated, or disposed of. This shall not include plumbing inside
or in connection with buildings served, or service sewers from a
building, to street lateral.
(3) APPLICATION FOR SERVICE. (a) Application for service
shall be made in writing on a form furnished by the sewer
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 13.06(3)(b)
6
utility. The application will include: 1. The name of the
property owner, 2. A legal description of the property to be
served, and 3. A list of the number and type of plumbing
fixtures to be connected.
(b) An application for disposal of industrial waste
shall include in addition to the above the following: 4.
estimated volume of waste, 5. Variation in rates of discharge,
6. Characteristics of waste, and 7. Strength of waste.
(c) The applicant for service agrees to install a
house or building sewer to the public sanitary sewer in
accordance with utility specifications. The size and kind of
pipe shall be subject to approval of the superintendent of the
sewer system, but no pipe of less than a 6 inch diameter shall
be used. The slope of such pipe shall not be less than 1/8 inch
per foot.
(4) UNIT OF SERVICE. (a) A unit of service shall consist
of any aggregation of space or area occupied for a distinct
purpose, such as a residence, apartment, flat, store, office,
which is equipped with one or more fixtures connected to the
sewer system, separate and distinct from other users.
(b) The surcharge provided for in the rates shall
apply to each additional unit on one service pipe with no
increase in the amount of flow allowed with the minimum charge.
(5) LEINS FOR UNPAID WATER AND SEWER CHARGES. The sewage
service charge shall be payable to the Village Clerk-Treasurer
at the same time as water bills in the district in which the
property is located are payable. All charges for water and
sewer shall be a lien upon the premises served, pursuant to
Secs. 66.0821(4)(d) and 66.0809(1), Wis. Stats., and shall be
collected in the manner therein provided.
[Ord. 523 8/02, Ord. 592 06/2009]
(6) RATES FOR INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Whenever the
superintendent of the sewer department shall determine that any
lot, parcel of land, building or premises is discharging
industrial wastes of unusual volume, concentration of character,
or of greatly variable volume, he shall recommend the adoption
of a special rate for such class of users, taking into
consideration the volume, biochemical-oxygen-demand value, and
suspended solids content of the industrial wastes and the nature
of the use made of the sewer system, but industrial sewer
service rates will not be changed or adopted as original rates
except upon resolution of the Village Board. [Ord. 486]
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 13.06(7)(a)
7
(7) USE OF SEWER SYSTEM. (a) Deleterious Sewage. If a
user discharges any substance which is deemed deleterious by the
sewage commission or committee to the operation of the sewerage
system, he shall be required to discontinue the discharge of
such substance in the sewerage system. If after 10 days' notice
in writing, such user continues to discharge such deleterious
substance, he shall be subject to a penalty of $10.00. Each day
in which such violation continues to exist, after effective date
of notice to discontinue such discharge, shall be deemed a
separate violation.
(b) Restrictions with respect to domestic and
commercial wastes to be discharged to sewer:
(1) No customer shall discharge or cause to be
discharged to the sanitary sewer any storm
water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff
or subsurface drainage.
(2) Except as hereinafter provided, no person
shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of
the following described waters or wastes to any
sanitary sewer:
(a) Any liquid or vapor having a
temperature higher than 150 degrees F.
(b) Any water or waste which may contain
more than 100 parts per million by weight
of fat, oil, or grease.
(c) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel
oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
(d) Any garbage that has not been properly
shredded.
(e) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or
other solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstruction of the flow in sewers
or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works.
(f) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower
than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 13.06(7)(b)(2)(g)
8
corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment,
and personnel of the sewage works.
(g) Any water or wastes containing a toxic
or poisonous substance in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant.
(h) Any waters or wastes containing
suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense
is required to handle such materials at the
sewage treatment plants.
(i) Any noxious or malodorous gas or
substance capable of creating a public
nuisance.
(c) Grease, Oil, and Sand Interceptors. (1) Grease, oil
and sand interceptors shall be provided when the superintendent
deems them necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptions shall not be required for private living quarters
or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as
to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(2) Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed
of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial
construction, water-tight, and equipped with easily removable
covers which when bolted in place shall be gas-tight and watertight.
(3) Where installed, all grease, oil and sand
interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense,
in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(d) Preliminary Treatment Facilities. Where preliminary
treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation, by the owner at his expense.
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 13.06(7)(e)
9
(e) Manholes. When required by the superintendent, the
owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with the
plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained
by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. [Ord. 144,
147]
13.07 INTRODUCTION OF FLUORIDES. Upon receiving the
consent and approval of the State Department of Health, and
until further direction of the Village, the Water Department
shall provide the means and proceed with the introduction of
approximately one to 1.5 parts of fluoride to every million
parts of water being distributed in the water supply system of
the Village. [Ord. 177]
13.08 CONNECTIONS TO SEWER SYSTEM; EXCAVATIONS. (1)
Every person desiring to make a connection with the sewer system
of the Village shall make application through a Department of
Public Works Permit Application made to the Director of Public
Works, and shall pay the fee for such application as from time
to time established by the Village Board.[Ord. 609 12/2010, Ord. 610
03/2011]
(2) No person, other than a designated employee of the
Village, shall tap or make any opening in any sewer or drain or
service pipe within the streets, avenues or public grounds in
the Village without first obtaining a license. Any person may
obtain such a license upon satisfying the Village Board that he
is competent to perform such work, but no such license shall
take effect until the person applying therefore files with the
Clerk-Treasurer a bond in the sum of $1,000, conditioned upon
the due and faithful performance of his work and conditioned
further to save the Village harmless from any action accruing by
reason of his failure to safeguard excavations, or other failure
to comply with provisions of this code. The Board reserves the
right to revoke any such license without notice, whenever it
shall appear to the best interest of the Village.
(3) No person shall build any basement along any line of
sewer which will be lower than can be properly drained into such
sewer system. Every person about to build a basement along any
line of sewer shall first ascertain from the Building Inspector
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 13.08(4)
10
the depth of basement allowable and shall have his plans of
construction approved by the Building Inspector.
(4) All sewers which shall hereafter be laid, relaid or
repaired shall be subject to the inspection of the Building
Inspector, or such employees as the Village may designate, and
the person who is causing the same to be laid, relaid, or
repaired, as well as the person laying or repairing the same,
shall give such employee all reasonable facilities for
inspecting the laying, relaying or repairing thereof, and all
work in connection therewith shall be laid, relaid or repaired
according to the direction of such employee.
(5) No sewer shall be put into the same opening with any
gas pipe and such pipe must be far enough from all other pipes
to admit the repair or removal or relaying of such sewer pipe
without disturbing any other pipe. [Ord. 79]
(6) The following rules must be observed and carried out
in all work relative to sewer connections: [Ord. 116]
(a) Connections with sewers must be made at the
branches and with the slant already put in by the Village, if
any.
(b) Any New connections made shall be made properly
placing a wye branch in the line of the sewer.
(c) All connection pipe must be laid in a true line
from the sewer to the curb in an open trench and before any
filling is done.
(d) All connection pipes must be enveloped with
earth or sand to a thickness of 4 inches.
(e) All joints of sewer pipes must be made with
Portland cement mortar and oakum in the best manner and to the
satisfaction of the Building Inspector or such employee as
designated by the Village.
(f) After the pipe is properly laid refilling must
proceed at once and must by thoroughly tamped or puddled or
both, and so done that there shall be no surplus earth left.
(g) Should there be a deficiency of earth to fill
the excavation the person doing such work must supply the
deficiency.
(h) No rock larger than 4 inches in any direction
shall be put in any excavation.
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 13.08(6)(i)
11
(i) All work must be done under the supervision of
the officer designated by the Village for the inspection of the
work.
(j) A clean-out of a diameter of at least 4 inches
shall be installed on the sewer connection immediately inside
the basement wall.
(k) The price to be paid to the Village for each
sewer connection shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board and shall be in addition to the
actual cost of labor and materials furnished by the Village.
[Ord. 475]
(7) No drain from any building shall be connected with a
public sewer unless it be by drain pipe 6 inches in diameter,
laid in a uniformly ascending slope of at least 1/8 inch per
foot from the sewer toward the building. Where the sewer enters
any building, it shall be of cast iron soil pipe.
(8) At least 4 hours' notice must be given the Building
Inspector or other officer designated as sewer inspector by any
person making a connection with any sewer or drain when such
work will be ready for inspection, previous to making such
connection.
(9) Every person excavating in or upon the streets or
public alleys for the purpose of making sewer connections shall
see that such excavations are at all times properly and
adequately guarded and made safe and shall provide sufficient
red lights at night to appraise persons of danger. The duty to
make such excavations safe as herein provided shall devolve
equally upon the owner of the property for whose benefit such
excavation is made, the employee or person who actually makes
the excavation and the person who is licensed to make the
connection.
13.09 PENALTY. Unless otherwise provided in any Section
of the Chapter, any person who shall violate any provision of
this chapter or any order, rule or regulation made hereunder
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Sec. 25.04 of this
Code. [Ord 628 11/12]
CHAPTER 14
BUILDING CODE
14.01 Purpose
14.02 Adoption of Codes by Reference
14.03 Scope and Variance
14.04 Building Inspector
14.05 Building Permit Required
14.06 Application Process; Issuance of Permit
14.07 Swimming Pools
14.08 Exceptions
14.09 Disapproval of Plans and Denial of Permit
14.10 Time Limit for Action on Application;
Posting of Permit
14.11 Compliance with Permit
14.12 Revocation of Permit
14.13 Lapse of Permit
14.14 Inspections
14.15 Enforcement; Right of Entry
14.16 Records and Reports
14.17 Occupancy Permits
14.18 Non-Liability of Village
14.19 Fees; Violations and Penalties
Building Code 14.01
14.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the
general health, safety and welfare of Village residents, to protect
property values, and to promote the uniformity of construction
standards by enforcing the adopted codes.
14.02 ADOPTION OF CODES BY REFERENCE. (1) The Uniform
Dwelling Code, Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 320 to
325, and all amendments thereto are adopted and incorporated in
this Chapter by reference and shall apply to all buildings within
the scope of this Chapter. A copy of the Code is available online
and is on file with the Village Building Inspector.
(2) Adoption of Plumbing, Electrical Codes, and Heating and
Ventilating Codes. Chapters SPS 381 to 387, Plumbing Code,
Wisconsin Administrative Code, Chapter SPS 316, Electrical Code,
Wisconsin Administrative Code, Chapters SPS 360 to 366 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code (Wisconsin Commercial Building
Code), and Chapters SPS 375 to 379 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code, and all amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and made part
of this Chapter by reference and are applicable to all those
classes of buildings to which said Codes apply. Copies of said
Codes are available online and in the office of the Village
Building Inspector.
14.03 SCOPE AND VARIANCE. (1) This Chapter shall apply
to all new construction and the alteration of one and twofamily
dwellings.
(2) Notwithstanding SPS 320.05, the scope also includes the
construction and inspection of alterations and additions to one
and two-family dwellings constructed before June 1, 1980.
(3) Variance. Petitions for variance with respect to
construction and alterations from and after June 1, 1980, are
governed by the provisions of SPS 320.19. A petition for a
variance with respect to alterations or additions to one and
two-family dwellings constructed before June 1, 1980, shall be
made to the Village Board and the determination made in the same
manner as they would be by the Department under SPS 320.19.
14.04 BUILDING INSPECTOR. (1) There is hereby created the
position of Building Inspector, who shall administer and enforce
this Chapter and who shall be certified by the Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services as specified by
Wisconsin Administrative Code 101.66(2). The Building Inspector
and any other assistant or deputy inspectors designated by the
Building Inspector shall possess the Wisconsin certification
2
B u i l d i n g C o d e 1 4 . 0 4 ( 2 )
categories of UDC HVAC, UDC Electric, UDC Plumbing,
UDC Construction, and Commercial Building Inspector.
(2) The Building Inspector shall have the power and duty to
confirm that the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
addition and razing of dwellings and Commercial buildings in the
Village conform to the laws of the State of Wisconsin, the orders,
rules and regulations established by the Department of Safety and
Professional Services of the State of Wisconsin and of the Village
Building Code, and to make all inspections as required.
14.05 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall build or
cause to be built any new one or two-family dwelling or commercial
building, or any addition or alteration to an existing one or twofamily
dwelling, commercial building or swimming pool without
first obtaining a state uniform Building Permit or a Village
Building Permit for such dwelling, structure, accessory or
outbuilding, commercial building, etc., as determined by the
Building Inspector.
14.06 APPLICATION PROCESS; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
(1) Application for a Building Permit shall be made in
writing upon a form furnished by the Building Inspector.
The appropriate building requirements of the Village
and, where applicable, the State for the contemplated
improvement shall be made available to the permit
applicant by the Building Inspector upon request.
(2) Plans and drawings. The Building Permit applicant shall
submit with the application two complete sets of site
plans and specifications, one set of blueprints and an
erosion control plan.
(3) Driveway permits. The Building Permit applicant shall
submit with the application a driveway permit where
required. The State DOT issues permit on State roads.
(4) Approval of plans and issuance of Building Permit. If
the Building Inspector determines that the proposed
building, addition or alteration will comply in every
respect with this Chapter and all other applicable
laws and regulations of the Village and the State of
Wisconsin, and is not in violation of the Village
Subdivision Ordinance (Chapter 45) or any applicable
Village Code or Ordinance provision, the Building
3
Building Code 14.06(4)
Inspector shall conditionally approve the plans and
Issue a Building Permit which shall be valid for 24
months. One copy of the approved plan shall be returned
to the applicant. The Village or Building Inspector
shall retain on copy. After approval, the plans and
specifications shall not be altered in any respect
governed by this Chapter or the above-mentioned laws or
regulations, or which involves the safety of the
building or occupants, without first obtaining an
amended Building Permit.
(5) State Uniform Dwelling Code Seal. The Building Permit
for one or two-family dwellings shall have affixed to
it a State of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code seal.
(6) Fees. Fees shall be submitted to the Building Inspector
at the time the application is filed. Fees for plan
examination, inspection, driveway permit, culvert, house
number, variance application and issuance of the
Building Permit shall be set from time to time by the
Village Board.
(7) Waiver of plans. If the Building Inspector finds that
the character of the work is sufficiently described in
the application, the filing of plans for alterations or
repairs may be waived provided that the cost of such
work does not exceed $2500.
14.07 SWIMMING POOLS. (1) A permit shall be required
for pools with a capacity of 5000 gallons or more.
(2) The application for a building permit for a swimming
pool shall show
(A) The type and size of the pool.
(B) A site plan, to include:
(1) Location of the pool.
(2) Location of the house, garage, fencing, well,
drain field and septic tank on the lot.
(3) Location of filter unit, pump and
wiring (involving location)
(4) Location of back-flush and drainage outlets.
(5) Grading plan, finished elevations and final
treatment (decking, landscaping, etc.)
around pool.
(6) Location of existing overhead or underground
wiring, utility easements, trees and similar
features.
4
B u i l d i n g C o d e 1 4 . 0 7 ( 3 )
(3) In one family and two-family districts:
(A) Pools for which a permit is required shall not
be located within 25 feet of any side or
rear lot line nor within 25 feet of any
principal structure or frost footing. Pools
shall not be located within any required
front yard or within 15 feet of a septic tank
or 25 feet of the well.
(B) Pools shall not be located beneath overhead
utility lines nor over underground utility
lines of any type.
(C) Pools shall not be located in an alternate
septic field/drain field site.
(D) Pools shall not be located in or on any
easement of any private or public utility,
walkway, drainage area or other easement.
(E) For in-ground pools, due precautions shall
be taken during the construction period to:
(1) Avoid damage, hazards or inconvenience
to adjacent or nearby property.
(2) Assure that proper care shall be taken
in stockpiling excavated material to
avoid erosion, dust or other
infringement onto adjacent property.
(F) To the extent feasible, back-flush water or
water from pool drainage shall be discharged
on the owner's property or into approved
public drainage ways. Water shall not drain
onto adjacent or nearby private land without
the written permission of the adjacent owner.
(G) The filter unit, pump, heating unit and any
other noise-making mechanical equipment shall
be located at least 30 feet from any adjacent
or nearby residential structure or shall be
enclosed in a sound-restrictive enclosure not
closer than 25 feet to any lot line.
(H) Lighting for the pool shall be directed into
or onto the pool and not onto adjacent
property.
(I) A nonclimbable safety barrier of at least six
feet in height shall completely enclose the
pool.
(J) Water in the pool shall be maintained in a
manner suitable to avoid hazards.
(k) All wiring, lighting, installation of heating
unit, grading, and installation of pipes and
all other installations and construction
5
B u i l d i n g C o d e 1 4 . 0 7 ( 3 ) ( k )
shall be subject to inspection by
the Building Inspector.
(L) Required safety fencing shall be
installed immediately upon completing the
pool construction.
(M) There shall be no nuisances created by virtue
Of the pool, including but not limited to
Undue noise, light spilling onto adjacent
property, health and safety hazards, and
damage to nearby vegetation.
(N) Drainage of pools into public streets or
Other public drainage ways shall require
permission of the Village Public Works
Director.
14.08 EXCEPTIONS. (1) Minor repairs or alterations which cost
less than $2500 and which do not change occupancy area, structural
strength, fire protection, exits, natural light or ventilation do
not require a permit. Repairs or alterations that change any one of
the above items require a permit. Repairs and alterations which cost
more than $2500 require a permit. "Cost" refers to the fair market
value of construction labor plus materials, not actual cost
incurred.
(2) No permit is necessary for accessory structures under
144 square feet; replacement or repair of roofing or siding;
replacement of doors and windows of same size; or carpeting,
tile or other floor covering; or kitchen cabinetry.
(3) No permit is necessary for landscaping, not
including decks.
14.09 DISAPPROVAL OF PLANS AND DENIAL OF PERMIT. (1) If the
Building Inspector determines that the Building Permit application
or plans do not conform to the provisions of this Chapter and
applicable Codes or Ordinances, or other requirements, approval
shall be denied.
(2) Denial of application. A copy of the denied application,
accompanied by a written statement specifying the reasons for
denial, shall be sent to the applicant and/or the owner as
specified on the application.
(3) Stamping of plans. Plans and specifications, which do not
substantially conform to the provisions of the Building Code,
shall be stamped "Not approved." One copy shall be returned to the
applicant and one copy retained by the Village.
6
Building Code 14.09(4)
(4) Appeals. The applicant may appeal a denial of an
application to the Village Board by filing a Notice of
Appeal and requesting a hearing thereon within 28 days
of denial.
14.10 TIME LIMIT FOR ACTION ON APPLICATION; POSTING
OF PERMIT.
(1) Time for permit issuance. Action to approve or deny a
Building Permit application shall be completed within 10
business days of receipt of all of the forms, fees, plans and
documents required processing the application.
(2) Posting of permit. The Building Permit and all other
permits required by the Village, County, State shall be posted
in a conspicuous place at the building site and within view of
the adjacent roadway.
14.11 COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT. All construction must comply
with the Building Permit and the plans submitted with the Building
Permit application. Any construction that is not authorized by the
Building Permit as described in the blueprint, site plan, or
plans, or is not listed on the Building Permit application, shall
be deemed a violation of the Permit W.A shall subject the Owner
and Applicant to the penalties established in this Chapter.
14.12 REVOCATION OF PERMIT (1)If the Building Inspector at
any time determines that the provisions of this Chapter are not
being complied with and that the holder of the permit, applicant,
owner or contractor refuses to conform after a written warning or
instruction has been issued, the Building Inspector shall revoke
the Building Permit by written notice posted at the site of the
work. The written warning or instruction shall contain a deadline
by which the permit holder, owner, and/or contractor must conform
to the warning or instruction.
(2) When any permit is revoked, no further work shall be done
until the permit is reissued, except such work as the Building
Inspector may order as a condition precedent to the re-issuance of
the permit or as he may require for the preservation of human life
and safety.
14.13 LAPSE OF PERMIT A Building Permit shall lapse and be
void unless construction under the permit is commenced within six
months from the date of issuance thereof. The building permit
shall lapse and be void if the Permit purpose has not been fully
completed within 24 months from the date of issuance of the
7
B u i ld i ng Co d e 1 4 .13
permit. When a permit has lapsed, no further work shall
be performed until such time as a new Building Permit has
been issued.
14.14 INSPECTIONS. (1) All inspections for the purpose of
administering and enforcing the UDC and Village Building Code
ordinance shall be performed by a certified inspector who shall
conduct inspections according to the respective Codes being
applied and enforced.
(2) Notification. The builder (contractor, owner or permit
holder as the case may be) shall give the Building Inspector for all
inspections required by the Uniform Dwelling Code and the Commercial
Building Code, notification under the guidelines set forth in SPS 320
.10 (b) 3, SPS 320.10 (3) (h) 2, and SPS 361.41 (1) .
(3) Witness to inspection. It is recommended that a
representative of the developer, contractor, builder or owner be
present at each required inspection. It shall be the
responsibility of the developer, contractor, builder or owner to
coordinate inspection times and dates with the Building Inspector.
(4) Re-inspections. Any re-inspections necessary due to
incomplete work or non-complying conditions shall be subject to
an additional fee per inspection to be paid in full prior to the
issuance of the occupancy permit.
14.15 ENFORCEMENT; RIGHT OF ENTRY. (1)Except where otherwise
provided in this Chapter, the Building Inspector shall have the
general management and control of all matters pertaining to
building inspection and shall enforce all State laws, this
Chapter, and all other Village Ordinances and Code provisions, as
well as all lawful orders, relating to the construction,
alteration, repair, removal and safety of buildings and other
structures, dwellings, public buildings and places of employment
in the Village.
(2) The Building Inspector shall have the power and
authority, at all reasonable hours, for any proper purpose, to
enter upon any public or private premises and make inspection and
to require the production of the permit for any building work
being done or the required license. No person shall interfere with
or refuse to permit access to any such premises to the above
described representatives of the Village while in the performance
of their duties. Any person who shall willfully or knowingly
resist or obstruct the inspector in the performance of his duty
8
B u i l d i n g C o d e 1 4 . 1 5 ( 2 )
shall be guilty of a violation of this Chapter.
14.16 RECORDS AND REPORTS. (1) The Building Inspector
shall maintain a record of all permits issued, which shall be
kept on file.
(2) The Building Inspector shall make a monthly and
annual written report to the Village Board of all permits
issued, violations noted and fees collected.
14.17 OCCUPANCY PERMITS. The Building Inspector shall
issue occupancy permits after all inspections shall have been
satisfactorily completed, all required fees shall have been
paid and all required terms of the Building Code shall have
been met before an occupancy permit will be issued.
(1) No single-family or multiple-family dwelling or
commercial building may be occupied by any person or party
until an occupancy permit has been issued.
(2) Where any building is occupied by any person or party
prior to issuance of an occupancy permit the owner and/or
occupant shall pay the minimum penalty imposed under Section
14.19(2)(A) for each day of occupancy without a permit, and no
occupancy permit shall be issued until such penalty has been paid.
14.18 NON-LIABILITY OF VILLAGE. This Chapter shall not be
construed as creating or assuming any liability on the part of
the Village or any official or employee thereof for damages to
anyone injured or for any property destroyed by any defect in
any building or equipment or in connection with any plumbing or
electric wiring or equipment.
14.19 FEES; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. (1) Fees. The Building
Permit fees shall be established from time to time by the
Building Inspector, approved by the Village Board. They shall
include the UDC permit seal fee (currently $35.00) to be
forwarded to the Wisconsin Department of Safety & Buildings for
the UDC permit seal required to be assigned to any new dwelling.
(2) Penalties.
(A) The Building Permit fee will be doubled if
construction commences prior to issuance of
a Permit and a Permit is issued.
(B) The enforcement of this Chapter and all other
laws and ordinances relating to the building
may be by means of the withholding of Building
9
Building Code 14.19(2)(B)
Permits, imposition of forfeitures and/or
injunctive action. Any person, firm or corporation
violating any provision of this Chapter shall,
upon conviction, forfeit not less than $100 nor
more than $500 plus the costs of prosecution. Each
day a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
Ord. 678 8/5/2019
10
CHAPTER 15
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
15.01 Purpose and Intent
15.02 Definitions
15.03 Historic Preservation Commission (or
Committee) Composition
15.04 Historic Structure, Historic Site and
Historic District Designation
Criteria
15.05 Powers and Duties
15.06 Procedures
15.07 Interim Control
15.08 Penalties for Violations
15.09 Separability
HISTORIC PRESERVATION 15.01
1
15.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. It is hereby declared a
matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and use of improvements or sites of special
character or special architectural, archeological or historic
interest or value is a public necessity and is required in the
interest of the health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the
people. The purpose of this section is to:
(a) Effect and accomplish the protection,
enhancement, and preservation of such improvements, sites and
districts which represent or reflect elements of the Village’s
cultural, social, economic, political and architectural
history.
(b) Safeguard the Village’s historic, prehistoric
and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such
historic structures, sites and districts.
(c) Stabilize and improve property value, and
enhance the visual and aesthetic character of the Village.
(d) Protect and enhance the Village’s attractions
to residents, tourists and visitors, and serve as a support
and stimulus to business and industry.
15.02 DEFINITIONS. The definitions shall be as follows:
(1) “Certificate of Appropriateness” means the
certificate issued by the commission approving alteration,
rehabilitation, construction, reconstruction or demolition of
a historic structure, historic site or any improvement in a
historic district.
(2) “Commission” means the Historic Preservation
Commission created under this section.
(3) “Historic district” is an area designated by the
Village Board on recommendation of the commission that
contains two or more historic improvements or sites.
(4) “Historic site” means any parcel of land of historic
significance due to a substantial value in tracing the history
or prehistory of man, or upon which a historic event has
occurred, and which has been designated as a historic site
under this section, or an improvement parcel, or part thereof,
on which is situated a historic structure and any abutting
improvement parcel, or part thereof, used as and constituting
HISTORIC PRESERVATION 15.02(5)
2
part of the premises on which the historic structure is
situated.
(5) “Historic structure” means any improvement which has
a special character or special historic interest or value as
part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics
of the Village, state or nation and which has been designated
as a historic structure pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
(6) “Improvement” means any building, structure, place,
work of art or other object constituting a physical betterment
of real property, or any part of such betterment, including
streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, lighting fixtures, signs
and the like.
15.03 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION (OR COMMITTEE)
COMPOSITION. A Historic Preservation Commission is hereby
created, consisting of seven (7) members. Of the membership,
if available in the community, one shall be a registered
architect; one shall be a historian; one shall be a licensed
real estate broker; one shall be a Village trustee and three
shall be citizen members. Each member shall have to the
highest extent practicable, a known interest in historic
preservation. The Village President shall appoint the
commissioners subject to confirmation by the Village Board.
15.04 HISTORIC STRUCTURE, HISTORIC SITE AND HISTORIC
DISTRICT DESIGNATION CRITERIA. (1) For purposes of this
ordinance, a historic structure, historic site, or historic
district designation may be placed on site, natural or
improved, including any building, improvement or structure
located thereon, or any area of particular historic,
architectural, archeological or cultural significance to the
Village such as historic structures, sites, or districts
which:
(a) Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural,
political, economic or social history of the nation, state or
community; or
(b) Are identified with historic personages or with
important events in national, state or local history; or
(c) Embody the distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural type or specimen inherently valuable for a study
of a period, style, method of construction, or of indigenous
materials or craftsmanship; or
HISTORIC PRESERVATION 15.04(1)(d)
3
(d) Are representative of the notable work of a
master builder, designer or architect who influenced his age;
or
(e) Have yielded, or may be likely to yield,
information important to prehistory or history.
(2) The commission shall adopt specific operating
guidelines for historic structure, historic site and historic
district designation providing such are in conformance with
the provisions of this ordinance.
15.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. (1) DESIGNATION. The
commission shall have the power, subject to Section 15.06, to
designate historic structures and historic sites and to
recommend designation of historic districts within the Village
limits. Such designations shall be made based on Section IV.
Historic districts shall be approved by the Village Board.
Once designated, such historic structures, sites and districts
shall be subject to all the provisions of this ordinance.
(2) REGULATION OF CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION,
ALTERATION AND DEMOLITION. (a) No owner or person in charge
of a historic structure, historic site or structure within a
historic district shall reconstruct, alter or demolish all or
any part of the exterior of such property or construct any
improvement upon such designated property or properties or
cause or permit any such work to be performed upon such,
property or demolish such property unless a Certificate of
Appropriateness has been granted by the Historic Preservation
Commission. Also, unless such certificate has been granted by
the commission, the building inspector shall not issue a
permit for any such work.
(b) Upon filing of any application for a
Certificate of Appropriateness with the commission, the
commission shall approve the application unless:
(1) In the case of a designated historic
structure or historic site, the proposed work
would detrimentally change, destroy or
adversely affect any exterior feature of the
improvement or site upon which said work is to
be done:
(2) In the case of the construction of a new
improvement upon a historic site, or within a
historic district, the exterior of such
improvement would adversely affect or not
HISTORIC PRESERVATION 15.05(2)(b)(3)
4
harmonize with the external appearance of other
neighboring improvements on such site or within
the district;
(3) In the case of any property located in a
historic district, the proposed construction,
reconstruction, exterior alteration or
demolition does not conform to the purpose and
intent of this section and to the objectives
and design criteria of the historic
preservation plan for said district;
(4) The building or structure is of such
architectural or historical significance that
its demolition would be detrimental to the
public interest and contrary to the general
welfare of the people of the Village and state;
(5) In the case of a request for the
demolition of a deteriorated building or
structure, any economic hardship or difficulty
claimed by the owner is self-created or is the
result of any failure to maintain the property
in good repair.
(c) If the commission determines that the
application for a Certificate of Appropriateness and the
proposed changes are consistent with the character and
features of the property or district, it shall issue the
Certificate of Appropriateness. The commission shall make this
decision within forty-five (45) days of the filing of the
application.
(d) The issuance of a Certificate of
Appropriateness shall not relieve the applicant from obtaining
other permits and approvals required by the Village. A
building permit or other municipal permit shall be invalid if
it is obtained without the presentation of the Certificate of
Appropriateness required for the proposed work.
(e) Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be
undertaken without a Certificate of Appropriateness provided
that the work involves repairs to existing features of a
historic structure or site or the replacement of elements of a
structure with pieces identical in appearance and provided
that the work does not change the exterior appearance of the
structure or site and does not require the issuance of a
building permit.
(3) APPEALS. Should the commission fail to issue a
HISTORIC PRESERVATION 15.05(4)
5
Certificate of Appropriateness due to the failure of the
proposal to conform to the guidelines, the applicant may
appeal such decision to the Village Board within thirty (30)
days. In addition, if the commission fails to issue a
Certificate of Appropriateness, the commission shall, with the
cooperation of the applicant, work with the applicant in an
attempt to obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness within the
guidelines of this ordinance.
(4) RECOGNITION OF HISTORIC STRUCTURES, SITES AND
DISTRICTS. At such time as a historic structure, site or
district has been properly designated, the commission, in
cooperation with the property owner, may cause to be prepared
and erected on such property at Village expense, a suitable
plaque declaring that such property is a historic structure,
site or district.
15.06 PROCEDURES. (1) DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC
STRUCTURES AND HISTORIC SITES. (a) The commission may, after
notice and public hearing, designate historic structures and
historic sites, or rescind such designation or recommendation,
after application of the criteria in Section 15.04 above. At
least ten (10) days prior to such hearing, the commission
shall notify the owners of record, as listed in the office of
the Village assessor, who are owners of property in whole or
in part situated within two hundred (200) feet of the
boundaries of the property affected.
(b) The commission shall then conduct such public
hearing and, in addition to the notified persons, may hear
expert witnesses and shall have the power to subpoena such
witnesses and records as it deems necessary. The Commission
may conduct an independent investigation into the proposed
designation or rescission. Within ten (10) days after the
close of the public hearing, the commission may designate the
property as either a historic structure, or a historic site,
or rescind the designation. After the designation or
rescission has been made, notification shall be sent to the
property owner or owners. Notification shall also be given to
the Village Clerk. The commission shall cause the designation
or rescission to be recorded at Village expense, in the County
Register of Deeds office.
(2) CREATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICT. (a) For
preservation purposes, the Historic Preservation Commission
shall select geographically defined areas within the Village
to be designated as Historic Districts and shall prepare a
historic preservation plan for each area. A Historic District
may be designated for any geographic area of particular
HISTORIC PRESERVATION 15.06(2)(b)
6
historic, architectural or cultural significance to the
Village, after application of the criteria in Section 15.04
above. Each historic preservation plan prepared for or by the
Historic Preservation Commission shall include a cultural and
architectural analysis supporting the historic significance of
the area, the specific guidelines for development, and a
statement of preservation objectives.
(b) Review and Adoption Procedure. (1) Historic
Preservation Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission
shall hold a public hearing when considering the plan for a
Historic District. Notice of the time, place and purpose of
the public hearing shall be sent by the Village Clerk and the
owners of record, as listed in the office of the Village
Clerk, who are owners of the property within the proposed
Historic District or are situated in whole or in part within
two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries of the proposed
Historic District. Said notice is to be sent at least ten (10)
days prior to the date of the public hearing. Following the
public hearing, the Historic Preservation Commission shall
vote to recommend, reject or withhold action on the plan.
(2) The Village Board. The Village Board,
upon receipt of the recommendations from the
Historic Preservation Commission, shall hold a
public hearing, notice to be given as noted in
subparagraph 1 (a) above and shall following
the public hearing, either designate or reject
the Historic District. Designation of the
Historic District shall constitute adoption of
the plan prepared for that district and direct
the implementation of said plan.
15.07 INTERIM CONTROL. No building permit shall be
issued by the building inspector for alteration, construction,
demolition, or removal of a nominated historic structure,
historic site, or any property or structure within a nominated
historic district from the date of the meeting of the Historic
Preservation Commission at which a nomination form is first
Presented until the final disposition of the nomination by the
Historic Preservation Commission or the Village Board unless
such alteration, removal or demolition is authorized by formal
resolution of the Village Board as necessary for public
health, welfare or safety. In no event shall the delay be for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
15.08 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS. Any person or persons
violating any provision of this section shall be fined not
HISTORIC PRESERVATION 15.09
7
less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 for each separate
violation. Each and every day during which a violation
continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. Notice of
violations shall be issued by the building inspector.
15.09 SEPARABILITY. If any provision of this chapter
or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is
held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the
application of such provisions to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
CHAPTER 16
IMPACT FEES
16.01 Intent
16.015 Impact Fee Reduction
16.02 Definitions
16.03 Establishment of Impact Fees
16.04 Documentation
16.05 Revenues
16.06 Time Limit for Expenditures
16.07 Payment of Impact Fees
16.08 Installment Payments
16.09 Appeals
16.10 Public Water Impact Fees
16.11 Public Police Impact Fees
16.12 Public Library Impact Fees
16.13 Public Park Impact Fees
16.14 Severability
Revised 12/2019
IMPACT FEES 16.01
1
16.01 Intent. This Ordinance is enacted to establish
the mechanism for the imposition of impact fees upon
development to finance the capital costs of acquiring,
establishing, upgrading, expanding, and constructing public
facilities which are necessary to accommodate such
development. This Ordinance is intended to assure that
development bears an appropriate share of the cost of
capital expenditures necessary to provide such public
facilities within the Village of Ellsworth and its service
areas as are required to serve the needs arising out of
development, as well as to comply with Sec. 66.0617 Wis.
Stats. As provided in Sec. 66.0617(2)(b), Wis. Stats., the
Village of Ellsworth, by adopting this Ordinance, is not
intending to limit its authority to finance public
facilities by any other means authorized by law, including,
without limitation because of enumeration herein, the means
authorized by Sec. 236.13, subsections (2) and (2m), Wis.
Stats., the Ellsworth Ordinances, and any other statutes or
ordinances.
16.015 Impact Fee Reduction.
(1) Impact Fees established under Section 16.03,
pursuant to Wis. Stat. Section 66.0617, and
required to be paid under Section 16.07 as a
condition of the issuance of a building permit,
are waived for the period commencing December 31,
2019, and ending midnight, December 31, 2020, as
follows:
a. All new construction residential and
commercial Impact Fees in non-TID districts
where the total tax assessed value of the
property is projected to equal or exceed
$150,000 upon completion shall be reduced 50%
from the rate(s) in effect on June 1, 2015.
b. All new construction Impact Fees in TID
districts where the total tax assessed value
of the property is projected to equal or
exceed $150,000 upon completion shall be
reduced 65% from the rate(s) in effect on June
1, 2015.[Ord. 644 6/2015, 648 01/2016,653 06/2016, 658
12/2016, 665 12/2017 671 12/2018, 674 03/2019]
(2) The reduction of Impact Fees in subsec. (1) is
conditioned upon full payment of any necessary
building permit(s), timely payment of the reduced
IMPACT FEES 16.015(3)
2
Impact Fee in accordance with Section 16.07, and
completion of the project of construction for
which the building permit(s) was issued within
one year of permit issuance. In the event any of
the aforementioned conditions are not complied
with then the full, unreduced Impact Fee shall be
due and payable before any certificate of
occupancy is issued for the premises. Where any
additional Impact Fee is due as a result of noncompliance
the Village may take such enforcement
action to collect such fees as appropriate in its
discretion, including adding the fees as a
special assessment against the premises on the
tax roll.
(3) This Ordinance shall take effect on December 3,
2019, and shall expire, unless extended by
Ordinance, at midnight on December 31, 2020. [Ord
644 6/2015, 645 8/2015, 658 12/2016, 665 12/2017 671
12/2018,Ord 681 12/2019]
16.02 Definitions. In this Chapter:
(a) All words shall have the same meanings as
set forth in Sec. 66.0617, subsection (1), Wis. Stats.
(b) The word "development" shall have the same
meaning as the phrase "land development".
(c) "Residential Equivalent Unit (REU)" means a
unit of measure for impact fees equivalent to one
residential dwelling unit. For purposes of calculating the
public water impact fee, one REU is considered equal to the
basic residential meter size of 5/8 in. or 3/4 in. For the
library impact fee, park impact fee and the police impact
fee one REU is equal to each separate dwelling unit. In
all cases, the Village Clerk shall make the decision as to
the application these standards.
16.03 Establishment of Impact Fees. The following
fees are impact fees established by the Village pursuant to
Sec. 66.0617, Wis. Stats.:
(a) Public water impact fees pursuant to
Section 16.10.
IMPACT FEES 16.03(b)
3
(b) Public police impact fees pursuant to
Section 16.11.
(c) Public library impact fees pursuant to
Section 16.12.
(d) Park impact fees pursuant to Section 16.13.
16.04 Documentation. The following Village documents
contain the needs assessments for the impact fees
identified under Section 16.03 above, demonstrate Village
compliance with the requirements of Sec. 66.0617(3), Wis.
Stats., and shall be kept on file and available for public
inspection in the Office of the Village Clerk:
(a) Impact Fee Needs Assessment prepared by
Short Elliot Hendrickson Inc., dated November, 2003.
(b) Impact Fee Needs Assessment for Parks
prepared by Short Elliot Hendrickson Inc., dated February,
2007.
16.05 Revenues. Revenues collected by the Village as
impact fees shall be placed by the Village Treasurer in a
separate, segregated interest-bearing accounts, and shall
be accounted for separately from other funds of the
Village. Impact fee revenues and interest earned on impact
fee revenues may be expended by the Village only for the
capital costs for which the impact fees were imposed.
16.06 Refund of Impact Fees
(a) An impact fee that was collected before
January 1, 2003, must be used for the purpose for which it
was imposed not later than December 31, 2012. Any such fee
that is not used by that date shall be refunded to the
current owner of the property with respect to which the
impact fee was imposed, along with any interest that has
accumulated.
(b) An impact fee that was collected after
December 31, 2002, and before April 11, 2006, must be used
for the purpose for which it was imposed not later than the
first day of the 120th month beginning after the date on
which the fee was collected. Any such fee that is not used
by that date shall be refunded to the current owner of the
IMPACT FEES 16.06(c)
4
property with respect to which the impact fee was imposed,
along with any interest that has accumulated.
(c) With regard to an impact fee that is
collected after April 10, 2006, and within 7 years of the
effective date of the ordinance adopting this section, such
impact fees shall be used within 10 years of the effective
date of the ordinance to pay the capital costs for which
they were imposed, or shall be refunded to the current
owner of the property with respect to which the impact fees
were imposed, along with any interest that has accumulated.
(d) With regard to an impact fee that is
collected after April 10, 2006, and that is collected more
than 7 years after the effective date of the ordinance
adopting this section, such impact fees shall be used
within a reasonable period of time to pay the capital costs
for which they were imposed, or they shall be refunded to
the current owner of the property with respect to which the
impact fees were imposed, along with any interest that has
accumulated.
(e) With respect to impact fees collected during
the time period set forth under (c) and (d) above, the time
period for use of the impact fees may be extended for three
(3) years by the Village Board if the Board has adopted a
resolution which includes detailed written findings that
specify the extenuating circumstances or hardship that led
to the need to adopt the resolution, and specifying the
resolution is adopted and the time limit for using impact
fees has extended for 3 years due to such extenuating
circumstances or hardship in meeting the 10 year limit.
[Ord. 611 04/2011]
16.07 Payment of Impact Fees. Impact fee payments
shall be assumed to be the responsibility of the owner of
record at the time of issuance of a building permit. All
required impact fees shall be paid one hundred percent
(100%) to the Ellsworth Building Inspector’s office within
fourteen days of the issuance of the building permit. Rates
that are in effect at the time of building permit issuance
shall be applied. Impact fee payments shall be the
responsibility of the owner of record at the time of
building permit issuance. Failure to pay impact fees
within 14 days of issuance of the building permit, the
building permit shall be void. If the provisions of this
section are inconsistent with any terms addressing
imposition or payment of impact fees in any developer’s
agreement executed prior to passage of this ordinance, the
terms of any such developer’s agreements shall control
IMPACT FEES 16.08
5
16.08 Installment Payments. The Village Board, by
resolution, may authorize the payment of impact fees,
otherwise payable in full, in installment payments. If
installment payments are authorized, interest shall be
paid on the installment payments at the same rate then
charged by the Village on installments of special
assessments.
16.09 Appeals. A developer may appeal to contest the
amount, collection or use of the impact fee in the manner
provided herein:
(a) It shall be a condition to the commencement
of such an appeal that the impact fee from which the
developer appeals shall be paid as and when the fee or any
permitted installment payment becomes due and payable, and
upon default in making any such payment, such appeal may be
dismissed.
(b) The only questions appealable under this
section are the following, as authorized by Sec.
66.0617(10), Wis. Stats.:
(1) The amount of fee charged and paid by
the developer;
(2) The method of collection of the impact
fee;
(3) The use to which the particular fee
paid by the developer is made by the
Village.
(c) Appeals must be brought within 30 days of
the earlier of:
(1) The date the impact fee is payable
hereunder;
(2) In a situation where installment
payments are allowed, the due date of the
first required installment.
(d) The appellant shall pay a filing fee of
$200 at the time of filing of the appeal. The notice of
appeal shall be filed with the Village Clerk
IMPACT FEES 16.09(e)
6
(e) Following the filing of the notice of
appeal, the Village Clerk shall compile a record of the
ordinance imposing the impact fee that is the subject of
the appeal and a record of the management and expenditure
of the proceeds of the impact fee, and shall transmit these
documents to the Village Board. In consultation with the
Village departments, the Village Clerk shall also compile a
report on each appeal in which the appellant is seeking a
reduction or total refund in the impact fee paid. This
report shall specify the fiscal impact on the Village of
Ellsworth if the appeal overturns the impact fee. If the
fiscal impact report indicates that the appeal, if
successful, will cause a revenue shortfall that otherwise
was not budgeted with respect to the public facility, and
if this revenue shortfall cannot be reconciled by reduction
in impacts caused by development on the appellant's
property, the report shall estimate whether it will be
necessary for the Village to adjust impact fees, or amend
existing ordinances, to recover the proposed revenue
shortfall.
(f) The Village Board shall hold a public
hearing on the appeal, preceded by a class 1 notice,
providing fair opportunity for the appellant to be heard.
The burden shall be on the appellant to establish
illegality or impropriety of the fee from which the appeal
has been taken. Following the close of the public hearing,
the Village Board shall deliberate upon the matter, and
shall conduct such studies and inquiries as it deems
appropriate to decide the appeal.
(g) If the Village Board determines that the
appeal has merit, it shall determine appropriate remedies.
These may include reallocation of the proceeds of the
challenged impact fee to accomplish the purposes for which
the fee was collected, refunding the impact fee in full or
in part, along with interest collected by the Village
thereon, or granting the appellant the opportunity to make
the impact fee payment in installments, or such other
remedies as it deems appropriate in a particular case.
16.10 Public Water Impact Fee.
(a) A public water impact fee is hereby imposed
on all development in the Village of Ellsworth as specified
by this Ordinance. The public water impact fee shall be
effective with respect to development in any portion of
said Impact Fee Area not
IMPACT FEES 16.10(b)
7
currently located in the Village of Ellsworth upon any such
portion becoming annexed to the Village of Ellsworth
(b) The public water impact fee is hereby
imposed for development being constructed at the time this
Ordinance becomes effective or constructed after such time,
as well as for modification or addition to existing
development where a larger water meter is installed. The
public water impact fee is also imposed for installation of
a larger water meter where a smaller water meter was
originally installed and an impact fee was paid based on
such smaller size and the property owner later requires a
larger water meter, even if no modification or addition to
the development was made subsequent to the installation of
the smaller meter. The public water impact fees when a
larger meter is installed are sometimes referred to in this
Chapter as a "larger meter fee", and shall be imposed
according to the size of the new larger meter, subject to
reduction for the credit described in (f)(2) below.
(c) The public water impact fee imposed shall
be calculated in each instance in the manner set forth in
the Report on Water Impact Fees referred to in Section
16.04 of this Chapter ("the Report").
(d) The public water impact fee shall be $2,200
for each REU.
(e) The total public water impact fee for a
particular development shall be based on the size of the
water meter installed to service the development according
to the following table of meter equivalents:
Meter Size and its Number of REU's (referred to as
"Equivalent Meter Conversion" in the Report)
3/4 in. or 5/8 in. = 1 REU
1. in. = 2.5 REU
1.25 in. = 4 REU
1.5 in. = 5 REU
2 in. = 8 REU
3 in. = 15 REU
4 in. = 25 REU
6 in. = 50 REU8 in. or larger = 8
IMPACT FEES 16.10(f)
8
The impact fee for a particular development shall be equal
to the impact fee per REU as set forth in (d) above,
multiplied times the number of REU's, as determined by
applying the above table of meter equivalents to the size
of the meter installed to service the development.
(f) The following shall be fully or partially
exempt from payment of a public water impact fee:
(1) Additions to existing buildings where
no additional or larger water meters
are requested;
(2) A larger meter impact fee shall be
reduced by a credit in the amount of
any impact fees paid with earlier water
meter installations.
16.11 Public Police Impact Fee.
(a) A public police impact fee is hereby imposed
on all development in the Village of Ellsworth as specified
by this Ordinance. The public police impact fee shall be
effective with respect to development in any portion of
said Impact Fee Area not currently located in the Village
of Ellsworth upon any such portion becoming annexed to the
Village of Ellsworth.
(b) The public police impact fee is hereby
imposed for development being constructed at the time
this Ordinance becomes effective or constructed after such
time.
(c) The public police impact fee imposed shall
be calculated in each instance in the manner set forth in
the Report on Police Impact Fees referred to in Section
16.04 of this Chapter ("the Report").
(d) The public police impact fee shall be $180
for each REU.
(e) The total public police impact fee shall be
based upon the number of separate dwelling units built on
an individual parcel of land.
(f) The impact fee for a particular development
shall be equal to the impact fee per REU as set forth in
(d) above, multiplied times the number of dwelling units in
that development.
IMPACT FEES 16.12(a)
9
16.12 Public Library Impact Fee.
(a) A public library impact fee is hereby
imposed on all residential development in the Village of
Ellsworth as specified by this Ordinance. The public
library impact fee shall be effective with respect to
development in any portion of said Impact Fee Area not
currently located in the Village of Ellsworth upon any such
portion becoming annexed to the Village of Ellsworth.
(b) The public library impact fee is hereby
imposed for development being constructed at the time this
Ordinance becomes effective or constructed after such time,
as well as for modification or addition to existing
development where additional residential units are
constructed.
(c) The public library impact fee imposed shall
be calculated in each instance in the manner set forth in
the Report on Impact Fees referred to in Section 16.04 of
this Chapter ("the Report").
(d) The public library impact fee shall be $300
for each REU.
(e) The total public library impact fee shall be
based upon the number of separate dwelling units built on
an individual parcel of land.
(f) The impact fee for a particular development
shall be equal to the impact fee per REU as set forth in
(d) above, multiplied times the number of dwelling units in
that development.
6.13 Public Park Impact Fee.
(a) A park impact fee is hereby imposed on all
development in the Village of Ellsworth as specified by
this Ordinance. The park impact fee shall be effective
with respect to development in any portion of said Impact
Fee Area not currently located in the Village Of Ellsworth
upon any such portion becoming annexed to the Village Of
Ellsworth.
(b) The park impact fee is hereby imposed for
development being constructed at the time this Ordinance
becomes effective or constructed after such time.
IMPACT FEES 16.13(c)
10
(c) The park impact fee imposed shall be
calculated in each instance in the matter set forth in the
Report on Park Impact Fees referred to in Section 16.04 of
this Chapter (“the Report”).
(d) The park impact fee shall be $900 for each
REU.
(e) The total park impact fee shall be based
upon the number of separate dwelling units built on an
individual parcel of land.
(f) The impact fee for a particular development
shall be equal to the impact fee per REU as set forth in
(d) above, multiplied times the number of dwelling units in
that development.
16.14 Severability. If any section, phrase,
sentence, or portion of this ordinance is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portions shall be deemed separate,
distinct, and independent provisions, and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this ordinance. [Ord.530 06/2003]
CHAPTER 18
CODE OF ETHICS
18.01 Definitions
18.02 Declaration of Policy
18.03 Statutory Standards of Conduct
18.04 Use of Public Property
18.05 Obligations to Citizens
18.06 Conflicts of Interest, Disclosure of
Interest
18.07 Representing Private Interests Before the
Common Council or Village Agencies
18.08 Disclosure of Confidential Information
18.09 Receipt of Gifts, Gratuities, and
Preferential Treatment
18.10 Employees Covered by Collective Bargaining
Agreements Sanctions.
18.11 Reporting Ethics Violations
18.12 Nepotism
18.13 Solicitation
18.14 Enforcement
CODE OF ETHICS 18.01
1
18.01. Definitions.
a. Public Officer. Those persons serving in
statutory elected or appointed offices provided
for in Chapter 62 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and
all members appointed to Boards, Committees, and
Commissions established or appointed by the
Village President, Chairperson, and/or Village
Board, whether paid or unpaid.
b. Public Employee. Any person excluded from the
definition of public officer who is employed by
the Village.
c. Confidential Information is, at the time of a
proposed disclosure, information where the
Village’s interests in its confidentiality or in
the Village’s effective functioning outweigh an
interest in free speech to disclose same.
Confidential information includes, but is not
limited to, information where the disclosure is
prohibited by common law, or state or federal law
or statute unless the release of same is ordered
pursuant to a lawful order of a court or the
informed consent of the subject, as applicable;
and, information that is subject to the
exemptions of a governmental body to meet in open
session under Wisconsin Statute Section 19.85
unless release is authorized by the legal
custodian or other proper legal authorization is
given. For purposes of this Section, information
shall include, but not be limited to, knowledge
imparted orally, recordings, and written
documents or records.
d. Anything of Value. Means any gift, favor, loan,
service or promise of future employment, however,
it does not include reasonable fees and
honorariums, or the exchange of seasonal,
anniversary or customary gifts among relatives
and friends.
e. Financial Interest. Any interest which shall
yield, directly or indirectly, a monetary or
other material benefit to the officer or employee
or to any person employing or retaining the
services of the officer or employee.
CODE OF ETHICS 18.01(f)
2
f. Personal Interest. Means the following specific
blood or marriage relationship:
(1) An individual’s spouse;
(2) An individual’s mother, father, lineal
descendant, brother or sister who receives,
directly or indirectly, more than one-half
of his or her support from the individual or
from whom the individual receives, directly
or indirectly, more than one-half of his or
her support.
g. Vendor. One who sells and/or provides services
and/or products to the Village.
h. Business. Means any corporation, partnership,
proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise,
association, organization, self-employed
individual or any other legal entity which
engages in profit and/or not-for-profit
activities.
18.02 Declaration of Policy. It is declared that high
ethical standards among Village officers and employees are
essential to the conduct of good representative government
and that a Code of Ethics for the guidance of public
officers and employees will help them avoid conflicts with
improved standards of public service and will promote and
strengthen the confidence of the residents of the Village
in their public officers and employees. The purpose of
this Section is to establish guidelines for ethical
standards of conduct for all such Village officers and
employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are
incompatible with the public interest and which compromise,
or appear to compromise, public trust in the fairness,
independence and integrity of Village officers and
employees and their official actions.
18.03 Statutory Standards of Conduct. The provisions of
the following Sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, as from
time to time amended or renumbered, are made a part of this
Chapter and shall apply to all public officers and public
employees whenever applicable, to-wit:
a. Section 946.10. Bribery of Public Officers and
Employees.
CODE OF ETHICS 18.03(b)
3
b. Section 946.11. Special Privileges from Public
Utilities.
c. Section 946.12. Misconduct in Public Office.
d. Section 946.13. Private Interest in Public
Contract Prohibited.
e. Section 19.01 – Oaths and Bonds.
f. Section 19.21 – Custody and Delivery of Official
Property and Records.
g. Sections 19.81 – 19.89. Open Meetings of
Governmental Bodies.
h. Section 19.59 – Code of Ethics for Local
Government
Officials, Employees, and Candidates.
Public officers and employees shall comply with the
Sections of the Wisconsin Statutes incorporated in this
Code and failure to do so constitutes a breach of this Code
of Ethics.
18.04 Use of Public Property. No public officer or
employee shall use or permit the use of Village vehicles,
equipment, materials, or property for personal convenience
or profit, except when such services are available to the
public generally or are provided as Village policy for the
use of such officer or employee in the conduct of official
business, as authorized by the Village Board or authorized
Board, Commission, or Committee.
18.05 Obligations to Citizens. A public officer or
employee shall not grant or receive any special
consideration, treatment, or advantage beyond that which is
available to every other citizen.
18.06 Conflicts of Interest; Disclosure of Interest.
Except as provided herein, no public officer or public
employee shall engage in any business transaction with the
Village, or have a financial or other personal interest,
direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper
discharge of his or her official duties or will tend to
CODE OF ETHICS 18.07
4
impair his or her independence or judgment or action in the
performance of his or her official duties. Any public
officer or employee who has a substantial financial
interest, including employment, in any business entity
entering into, proposing to enter into, or bidding on any
transaction with the Village, or as part of his or her
official duties will be making an official decision or
recommendation significantly affecting a business
competitor, client, or regular customer, shall disclose
such interest to the membership of the Village Board (or
Committee, Board, or Commission thereof, as appropriate) to
be recorded in the minutes of that body. Upon such
disclosure, it is advised that the public officer or
employee abstain from voting on the matter and from
participating in the discussion of the matter.
18.07 Representing Private Interests before the Common
Council or Village Agencies. No public officer or
employee, including persons or firms engaged to provide
professional services to the Village, shall represent, for
compensation, private interests before the Village Board or
any Village Board, Commission, or Committee without
disclosure of the private business relationship and
explicit consent of the Village Board.
18.08 Disclosure of Confidential Information. No officer
or employee may use or disclose confidential information
concerning the property, government, or affairs of the
Village gained in the course of or by reason of his or her
official position or activities, nor shall such officer or
employee use such information to advance the financial or
other private interest of such officer or employee or
others.
18.09 Receipt of Gifts, Gratuities, and Preferential
Treatment. No public officer or employee shall accept
anything of value whether in the form of a gift, service,
loan, or promise from any person, who, to his or her
knowledge, has a direct financial interest in any
transaction or official business with the Village, which
may tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or
action in the performance of his or her official duties.
However, it is not a conflict of interest for any public
officer or employee to receive a gift or gratuity that is
an unsolicited item of nominal intrinsic value.
CODE OF ETHICS 18.10
5
18.10 Employees covered by Collective Bargaining
Agreements. In the event an employee covered under a
collective bargaining agreement, is allegedly involved in
an “Ethic Policy” violation, the terms and conditions set
forth in the applicable collective bargaining agreement
shall prevail in the administration and interpretation of
this “Ethic Policy”.
Sanctions
A determination that any employee’s actions constitute
improper conduct under the provisions of this “Ethics
Policy” may constitute a cause of suspension, removal
from office or employment or other disciplinary
action. Sanctions, including any disciplinary action
that may affect employees covered under a labor
agreement will be consistent with the terms and
conditions set forth in the applicable labor
agreement.
18.11 Reporting Ethics Violations. Any questions as to the
interpretation of any provisions of this code of ethics
shall be referred to the Salary and Labor Committee. Such
requests shall be as detailed as possible and shall be made
in writing. Advisory requests and opinions shall be kept
confidential, except when disclosure is authorized by the
requestor, in which case the request and opinion may be
made public.
Any employee who is requested to engage in any
activity which is or may be contrary to this Policy
will promptly report in writing such information to
his/her supervisor, or, if the employee was so
directed by the supervisor, then to the Salary and
Labor Committee.
Any employee who acquires information that gives the
employee reason to believe that any other employee is
engaged in conduct forbidden by this policy or the law
will promptly report in writing such information to
his/her supervisor or, if the supervisor is engaged in
such conduct, then to the Salary and Labor Committee.
18.12 Nepotism. It is the policy of the Village of
Ellsworth to prohibit supervisors from hiring a person
related to them to work under their direct supervision
unless authorized and approved by the Board. For purposes
CODE OF ETHICS 18.13
6
of this policy, related persons shall mean spouse, mother,
father, son, daughter, sister, brother, uncle, aunt,
nephew, niece, grandfather, grandmother, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, stepdaughter, stepson, stepfather,
stepmother.
18.13 Solicitation. The maintenance of a business
atmosphere is important to the operation of the Village of
Ellsworth and protects employees from undue interference
while performing their jobs. Therefore, unless otherwise
permitted by the Village, employees may not orally solicit
or distribute written materials for any organization, fund,
activity or cause to other employees in work areas while
either employee is on working time. Employees may solicit
other employees or distribute written materials before or
after the normal work day, during normal break or lunch
times or any other time when they are not working.
18.14 Enforcement. A determination that an elected public
officer’s actions constitutes improper conduct under the
provisions of this Section may constitute a cause for
sanctioning, censuring, or removing the officer, or other
disciplinary action by the Board, as permitted by laws.
Removals may be made only by an affirmative vote of threefourths
(3/4) of all the members of the Village Board.
Sanctions and censures may be made only by an affirmative
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Village
Board present. A determination that an public employee’s
actions constitutes improper conduct under the provisions
of this Section may constitute a cause for disciplining or
discharging the employee, or other disciplinary action by
the Village Board as permitted by law. A determination
that an appointed member of a Board, Committee, or
Commission’s actions constitutes improper conduct under the
provisions of this Section may constitute a cause for the
Village President or other appointing authority to consider
removing the member from the Board, Committee, or
Commission. [Ord. 576 07/07]
CHAPTER 21
GAS SAFETY CODE
21.01 Gas Safety Code
21.02 Permits
21.04 Installation Regulations
21.05 Inspection
21.06 Powers and Duties of Inspector
21.07 Severability
21.08 Gas Code Appeal Board
21.09 Penalty
GAS SAFETY CODE 21.01(1)
1
21.01 GAS SAFETY CODE. (1) PURPOSE. The purpose of this
chapter is to provide minimum standards and requirements for the
safe installation of gas utilization appliances, and gas
utilization equipment and utilization piping.
(2) SCOPE. All gas utilization appliances, and gas
utilization equipment, and utilization piping hereafter
installed within the Village shall conform to the requirements
of this chapter.
(3) DEFINITIONS. (a) Appliance. Device or piece of
equipment, fixed or portable, which utilizes a gaseous fuel as a
source of energy, including but not limited to, for example, gas
water heaters, gas central heating, gas stoves, gas
refrigerators, etc.
(b) Gas Utilization Piping. Piping installed on the
customer's premises, from the termination of the supplier's
facilities to gas utilization appliances, used to transport a
gaseous fuel from the supplier's facilities to such appliance.
(c) Gas Utilization Equipment. All valves,
fittings, appliance regulators, and other materials, devices or
apparatus used with gas utilization piping as a part of the
installation of gas utilization appliances.
(d) Gas. Vaporous fuels, including natural,
manufactured or mixed gas distributed to customers by means of
underground piping, by deposit in bulk containers on the
customer's premises, or by delivery in portable containers to
the customer's premises.
(e) Gas Company or Supplier. Any person, firm or
corporation engaged in the business of selling, installing, or
distributing gas or gas appliances within the Village.
(f) Inspector. The Village Building Inspector, or
such other Village employee as the Village Board may designate
to issue permits and to make inspections to check compliance
with these rules.
(g) Minor Repairs. Adjustment of gas appliances,
replacement of parts or exchange of similar units or repairing
of leaks.
21.02 PERMITS. (1) No person shall install, or cause to
be installed, any gas utilization appliances, gas utilization
GAS SAFETY CODE 21.02(2)
2
equipment, or gas utilization piping, without first obtaining
from the Village a permit, except that no permit shall be
required for work defined as minor repairs
(2) PERMIT FEE. The fee for each permit issued hereunder
shall be in an amount as is established from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board, payable to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer at the time of issuance. A permit may include more
than one installation on the same premises, provided that all
such installations are to be made as part of a single
transaction. [Ord. 475]
21.04 INSTALLATION REGULATIONS. No gas utilization
appliances or gas utilization equipment and utilization piping
shall be installed within the Village from and after November
17, 1966 until a permit therefore has been issued. After the
issuance of such permit, no gas utilization appliance or gas
utilization equipment or piping shall be installed except in
compliance with the applicable standards hereinafter set forth:
(1) All gas appliances utilizing gaseous fuels deposited
in bulk containers on or delivered in portable containers to the
customer's premises, and the gas utilization equipment and
utilization piping appurtenant thereto, shall be installed in
accordance with Chapter Ind. 9 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code, entitled "Liquefied Petroleum Gases."
(2) All gas appliances utilizing natural, manufactured or
mixed gas distributed to the customer's premises by means of
underground piping, and the gas utilization equipment and
utilization piping appurtenant thereto, shall be installed in
accordance with American Standards Association Code, ASA Z21.30-
-1964, which is also referred to as National Fire Protection
Association Pamphlet No. 54 of the same date, and entitled
"Installation of Gas Appliances and Piping" or revisions
thereto.
(3) In addition to or in substitution of the requirements
in the reference at subs. (1) and (2) above, the following shall
be required:
(a) All liquefied petroleum gas appliances having
automatic controls shall have safety shut-off equipment on pilot
and main burner. All natural gas appliances having automatic
controls shall have safety shutoff equipment on main burners.
(b) Water heater installations shall provide a
temperature pressure release valve to be installed on the hot
water line as near the heater as is practicable or on special
GAS SAFETY CODE 21.04(3)(c)
3
outlet if the heater is equipped with a special outlet.
(c) Unvented Heating Equipment. Room heaters
installed at any location, shall be of the vented type and shall
be connected to an effective chimney or gas vent and equipped
with an automatic pilot.
(d) Shut-off Valve. All valves used shall be A.G.A.
approved. In sizes larger than 2" lubricating plug valves shall
be used. An individual lever handle gas cock or shut-off valve
shall be installed preceding the union or mechanical joint of
each appliance, so installed as to be easily accessible for
operation and installed so as to be protected from physical
damage. For heating units, the shut-off valve shall be
installed approximately 5 feet above the floor where possible.
(e) There shall be a master shut-off valve on the
outside of the building ahead of the meter and pipes.
(f) Where appliances require a vent such vent shall
be of the approved single wall type, except that it shall be BW
double wall when it is inserted between walls, roofs, ceilings,
and other obstructions.
(g) Temporary Installations. The Clerk-Treasurer,
with the approval of the Inspector, may grant a permit for a
period of not to exceed 90 days, for the use of gas for
temporary purpose by means of utilization piping and equipment
other than as specified herein; provided that the gas piping t
be used be given a test equal to that required as a final
inspection.
(h) Equipment not Covered. In the case of gas
equipment not covered by standards of specifications referred to
herein, or having a maximum hourly input exceeding 400,000 BTU,
or requiring delivery pressure of the gas exceeding 1/2 pound
psi, suitable protective equipment shall be selected and
installed. The selection of a protective system and components
required hereunder but not otherwise covered by this code shall
be based on the requirements of individual installation after
consultation with the various interested parties, including
user, designer, insurance company, the gas company and the
Inspector.
21.05 INSPECTION. Inspection shall be made after
installation of the equipment authorized by the permit, but
before such equipment has been put in regular operation. Where
tests are deemed necessary by inspection, all materials and
assistance necessary for such tests shall be furnished by the
GAS SAFETY CODE 21.06(1)
4
installer.
21.06 POWERS AND DUTIES OF INSPECTOR. (1) The Inspector
shall enforce this chapter and the Inspector or his authorized
representative, upon presentation of proper credentials, may
enter any building or premises for the purpose of making
inspection or preventing violations of this chapter.
(2) After inspection, if it is found that such work
complies with the provisions of this chapter and all other
requirements of law or ordinance applicable thereto, the
Inspector shall notify the gas company that the installation has
been approved. However, this chapter shall not be construed as
an assumption of liability by the Village for any defective work
or any negligence in performing any installations.
(3) The Inspector or his authorized representative may
order the gas company or installer to disconnect any appliance
which has been connected or without permit having first been
issued.
(4) The Inspector, shall, by permission of the owner or
occupant, or by due process of law, make an inspection where he
has reasonable cause to believe work is being done or has been
performed in violation of this chapter. Inspections shall be
made between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., or by special appointment.
(5) The Inspector may enter public buildings used in whole
or in part for the purpose of public assemblage when occupied by
the public, or at any time in order to examine gas equipment in
such building. When an installation has been completed and
final inspection made by the Gas Inspector, if he has found that
the work complies with this chapter, he shall issue a
Certificate of Inspection which shall authorize the turning on
of the gas.
21.07 SEVERABILITY. Should any section, paragraph,
sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter be declared
unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of
such chapter shall not be affected thereby.
However, the provisions of this chapter shall not be
construed as an assumption of liability by the Village of any
defective work or any negligence in performing any gas
installations.
21.08 GAS CODE APPEAL BOARD. (1) There is created a Gas
GAS SAFETY CODE 21.08(2)
5
Code Appeal Board. Such Board shall consist of the Building
Inspector, the Fire Chief, one person from a public utility
company operating in the Village, and 2 representatives of gas
installation contractors. The appointed members of such Board
shall be appointed by the President, subject to approval of the
Village Board. Such appointments shall be made annually and
hold office for the calendar year.
(2) APPEALS. Such Board shall act as a Gas Appeal Board.
Any person directly interested, who is aggrieved by any decision
of the Gas Inspector or by any requirement resulting from any
enforcement of this chapter, may appeal from such decision to
the Board. The appeal shall be made by the person aggrieved
upon service of a written notice of such appeal on the
Inspector, within 48 hours after the decision appealed from is
made. The appeal board shall meet within 48 hours after the
service of such notice and shall render its decision as soon as
it is practicable. The aggrieved party may present his own case
to the Board, or may have the assistance of legal counsel. An
appeal from the decision of such Board to the Village Board may
be taken within 10 days thereafter upon written notice served
upon the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
21.09 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate or fail to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall forfeit
not to exceed $100.00 and costs of the prosecution, and in
default of the payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be
imprisoned in the County Jail of Pierce County, Wisconsin, until
such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed 30 days.
Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
[Ord. 173]
CHAPTER 25
CONSTRUCTION AND EFFECT OF ORDINANCES
25.01 Rules of Construction
25.02 Conflict and Separability
25.03 Clerk-Treasurer to File Documents
Incorporated by Reference
25.04 Penalty Provisions
25.05 Repeal of General Ordinances
25.06 Effect of Repeals
25.07 Title; Effective Date; Citation
CONSTRUCTION AND EFFECT OF ORDINANACES 25.01
1
25.01 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. (1) In the construction of
this Code of general ordinances, the following rules shall be
observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the ordinance:
(a) Wisconsin Statutes. The term "Wisconsin
Statutes", or any reference thereto, wherever used in this Code
shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes for the years 1999/2000, and
shall include the 2001/2002 session laws, and shall further
include and incorporate any amendments or changes thereto.
[Ord. 156, 243, 270, 334, 443, 523 8/02]
(b) Gender, Singular and Plural. Every word in this
Code and in any ordinance imparting the masculine gender may
extend and be applied to females as well as males, and every
word imparting the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or
thing; provided that these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any provisions which shall contain any express
language excluding such construction or when the subject matter
or context of such provisions may be repugnant thereto.
(c) Person. The word "person" extends and applies
to natural persons, firms, corporations, associations,
partnerships or other bodies politic and all entities of any
kind capable of being sued unless plainly inapplicable.
(d) Acts of Agents. When a provision requires an
act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as
by the principal, such requirements shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
25.02 CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY. (1) CONFLICT OF
PROVISIONS. If the provisions of the different chapters of this
Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of
each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions
arising out of the subject matter of such chapter.
(2) SEPARABILITY OF CODE PROVISIONS. If any section,
subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the Code is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof. The Board
hereby declares that they would have passed this Code and each
section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions may be
CONSTRUCTION AND EFFECT OF ORDINANACES 25.03
2
declared invalid of unconstitutional.
25.03 CLERK-TREASURER TO FILE DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY
REFERENCE. Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule,
regulation or other written or printed matter is adopted by
reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if
fully set forth herein and the Clerk-Treasurer shall file,
deposit and keep in his office a copy of the Code, standard,
rule, regulation or other written or printed matter as adopted.
Materials so filed, deposited and kept shall be public records
open for examination with proper care by any person during the
Clerk-Treasurer's office hours, subject to such orders or
regulations which the Clerk-Treasurer may prescribe for their
preservation.
25.04 PENALTY PROVISIONS. Unless otherwise specified in
this Code, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of
this Code shall upon conviction of such violation, forfeit not
less than $30.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs
of prosecution, and in default of payment of the forfeiture and
costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the County Jail, as
permitted and provided by law, and ordered by the Court, until
such forfeiture and costs are paid, or for such length of time
as is so imposed by Order of the Court. [Ord. 609 12/10, Ord. 610
03/2011]
(2) CONTINUED VIOLATIONS. Each violation and each day a
violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate
offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the Village from
maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a
violation of any provision of this Code.
(3) EXECUTION AGAINST DEFENDANT'S PROPERTY. Whenever
any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution
upon the order of any court for violation of any ordinance of
the Village, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of
the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from
custody, issue an execution against the property of the
defendant for such forfeiture and costs. [Ord. 431]
25.05 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES. All ordinances
heretofore adopted by the Board of the Village are hereby
repealed, except all ordinances or parts of ordinances relating
to the following subjects and not conflicting with any of the
provisions of this Code:
CONSTRUCTION AND EFFECT OF ORDINANCES 25.06
3
The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the Village
whatever name or description.
The establishment of grades, curb lines and widths of sidewalks
in the public streets and alleys.
The fixing of salaries of public officials and employees.
Rights, licenses or franchises or the creation of any contract
with the Village.
The lighting of streets and alleys.
The annexation of territory to the Village.
The naming and changing of names of streets, alleys, public
grounds and parks.
The establishment of wards, ward boundaries and election
precincts.
Tax and special assessment levies.
Water, sewer and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer
and water main construction.
Budget ordinances, resolutions and actions.
25.06 EFFECT OF REPEALS. The repeal or amendment of any
section or provision of this Code or of any other ordinances of
resolutions of the Board shall not:
(1) By implication be deemed to revive any ordinance not
in force or existing at the time at which such repeal or
amendment takes effect.
(2) Affect any vested right, privilege, obligation or
liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any enactment so
repealed or amended, unless the privilege of repealing such
obligation or privilege has been reserved by the Village.
(3) Affect any offense committed or penalty or forfeiture
incurred, previous to the time when any ordinance shall be
repealed or amended, except that when any forfeiture or penalty
shall have been mitigated by the provisions of any ordinance,
such provisions shall apply to and control any judgment to be
CONSTRUCTION AND EFFECT OF ORDINANCES 25.06(4)
4
pronounced after such ordinance takes effect for any offense
committed before that time.
(4) Affect any prosecution for any offense, or the levy of
any penalty or forfeiture pending at the time when any ordinance
aforesaid shall be repealed or amended, but the right of action
shall continue and the offender shall be subject to the penalty
as provided in such ordinances, and such prosecution shall
proceed, in all respects, as if such ordinance or ordinances had
not been repealed, except that all such proceedings had after
the time this Code shall take effect, shall be conducted
according to the provisions of this Code.
25.07 TITLE: EFFECTIVE DATE: CITATION. These ordinances
shall be known as the "Municipal Code of the Village of
Ellsworth" and shall take effect from and after passage and
publication as provided in Sec. 66.0103, Wis. Stats. All
references thereto shall be cited by section number (example:
Section 13.06, Municipal Code of the Village of Ellsworth).
[Ord. 523 8/02]
CHAPTER 30
RULES, REGULATIONS AND CHARGES,
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM
30.01 Purpose and Scope
30.02 Definition of Terms
30.03 Sewage Disposal Charges
30.04 Billing Practice
30.05 Use of Public Sewers Required
30.06 Building Sewers and Connections
30.07 Control Manholes and Monitoring Facilities
30.08 Use of the Public Sewers
30.09 Pretreatment
30.10 Discharge Permits
30.11 Powers and Authority of Inspectors
30.12 Restricted Information
30.13 Protection from Damage
30.14 Enforcement and Termination of Service
30.15 Industrial Cost Recovery Plan
30.16 Other Provisions
30.17 Appeals
30.18 Validity of Chapter
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.01
1
30.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE. The Village of Ellsworth has
provided facilities for collection and treatment of sewage to
promote the health, safety and convenience of its people and to
safeguard the water resources common to all. In such
facilities, provisions of design, construction and operation
have been made to accommodate certain types and quantities of
commercial and industrial wastes in excess of, and in addition
to, normal sewage.
The Board has determined that it is the obligation of the
producers of residential, commercial and industrial wastes to
defray the cost of normal, and extraordinary services rendered
by the Village of Ellsworth in the collection and treatment of
such wastes in an equitable manner and, insofar as it is
practicable, in proportion to the benefits derived from such
services. Therefore, it is the purpose of this Chapter to
implement the necessary rules and regulations for governing the
uses of, and charges for, the wastewater disposal facilities
provided by the Village of Ellsworth.
30.02 DEFINITION OF TERMS. (1) "Act" shall mean the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, Public Law 92-
500.
(2) "Approving Authority" shall mean, as the provisions of
this ordinance shall set forth, the Director of Superintendent
of Wastewater Collection and Treatment System of the Village of
Ellsworth, or his duly authorized deputy, agent or
representative. The Village Board of the Village of Ellsworth
shall approve all sewage disposal charges including all unit
rates and the periodic and/or annual review of such rates, after
notice and public hearing.
(3) "B.O.D."(denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall
mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at 20 degrees C., expressed in milligrams per
liter (mg/l). The laboratory determinations shall be made in
accordance with "Standard Methods" or 40 CFR 136 "Guidelines
Establishing Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants."
(4) "Building or House Drain". The lowest horizontal
piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge of all
soil waste and other drainage pipes inside any building and
conveys the same to the building sewer, 3 to 5 feet outside the
foundation wall of such building. The minimum building drain
extends from the building sewer to the further-most soil stack.
(5) "Building or House Sub-drain". The horizontal portion
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.02(6)
2
of drainage system within a building which cannot flow
by gravity to the building or house drain.
(6) "Building or House Sewer". That part of the
horizontal piping beginning 3 to 5 feet from the foundation
wall to its connection with the main sewer, septic tank, or
other disposal terminal.
(7) "Village" shall mean the Village of Ellsworth,
Wisconsin.
(8) "C.O.D." (denoting chemical oxygen demand) shall mean
the quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of
organic matter and oxidizable inorganic matter with a strong
chemical oxidant under standard laboratory procedure and
expressed in milligrams per liter.
(9) "Commercial User" shall mean non-residential users
with a waste discharge similar in concentrations of the various
constituents to those discharged by the residential users.
(10) "Compatible Pollutants" shall mean biochemical oxygen
demands, suspended solids, pH, fecal coliform bacteria, chemical
oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus
compounds, nitrogen and nitrogen compounds, and fats, oils and
greases of animal or vegetable origin.
(11) "Director" shall mean the Director of Public Works
for the Village of Ellsworth or his authorized deputy, agent or
representative. The Director shall be the person ultimately
responsible for the Sanitary Sewerage System of the Village of
Ellsworth.
(12) "Domestic Wastes". See Sanitary Sewage.
(13) "Excessive" shall mean in such magnitude that in the
judgment of the Director, it will cause damage to any facility,
will be harmful to the sewage treatment process, cannot be
removed in the sewage treatment plant to the degree required to
meet the requirements of Public Law 92-500, can otherwise
endanger life, limb or public property, and/or which can
constitute a public nuisance.
(14) "Garbage". The putrescible organic solid wastes from
the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing
of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of meat, fish,
fowl, fruit, vegetables and condemned food.
(15) "Incompatible Pollutant" shall mean any pollutant
which is not defined as a "A Compatible Pollutant" in this
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.02(16)
3
section.
(16) "Industrial Use". A use in which the wastewater
discharge substantially exceeds the concentration of the
corresponding value for the residential classification of user
with respect to any one or more constituents of discharge.
(17) "Industrial Waste" shall mean any solid, liquid or
gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from
any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resources, as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
(18) "Industry" shall mean an establishment with
facilities for mechanical, testing, trade, or manufacturing
purposes.
(19) "In Lieu of Tax Charge" shall mean a tax equivalency
determined by equalizing the gross book value of fixed assets as
of January 1 of that year and multiplied by the local and school
tax rates for the same year.
(20) "Major Contributing Industry" shall mean an
industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that: (a)
has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average week day; (b)
has a flow greater than five percent of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste; (c) has in its waste, a
toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued
under section 207 (a) of the Act; or (d) is found by the
permit issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of an
WPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the
waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on that
treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that
treatment works.
(21) "May" is permissive; (See "Shall").
(22) "Natural Outlet". Any outlet into a watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
(23) "Operation, Maintenance, and Replacement Cost" shall
mean any cost attributable to insuring the proper functioning of
all components of the sewerage system for the useful life of
such components, including all costs associated with the
functioning of an accounting system for the collection of monies
to offset such costs. In addition, these costs shall include
all expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.02(24)
4
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the
useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement.
(24) "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
(25) "pH" shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the
reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration expressed in moles
per liter as determined by "Standard Methods."
(26) "Properly Shredded Garbage". The wastes from the
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been
ground to such a degree that all particles will be carried
freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
(27) "Public Sewer" shall mean a sewer provided by or
subject to the jurisdiction of the Village of Ellsworth and in
which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights. It
shall also include sewers within or outside the Village
boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately
discharge into the Village sewage system, even though these
sewers may not have been constructed with Village funds.
(28) "Receiving Waters" shall mean any water course,
river, pond, ditch, lake, aquifer, or other body of surface or
sub-surface water receiving discharge of sewage.
(29) "Residential User" shall mean a user whose wastewater
discharges consist of sanitary sewage only and associated with
domestic purposes.
(30) "Sanitary Sewage" shall mean a combination of the
water-carried domestic wastes of substantially such origin and
strength as those typically produced in households, including
wastes from sanitary conveniences, that possesses the following
characteristics:
(a) A five-day, 20 degree centigrade, B.O.D. of not
more than 250 milligrams per liter.
(b) A suspended solids content of not more than 350
milligrams per liter.
(31) "Sanitary Sewer" shall mean a sewer that conveys
sewage, and into which storm, surface and ground waters are not
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.02(32)
5
intentionally admitted.
(32) "Sewage" (also referred to as wastewater) shall mean
a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with such ground surface, and storm-waters as may be
present.
(33) "Sewerage System" shall mean all properties,
structures, manholes, catch basins, inlets, pipes, equipment and
conduits for the purpose of collecting, treating, testing, and
disposing of domestic wastewater and/or industrial or other
wastewaters, as existing now or hereafter added to, expanded or
improved.
(34) "Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for conveying
wastewaters.
(35) "Sewer Connection" shall mean that part of the
sewerage system connecting the sewer main and the line of
abutting property of extended to that distance from the sewer
main as considered necessary by the Director.
(36) "Shall" is mandatory; (See "May").
(37) "Slug". Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial
waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in
quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than
fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average
twenty-four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
(38) "Standard Classification" shall mean a classification
based on the most current publication of the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual (SIC), United States Office of Management
and Budget. Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code
numbers and description may be found in the 1972 edition of the
"Standard Industrial Classification Manual."
(39) "Standard Methods" shall mean the examination and
analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage and
Industrial Wastes," published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the
Federation of Sewage and Industrial Wastes Association.
(40) "Storm Sewer" shall mean a sewer which carries storm
and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.02(41)
6
(41) "Superintendent" shall mean the Superintendent of
Wastewater Collection and Treatment System of the Village of
Ellsworth, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
The Superintendent is an agent and representative of the
Director.
(42) "Suspended Solids" shall mean solids that either
float on the surface of, or are in suspension of water, sewage,
or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory
filtration device. The laboratory determinations shall be made
in accordance with "Standard Methods."
(43) "Treatment Plant" shall mean the Wastewater
Collection and Treatment System and all other structures or
devices used for controlling and/or treating sewage under the
control and ownership of the Village of Ellsworth.
(44) "Uncontaminated Wastewater" shall mean wastewater
which has not come into contact with any substance used in, or
incidental to, industrial processing operations and to which no
chemical or other substances or any physical change has been
added.
(45) "Unit Rates" shall be determined by dividing
projected costs by projected volumes, as provided in Section
30.03 (7) and as otherwise provided herein.
(46) "User" shall mean any person that discharges wastes
into the sewerage system.
(47) "Watercourse" shall mean a channel in which a flow of
water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(48) "WPDES Permit" shall mean a permit issued by the
State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources pursuant to
Section 402 (b) of the Act detailing terms and conditions for
discharges from the treatment plant to the receiving waters.
30.03 SEWAGE DISPOSAL CHARGES. (1) Applicability of
Charge. The sewage disposal charge herein established shall
apply to each lot or parcel of land, building or premises
(hereinafter called premises) from which sewage is discharged
into any public sanitary sewer, and to each premise for which a
connection to any sewer is ordered installed, said charges to
take effect upon the expiration of the time limited for the
installation of the sewer connection or upon use of such
connection for the disposal of sewage, whichever occurs first.
(2) Basis of Charge. In order to ensure a proportional
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.03(3)
7
distribution of the costs of furnishing sewage disposal
services, several factors, including strength, volume and
delivery flow rate characteristics, may be considered in
determining the appropriate sewage disposal charge for a
particular user or user class.
(3) User Classifications. For purposes of administering
the sewage disposal charge, three user classifications are
hereby established:
(a) Residential Customers. Wastewater discharged by
users within this classification shall consist of sanitary
sewage only.
(b) Commercial Customers. The wastewaters
discharged by these users shall be similar in concentrations of
the various constituents to those discharged by the Non-
Industrial Customer classification.
(c) Industrial Customers. This classification shall
be composed of industrial users possessing a wastewater
discharge in which any one constituent of the discharge
substantially exceeds the concentration of the corresponding
value for the Non-Industrial Customer classification.
The determination of user classification shall be based
upon the primary use of the premises as determined by the
Director.
(4) Use of Water Meters. The sewage disposal charge
herein established shall be based upon the amount of water used
upon the customer's premises including water from public and
private supplies, or, as hereinafter provided, upon the amount
of sewage discharged to the public sewer. If any person
discharging sewage into the public sewer system procures any
part, or all of his water from sources other than the Village
Water Utility, all or part of which is discharged into the
public sewers, the person shall be required to have water
meters installed for the purpose of determining the volume of
water obtained from these other sources. Where sewage meters
are already installed, no water meters will be required. The
water meters shall be furnished by the Village Water Utility and
installed under its supervision, all other costs being at the
expense of the person requiring the meter.
Failure to meter any water supply shall not release the
customer from paying the sewage disposal charge thereon. In
such cases, the charge shall be based upon the estimate of the
Director of the flow for the billing period.
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.03(5)
8
(5) Exemption Meters. In the event that a person
discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers produces
evidence satisfactory to the Director that significant amounts
of the total annual volume of water used for all purposes does
not reach the sanitary sewer, the person may be permitted to
have an exemption water meter installed. Such meter shall be
furnished by the Village Water Utility and installed under its
supervision, all other costs being at the expense of the person
requiring the meter, including any piping revisions required to
insure that only water not reaching the sanitary sewer is
metered by the exemption meter.
The amount of exemption water metered shall be subtracted
from the total amount of water used by the person and an
adjusted total water usage determined based on only water
reaching the sanitary sewer. This adjusted total water
usage will be used to determine the applicable sewage disposal
charge.
(6) Waste Meters. Devices for metering the volume of
waste discharged may be required by the Director if these
volumes cannot otherwise be determined by the use of water
meters and exemption water meters. Metering devices for
determining the volume of waste shall be purchased, installed,
owned and maintained by the user. The type of meter and
metering arrangement shall be approved by the Director before
installation and it shall be installed in accordance with
approved methods. Following approval and installation, such
meters may not be removed without the consent of the Director.
In the event the metering facilities shall fail to operate or
register the flow correctly, the sewage disposal charge shall be
based upon the estimate of the Director of the flow of sewage
for the billing period.
(7) Sewage Disposal Charge Formula. The sewage
disposal charges for the various classifications of user shall
be reviewed at least annually and revised periodically to insure
the continued proportionality of the charge and the generation
of sufficient revenues to offset the costs of furnishing the
maintaining sewerage disposal services. The charges shall be as
established by the Village Board and shall be equitable charges
to all users. There shall be no volume discounts. The sewage
disposal charge assessed a user shall consist of a user charge
for the operation, maintenance, and replacement of the
facilities, a debt service charge to assist the Village in
amortizing the local share of the capital cost of constructing
the sewerage system, and an "in lieu of tax" charge. Under no
circumstances shall a user's overall user charge rate be less
than the overall user charge rate assessed the Residential
Customer user class as developed in item (8) below. [Ord. 486]
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.03(8)
9
(8) Sewage Disposal Charges. The three customer
classifications shall be assessed their proportionate share of
the sewage disposal charges in the following manner:
(a) Residential Customers. The sewage disposal
charge assessed users in this classification shall consist of a
variable rate for debt service and a fixed user charge and
variable user charge rate for operation, maintenance and
replacement. The variable rates shall be based on the users
metered water consumption and shall be developed by
incorporating the unit rates per parameter discussed above and
the pollutant characteristics representative of sanitary sewage.
(b) Commercial Customers. The sewage disposal
charge assessed these users shall be computed in the same manner
as charges for Residential Customers.
(c) Industrial Customers. The sewage disposal
charge for users within this customer classification shall be
computed by incorporating the users metered sewage flow and
sampled pollutant characteristics, in conjunction with the
appropriate unit rate per parameter, into the sewage disposal
charge rat formula previously define. Under no circumstances
shall a user's overall user charge rate assessed the Residential
Customer user class for wastewaters having the pollutant
characteristics representative of sanitary sewage.
(9) Revenues From Sewage Disposal Charges. Revenues
generated through sewage disposal charges shall be recorded in
three separate accounts, one account to be used solely for the
purpose of covering all operating and maintenance expenses, the
second account to be used for the purpose of covering major
maintenance or replacement expenses, and the third account to be
used for the purpose of covering debt service expenses.
Unexpended balances in said major maintenance or replacement
account shall be carried forward to the next year without
reduction of the next year's replacement allowance. In the
event sewage disposal charge revenues are insufficient to
provide for current O. M. & R. (operating, maintenance and
replacement) and debt service needs, funds from the Village
General Fund may be advanced, but only if such advancement from
the Village General Fund is reimbursed through sewage disposal
charge revenues by the end of the next budget period. In the
event sewage disposal charge revenues exceed O. M. & R. and debt
service expenses, such excess shall be applied as revenue
against the estimated sewage disposal expenses for the next
budget period.
30.04 BILLING PRACTICE. (1) Billing Periods. Sewage
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.04(2)
10
Disposal Charges and all other charges provided for in the
Ordinance shall be billed, as a minimum, on a quarterly basis.
(2) Payment. Sewage Disposal Charges and all other
charges provided for in the Ordinance shall be due and payable
at the Village Treasurer's Office within ten (10) days after the
invoice date, or on or before the due date as indicated on the
statement.
(3) Rates. Rates shall be determined from time to time by
the Village Board and shall apply to actual usage thereafter.
(4) Delinquency. All delinquent accounts shall be charged
a penalty at the rate of one percent (1%) per month on the
unpaid balance, including penalties. Such penalty shall accrue
starting with the thirty-first (31st) day following the invoice
date, or twenty-first (21st) day following the payment due date
as applicable.
30.05 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED. (1) It shall be
unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the Village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said Village, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
(2) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural
outlet within the Village, or in any area under the jurisdiction
of said Village, any sewage or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this Ordinance.
(3) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful
to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.
(4) The owner of all houses, buildings, or other
properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or
other purposes, situated within the Village and abutting on any
street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may be located in the future a public sanitary sewer of the
Village, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable
toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance, within sixty (60) days after date
of official notice to do so.
(5) Whenever permits for new connections to the Village
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.06(1)
11
Wastewater Collection and Treatment System are applied for, the
Approving Authority shall determine whether adequate collection
and treatment capacities exist in the System to properly
accommodate such proposed new connections. If the determination
is that either existing collection or treatment capacity in the
System is inadequate for properly handling said proposed new
connections, then said connections shall be disallowed.
30.06 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS. (1) No
unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit
from the Director of the Village of Ellsworth.
(2) There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer
permits:
(a) For residential and commercial services, and
(b) For service to establishments producing
industrial wastes.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the Village. The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Plumbing Inspector and Superintendent.
A permit and inspection fee for a residential, commercial
and industrial building sewer permit, as established from time
to time by the Village Board, shall be paid to the Village at
the same time the application is filed.
(3) All costs and expense incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
(4) A separate and independent building sewer shall be
provided for every building.
(5) Existing building sewers may be used in connection
with new buildings only when they are found, on examination by
the Director, to meet all requirements of this ordinance.
(6) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction
of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.06(7)
12
trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the plumbing
code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village.
(7) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought
to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In
all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by
such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharge to the building sewer.
(8) Roof-leaders, surface drains, groundwater drains,
foundation footing drains, and other clear water drains shall be
connected wherever possible with a storm sewer, but they shall
not be connected to a building sewer which discharges into a
sanitary sewer or private sewage treatment plant. All such
connections existing at the time of passage of this ordinance
shall thereafter be illegal. If storm water or clear water is
being discharged into a sanitary sewer, the Director shall five
the offending person 15 days' notice to disconnect. Failure to
disconnect after such notice shall authorize the Director to
cause disconnection and assessment of the costs of such
disconnection against the property involved. The Director may,
in the alternative, institute legal action for violation of this
subsection.
(9) The connection of the building sewer into the public
sewer shall conform to the requirements of the plumbing code or
other applicable rules and regulations of the Village.
(10) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall
notify the Director when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection
shall be made under the supervision of the Director or his
representative.
(11) All excavations for the building sewer installations
shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkway and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall
be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
30.07 CONTROL MANHOLES AND MONITORING FACILITIES. (1)
Unless otherwise authorized by the Director, all persons
discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer shall
construct and maintain control manholes on all sewer connections
to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of their
waste, including sanitary sewage. Control manholes shall be
located and built in a manner approved by the Director. If
measuring devices are to be permanently installed, they shall be
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.07(2)
13
of a type approved by the Director.
(2) Control manholes and related equipment shall be
installed by the person discharging the waste at his expense and
shall be maintained by him in safe condition, accessible and in
proper operating condition at all times. Plans for the
installation of control manholes and related equipment shall be
submitted for approval to the Director prior to the beginning of
construction.
(3) An approved sketch shall be provided to the Director
for his records showing the locations of all control manholes.
The manholes shall be located from both street lines and
building lines. The sketch shall show the roadways and access
points to the control manholes and note entry limitations, if
any, and the telephone number and person to contact for entrance
when necessary, and any other data considered pertinent by the
Director. Ample space shall be provided around the control
manholes and shall be maintained free and clear by the owner at
all times.
(4) Waste Sampling. Industrial wastes discharged into the
public sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection and a
determination of character and concentration. The determination
shall be made a often as deemed necessary. Where samples are
taken often enough to produce meaningful averages, sewage
disposal charges will be determined based on the average values
determined during the billing period after due allowance for
values not believed to be representative. Any person may
request the Director to make new tests, such tests to be at the
expense of the person discharging the waste and such tests to be
of a minimum of 24 hours duration unless otherwise approved. If
the Director is satisfied that such test was made when the plant
was operating under normal conditions, the results of these
tests shall be used in computing the subsequent sewage disposal
charge in the manner previously prescribed. Records of the
results of such monitoring shall be kept and said results shall
be reported to the Director. The Director shall make such
records available upon request to State, Federal, or any other
public agencies having jurisdiction over such discharges.
(5) Analyses. Laboratory procedures used in the
examination of industrial wastes shall be those set forth in
"Standard Methods" or 40 CFR 136, "Guidelines Establishing
Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants." However, alternate
methods for certain analyses may be used subject to mutual
agreement between the person and the approving authority.
30.08 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS. (1) No person shall
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.08(2)
14
discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface
water, ground water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process
waters to any sanitary sewer.
(2) Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers specifically designated as storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Director.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water shall be
discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet subject to the
provisions of the particular industry's applicable WPDES Permit.
(3) No person without approval of the Director shall
discharge any waste or other substance directly into a manhole,
catch basin, or inlet. All discharges to the sewer shall be
through an approved sewer connection.
(4) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:
(a) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or
other inflammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
(b) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard
to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant,
including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/1
as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewers.
(c) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5,
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage
works.
(d) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of
such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers,
or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage
works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, un-ground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, excessive
amounts of hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, sanitary napkins, disposable diapers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(e) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.08(5)
15
life or concentration in quantities that exceed the limits
established by the Director in compliance with applicable State
or Federal regulations.
(5) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes
unless it appears unlikely in the opinion of the Director that
such wastes will harm either the sewers, sewage treatment
process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or will otherwise endanger life, limb, public property,
or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Director will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances
that require the approval of the Director prior to discharge
into the sewer system are:
(a) Any liquor or vapor having a temperature higher
than one hundred forty (140 degrees) F (60 degrees Centigrade).
(b) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease
or oils of petroleum origin, whether emulsified or not, in
excess of one hundred (100) mg/1 or containing substances which
may solidify or become viscous a temperatures between thirty-two
(32 degrees) and one hundred forty (140 degrees) F (0 degrees
and 60 degrees Centigrade).
(c) Any garbage that has not been properly ground.
The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped
with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric)
or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Director.
(d) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether
neutralized or not.
(e) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium,
cadmium, nickel, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or
toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement, in such quantities that any of the above materials
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the Director for such
material.
(f) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other
taste or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.08(5)(g)
16
exceeding limits which may be established by the Director as
necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the
requirements of the state, Federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
(g) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of
9.5.
(h) Materials which exert, cause or contain:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended
solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers
earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as but not limited to
sodium chloride and sodium sulfate)
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not
limited to, dye wastes, vegetable tanning
solutions, and commercial inks).
(3) BOD, chemical oxygen demand, phosphorus,
nitrogen or chloride requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load
on the sewage treatment works.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of
wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
(i) Incompatible pollutants in excess of the allowed
limits as determined by Village, State and Federal laws and
regulations as determined and when amended, referred to as
Pretreatment Standards developed by the Environmental Protection
Agency, 40 CFR 128.
(j) Any sludge, precipitate or waste resulting from
any industrial or commercial treatment or pretreatment of any
person's wastewater or air pollutants or any waste which would
result in a violation of the Village's WPDES Permit.
(6) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters
contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated
in Paragraph 5 of this Section, and which in the judgment of the
Director may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Village
Board, upon report of the above officer, may:
(a) Reject the wastes,
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.08(6)(b)
17
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition
for discharge, and/or
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge, and/or(d) Require payment to cover the added cost of
handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing sewage
disposal charges.
(7) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided as
required by the State Plumbing Code for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except
that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the Director, and shall be located as
to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(8) Where preliminary treatment of flow-equalizing
facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at his expense.
(9) All measurements, tests, and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made
in this ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the
latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health
Association or 40 CFR 136 "Guidelines Establishing Procedures
for the Analysis of Pollutants" and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided, Village for treatment, subject to
payment therefore, by the industrial concern. Any such
agreement that may be reached between the Village and an
industrial concern shall be subject as a minimum to the rates
and regulations stated elsewhere in this ordinance.
30.09 PRETREATMENT. (1) If the Village Board permits the
pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, detailed plans
showing the facilities, operating procedures, and effluent
characteristics shall be submitted to the Director for review
and approval prior to construction of the facility. The
approval of such plans and procedures will in no way relieve
such persons from the responsibility of modifying the facility,
if necessary, to produce an acceptable effluent. Any changes in
the approved facilities or method of operation shall be reviewed
and approved by the Director.
(2) The Village is required to meet certain effluent
limitations under Federal and State regulations as established
and amended. Therefore, the admission into the public sewerage
system, either directly or indirectly, of any wastes or waters
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.09(2)(a)
18
exceeding any of the limits listed below is subject to review
and approval by the Director:
(a) a five (5) day, 20 degree centigrade,
B.O.D.greater than 250 milligrams per liter.
(b) a suspended solids content greater than 350
milligrams per liter.
(c) an average daily flow exceeding two (2) percent
of the total flow to the treatment plant.
If determined necessary by the Director the user shall provide
the necessary pretreatment or curtailment to stay within the
above limitations. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the
Director from requiring lower constituent amounts if it is
deemed necessary for the protection of the sewerage system.
30.10 DISCHARGE PERMITS. (1) Persons engaged in any
activity listed in Section 306 (b)(1)(A) of the Act, which are
listed below, shall obtain a permit prior to connecting to or
discharging to sewerage system.
Pulp and paper mills
Paperboard, builders paper and board mills
Meat product and rendering processing
Dairy product processing
Grain mills
Canned and preserved fruits and vegetable processing
Canned and preserved seafood processing
Sugar processing
Textile mills
Cement manufacturing
Feedlots
Electroplating
Organic chemicals manufacturing
Inorganic chemicals manufacturing
Plastic and synthetic materials manufacturing
Soap and detergent manufacturing
Fertilizer manufacturing
Petroleum refining
Iron and steel manufacturing
Nonferrous metals manufacturing
Phosphate manufacturing
Steam electric power plants
Ferroalloy manufacturing
Leather tanning and finishing
Glass and asbestos manufacturing
Rubber processing
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.10(2)
19
Timber products processing
Such persons presently discharging to the sewerage system shall,
within sixty (60) days from the effective date of this
ordinance, complete and file an application for a permit with
the Director. Submission of the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (DNR). NR 101 form will be considered as satisfying
the requirements of Section 30.10 until such time as the
Approving Authority determines a more detailed submission is
required to safeguard the present and future utility of the
treatment plant. The Director may also require any other person
who is discharging or proposing to discharge wastes into the
system to obtain a permit. The Director may change the
conditions of the permit as circumstances or laws or regulations
enacted by the State or Federal governments may require.
Limitations on the discharge of wastes into the system shall be
in accordance and agreement with the appropriate current
Pretreatment Standards developed by the Environmental Protection
Agency.
(2) Permit application forms are available at the office
of the Director or other designated locations and persons
required to obtain a permit shall procure and complete the
application at their own expense and file the application with
the Director. The Director will evaluate the data furnished
and, if insufficient data has been furnished, the Director will
notify the applicant and action will not be taken until the
desired information is received. After acceptance of the data,
the Director will issue a permit with any restrictions,
conditions, limitations or special requirements noted thereon,
which may contain but not be limited to the following:
(a) Limits on rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization
(b) Installation of inspection and sampling
facilities including access to such facilities.
(c) Specifications for monitoring programs which may
include sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling,
number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule.
(d) Submission of discharge reports.
(e) Special service charge or fees.
(f) Pretreatment requirements.
(g) Submission of samples of all chemicals and
substances used along with a chemical analysis and list of all
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.10(2)(h)
20
materials.
(h) A continuously updated inventory on all
chemicals and substances. The inventory should show normal
usage and the amount on hand.
Any significant change in information supplied on the
application form or in strengths and volumes of waters and
wastewaters shall be reported immediately to the Director for
determination of need to change conditions of the permit and
related fees.
(3) A permit shall not be reassigned or transferred.
(4) The conditions of the permit shall be enforced by the
Director in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
Any permit holder who exceeds the conditions and provisions of
the permit will be subject to enforcement provisions of Section
30.14.
(5) Each person issued a permit may be required by the
Director to submit an annual report. The Director may require a
permit holder to submit more frequent reports if in his
judgment, the wastes being discharged are in violation of this
ordinance. The report may be required to include but not be
limited to, nature of process, volume, rates of flow, mass
emission, production quantities, hours of operation, personnel,
or other information that relates to the generation, handling
and discharge of wastes. The report may also include the
chemical constituents and quantity of liquid or gaseous material
stored on site. If sufficient data has been furnished,
additional information shall be provided upon request of the
Director.
30.11 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS. (1) The
Director and other duly authorized employees of the Village
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance
with the provisions of the ordinance. The Director of his
representative shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining,
ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers
or water ways or facilities for waste treatment.
(2) While performing the necessary work on private
properties referred to in Section (1) above, the Director or
duly authorized employees of the village shall: observe all
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.11(3)
21
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company; hold the company harmless for injury or death to the
Village employees; and indemnify the company against loss or
damage to its property by Village employees and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the company and growing out of the
gaging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe
conditions.
(3) The Director and other duly authorized employees of
the Village bearing proper credentials and identification shall
be permitted to enter all private properties through which the
Village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but
not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms
of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved.
30.12 RESTRICTED INFORMATION. All information and data on
a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit
application, permits, monitoring programs, and inspections,
shall be available to the public without restriction unless the
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Director, that the release of such
information to the general public would divulge information or
processes or methods that would give a business advantage to
competitors who did not know this information. However, all
such information shall be made available to governmental
agencies for use in making studies or for the use of the
Director or the state or any State agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
information.
30.13 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE. No unauthorized person
shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewerage
system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to
immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
30.14 ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION OF SERVICE. (1) Each
Sewage Disposal Charge and all other charges levied by, or
pursuant to, this ordinance shall constitute a lien upon the
corresponding premises served by the sewer system as provided
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.14(2)
22
in Section 66.0821 and 62.69, Wisconsin Statutes. [Ord. 523 8/02]
(2) The Director may, upon notice and failure to comply
with such notice, apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for
orders to cease and desist if it is determined that a discharge
of wastes has been taking place, or threatens to take place in
violation of prohibitions or limitations of this article, or the
provisions of the discharge permit, and direct those persons not
complying with such prohibitions, limits, requirements, or
provisions to comply immediately, or comply in accordance with a
time schedule approved by the Director, or to take appropriate
or remedial preventive action in the event of a threatened
violation.
(3) If it is determined that a discharge of wastes has
been occurring or threatens to occur, in violation of this
article or the provisions of the discharge permit, the Director
may require the user to submit for approval, with such
modifications considered necessary, a detailed time schedule of
corrective and/or preventive action.
(4) The Director may revoke any discharge permit, or
terminate or cause to be terminated, wastewater service to any
person, if a violation of this ordinance if found to exist or if
a discharge of wastes causes, or threatens to cause, a condition
of contamination, pollution, or nuisance. This provision is in
addition to other statutes, rules, or regulations authorizing
termination of service for delinquency in payment, and shall be
effective immediately upon written notification by the Director.
(5) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of the ordinance shall be liable to the Wastewater
Collection and Treatment System for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned by such violation and upon conviction of any
violation of this ordinance shall be fined not less than Five
Dollars ($5) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500) per
violation, and in default of payment, shall be committed to the
County Jail for a period of confinement not less than ten (10)
days nor to exceed ninety (90) days.
(6) Each day a condition is allowed to exist which is
contrary to all of any part of this ordinance shall constitute a
new violation.
(7) Ownership and Occupance. Change of ownership or
occupance of premises delinquent under provisions of this
ordinance shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating charges
due and penalties.
30.15 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY PLAN. (1) Purpose and
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.15(2)
23
Scope. This Plan implements the requirements of Section
204(b)(1)(B) of Public Law 92-500, 33 U.S.C. Section 1284
(b)(1)(B), as well as the regulations and guidelines issued
pursuant thereto, in order to maintain eligibility for Federal
grants which provide necessary funds for the construction of
wastewater treatment works. It is the intent of this Plan to
provide for payment by each industrial user, unless otherwise
excluded, in addition to the already established system of rates
and charges currently in effect, of such user's appropriate
share of Federal construction grant funds which are allocable to
the treatment of industrial wastes by the Village.
(2) Effective Date. The provisions of this Plan shall
become effective on the first day that any Village treatment
works assisted with Federal grants awarded for the sewerage
system, commencing with the Step I Grant, shall become
operational.
(3) Definitions. In addition to the terms defined in
previous sections of this Chapter, the following definitions
apply herein:
(a) "Expansion". An increase in treatment capacity.
(b) "Infiltration". The water entering a sewer
system, including sewer service connections, from the ground,
through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe
joints, connections, or manhole walls. Infiltration does not
include, and is distinguished from, inflow.
(c) "Inflow". The water discharged into a sewer
system, including service connections from such sources as, but
not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard, and area drains,
foundation drains, cooling-water discharges, drains from springs
and swampy area, manhole covers, cross connections from storm
sewers and combined sewer, catch basins, storm waters, surface
runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow does not
include, and is distinguished from, infiltration.
(d) "Industrial Cost Recovery". Recovery by the
Village from the industrial users of the treatment works of the
grant amount allocable to the treatment of industrial process
wastes from such users pursuant to Section 204 (b) of Public Law
92-500 and subsequent regulations.
(e) "Industrial Cost Recovery Period". That period
during which the Federal grant amount allocable to the treatment
of wastes from industrial users shall be recovered from
industrial users of the Village system, a period of thirty (30)
years from the first day that each such grant-assisted treatment
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.15(3)(f)
24
works shall become operations. Congress, as part of the Clean
Water Act of 1977, has established a moratorium on ICR payments
to the Federal Government for the period of December 28, 1997,
to June 30, 1979. During such moratorium period the Village
will not collect ICR charges from non-exempt industries, but
will continue to monitor the discharges from such industries and
will compute and keep a record of the ICR charges that would
normally accrue during the moratorium. In the event Congress
does not see fit to change the Federal regulations requiring ICR
payments, then those ICR obligations incurred by each non-exempt
industry during the moratorium will have to be satisfied after
the aforesaid June 30, 1979, date ending said moratorium. Said
obligations incurred during the moratorium will then be
collected via equal annual installments pro-rated over the
remaining cost recovery period.
(f) "Industrial User". Any non-governmental user of
treatment works owned by the Village, and identified in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, United States
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented,
under the following divisions: (1) Division A: Agricultural,
Forestry, and Fishing; (2) Division B: Mining; (3) Division
D: Manufacturing; (4) Division E: Transportation,
Communications, Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Services; and (5)
Division I: Services. (For the purpose of Industrial Cost
Recovery this definition of industrial user applies regardless
of how a user is classified for other purposes, e.g., commercial
or public.
(g) "Upgrading". An increase in the degree of
treatment.
(4) Exclusions. An industrial user who would otherwise be
subject to this Plan shall be excluded from its operation to the
extent that such user will introduce primarily sanitary sewage
into the Village sewerage system, Further, any industrial user
discharging the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day, or less,
of sanitary wastes is exempt from this Industrial Cost Recovery
Plan, provided that such discharge does not contain pollutants
which (a) interfere with the treatment process, (b) are toxic or
incompatible, or (c) contaminate or otherwise reduce utility of
the treatment process sludge.
(5) Reserved Capacity Agreements. Reserved capacity
agreements may be established whereby the industrial user shall
pay the full industrial cost recovery payments allocable to the
capacity reserved and, in the event that such an industrial user
exceeds its reserved capacity, its full use shall be subject to
this Plan, unless otherwise excluded.
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.15(6)
25
If the treatment works are expanded in the future with PL 92-500
grant assistance, an industrial user who has executed a reserved
capacity agreement and has made industrial cost recovery
payments based upon reserved capacity, will not incur additional
industrial cost recovery charges associated with the cost of
expansion until the industrial user's actual use of the
treatment works exceeds its reserved capacity.
Nevertheless, such industrial users shall be required to pay any
additional industrial cost recovery charges associated with the
cost of upgrading a treatment works.
An industrial user may terminate or modify, with the consent of
the Village, any agreement for reserved capacity, thereafter its
payment for industrial cost recovery shall cease or be modified,
to the extent of the reserved capacity so terminated or
modified.
(6) Computation of Industrial Cost Recovery Payments.
During the industrial cost recovery period, each industrial user
shall pay its share of the total amount of Federal grant funds,
including amendments to grants, which are allocable to capacity
used or reserved for use in the treatment of wastes from
industrial users. The payment for each industrial user shall be
proportionate to its industrial waste discharge flow capacity
for ICRS purposes; in addition, the pollutant strength of the
user's industrial waste discharge shall be considered in
computing ICRS payments. An industrial user's annual ICRS
payment shall be the greater of the amounts computed by the
following methods:
(a) The user's total annual industrial waste
discharge, adjusted for sanitary sewage discharges (thousands of
gallons), multiplied by the minimum unit rate per thousand
gallons for ICRS purposes ($0.1232 per thousand gallons of
process wastewater discharged); or,
(b) The user's total annual industrial waste
discharge, adjusted for sanitary sewage discharges, and broken
down by appropriate testing and calculations into quantities of
the following waste characteristics, multiplied by the following
pertinent rate for each such characteristic and added together
for a total ICRS charge:
ICR Flow Charge = $0.0580 per thousand gallons
ICR BOD Charge = $0.0356 per pound
For any industrial user which discharges into the Village
system of wastewater treatment works subject to this Plan, the
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.15(7)
26
industrial cost recovery charges for such user shall accrue from
the date of the user's initial discharge into the Village system
or the effective date of this Plan, whichever is later, and
shall continue to accrue for the unexpired portion of the
industrial cost recovery period or until the user ceases to use
the Village system, whichever occurs first.
If there is a substantial change in the strength, volume, or
delivery flow rate characteristics introduced into the treatment
works by an industrial user, such user's share shall be adjusted
accordingly when the Village has made such a determination. If
there is an expansion or upgrading of the treatment works, each
existing industrial user's share shall be adjusted accordingly.
An industrial user's share shall not include an interest
component.
(7) Industrial Cost Recovery Billing. The first
industrial cost recovery bills shall be issued to industrial
users no later than ten (10) months from the effective date of
this Plan. Thereafter, all industrial users shall be billed on
their normal wastewater user charge billing dates, or annually
as determined by the Director.
(8) Disposition of Industrial Cost Recovery Revenue. All
funds recovered during the annual accounting period, with the
exception of the discretionary portion, shall be deposited in
interest-bearing accounts which are fully collateralized by
obligations of the United States Government or by obligations
fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United
States Government or any agency thereof.
Within one year of the effective date of this Plan, and
thereafter at least annually and within four months after the
close of the fiscal year, the Village shall transfer to the
United States Treasury fifty percent (50%) of all industrial
cost recovery revenues collected during such fiscal year and any
interest earned thereon. Forty percent (40%) of any industrial
costs recovered and all interest which has accrued on the said
forty percent (40%) shall be placed in an industrial cost
recovery account entitled "Expansion and Upgrading Account."
Funds in this Expansion and Upgrading Account shall be expended
only for replacement or expansion of Grant assisted treatment
works and shall not be spent without prior written approval of
the Environmental Protection Agency's Regional Administrator.
The remaining ten percent (10%) of industrial cost recovery
revenues is discretionary and shall be used to administer this
Plan and for such other uses as the Village shall deem proper,
except it shall not be used for the construction of industrial
pretreatment facilities or rebates to industrial users for costs
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.15(9)
27
incurred by such users in complying with Federal user charges or
industrial cost recovery requirements.
(9) Monitoring. All industrial users who are classified
as "Industrial Customers" under Section 30.03, User
Classifications, shall be monitored at such times as the village
may deem necessary, but at least annually.
All other industrial users, may be monitored on a random basis,
as the Village deems appropriate or at the user's request.
Unless substantiated by actual monitoring, the wastewater
characteristics for such users shall be assumed to be comparable
to the concentrations found in sanitary sewage.
(10) Industrial Cost Recovery Charge Formula. Each
industrial user's Industrial Cost Recovery Charge (ICR) shall be
computed for each year of the industrial cost recovery period by
the following formula:
ICR = (Q-QD) x cqm or ICR = (Q-QD) x cq + (BODBODD)
x cBOD
where,
ICR = user per year.
Q = Wastewater flow contributed by the user during
the year (thousands of gallons).
QD = Wastewater flow that is certified as primarily
sanitary sewage contributed by the user during
the year (thousands of gallons); however,
under no circumstances shall the allowance for
primarily sanitary sewage exceed twenty-five
(25) gallons per workday per employee.
Cqm = The minimum annual unit charge for Federal
grant costs allocable to hydraulic capacity
(dollars per thousand gallons).
Cq = The annual unit charge for Federal grant cots
allocable to hydraulic capacity (thousands of
gallons).
BOD = The poundage of five-day biochemical oxygen
demand contributed by a user during the year
(pounds).
BODD = The poundage of five-day biochemical oxygen
demand contributed by the primarily sanitary
sewage component of a user's waste stream
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 30.15(11)
28
during the year (pounds)
cBOD = The annual charge for Federal grant costs
allocable to BOD removal (dollars per pound).
(11) Minimum Industrial Cost Recovery Charge. As a
minimum, no industrial user's Industrial Cost Recovery (ICR)
charge shall be less than the amount determined by applying the
procedure set forth in Section 30.15 (6) sub-section (a) of this
ordinance.
30.16 OTHER PROVISIONS. The provisions of Chapter 30
shall be in addition to any and all other sewer regulations of
the Ellsworth Municipal Code of Ordinances and shall take
precedence over those with which it may conflict.
30.17 APPEALS. Any user, permit applicant, or permit
holder affected by any decision, action, of determination,
including cease and desist orders made by the Director
interpreting or implementing the provisions of this Chapter, or
in any permit issued hereunder, may file with the Village Board,
a written request for reconsideration within 10 days of such
decision, action or determination, setting for in detail the
facts supporting the user's request for reconsideration. The
Village Board shall make a final ruling on the appeal within ten
(10) days.
30.18 VALIDITY OF CHAPTER. The invalidity of any section,
clause, sentence or provision of this Chapter shall not affect
the validity of any other part of this Chapter which can be
given effect without such invalid part of parts. [Ord. 258]
-1-
CHAPTER 45 LAND DIVISION AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
45.01 TITLE
45.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE
45.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
(1) Conformance with Policies
(2) Land Suitability
(3) Determination of Adequacy of Public Facilities and Services
(4) Lot Sizes
(5) Dedication and Reservation of Land
(6) Penalties
(7) Exceptions
45.04 PROCEDURE FOR DIVIDING LAND
(1) Pre-Application Procedure
(2) Preliminary Plat
(3) Final Plat Procedure
(4) Comprehensive Development Plan Procedure
(5) Minor Subdivision (Certified Survey) Procedure
(6) Procedures and Criteria for the Division of Land Within the 1-1/2 Mile Extraterritorial Plat
Approval Jurisdiction of the Village
(7) Fee and Dedication Schedule
45.05 PLAT AND DATA SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
(1) Environmental Assessment
(2) Preliminary Plat
(3) Final Plat
(4) Comprehensive Development Plan
(5) Minor Subdivision (Certified Survey)
45.06 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
(1) Statement of Intent
(2) Monuments
(3) Improvements
(4) Contract Requirements for Installation of Improvements
(5) Documentation
45.07 DESIGN STANDARDS
(1) Conformity with the Village Plans and Ordinances
(2) Relationship to Existing and Future Development
(3) Access
(4) Streets
(5) Blocks
(6) Lots
(7) Building Setback Lines
(8) Lighting
(9) Treatment of Railroad Rights of Way and Limited Access Highways
(10) Utility Easements
(11) Drainage and Greenway/Environmental Corridor Easements
(12) Erosion Control
(13) Intra-Block Drainage and Foundation Design
(14) Storm Water Management
45.08 VARIANCES
45.09 APPEALS
45.10 SEVERABILITY
45.11 DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-2-
CHAPTER 45
LAND DIVISION AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
45.01 TITLE. This Chapter shall be known as the Subdivision Ordinance, Village of Ellsworth, Wisconsin, and
any reference herein to “Ordinance” shall refer to this chapter.
45.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE. This Chapter is intended to regulate and control the division and subdivision of
land within the corporate limits and the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the Village of Ellsworth in
order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, to encourage the most appropriate use of land, to
provide the best possible living environment for people and to conserve the value of buildings placed upon the
land by: furthering the orderly layout and use of land; insuring proper legal description and proper monumenting
of land; preventing overcrowding of land and avoiding undue concentration of population; lessening congestion in
the streets and highways; securing safety from fire, flooding, water pollution and other hazards; providing
adequate light and air; facilitating adequate playgrounds, open space, storm water drainage, the conservation of
land, natural resources, scenic and historic sites, energy and other public requirements; facilitating further
resubdivision of larger parcels into smaller parcels of land; insuring enforcement of the development concepts,
policies and standards delineated in the related components, the Zoning Ordinance, and the Building Code of the
Village of Ellsworth.
45.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
(1) Conformance with Policies. It is the intent of the Village of Ellsworth that land be developed in
harmony with the following:
(a) To plan the location and/or timing of new development to make it efficient, to reduce public costs
and to encourage separation and distinction between municipalities.
(b) To direct and stage new growth only to those areas planned and programmed for development and
capable of providing a full range of urban services, including transportation and schools.
(c) To discourage scattered development and urban sprawl.
(d) To insure that land uses complement rather than conflict with natural features such as rolling
topography, trees, creeks, ponds and rock formations.
(e) To develop a system of interior open spaces in conjunction with existing environmental corridors
to delineate neighborhoods, control storm water drainage and provide circulation for pedestrian and
bicycle traffic.
(f) To locate multi-family development and local commercial development convenient to each other
and near arterials.
(g) To encourage preservation of open space and aesthetic quality in development.
(h) To favor land use intensities and patterns that are supportive of alternative modes of transportation.
(i) To promote and maintain balanced commercial activity that is viable and responsive to the needs of
the community and the surrounding market area.
(j) To preserve the quality of the water and the air and to prevent extreme noise and visual blight.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-3-
(k) To preserve prime agricultural land for agricultural use.
(l) To encourage development in the Village with balanced residential, commercial, industrial and
open space uses and public services.
(2) Land Suitability. No land shall be divided or subdivided for a use which is held unsuitable by the Plan
Commission for reason of flooding or potential flooding, soil limitations, inadequate drainage, steep
topography, incompatible surrounding land use, or any other condition likely to be harmful to the health,
safety or welfare of the future residents or users of the area, or harmful to the community.
(a) Except as provided herein, the Plan Commission shall determine land suitability prior to the time
the preliminary plat or certified survey is considered for approval, following review and
recommendations by the appropriate Village Commissions and Committees. The Plan Commission
may impose special conditions on the plat or certified survey map deemed necessary to protect the
health, safety or welfare of future residents of the area. The areas which are found to be
environmentally sensitive shall be considered for preservation as open space. The determination of
land suitability will be evaluated through the Environmental Assessment Procedures set forth in
sec. 45.05(1) of this Ordinance. The subdivider shall furnish such maps, data and information as
may be necessary to make a determination of land suitability.
(b) Should the Plan Commission determine that the land is unsuitable for the intended use or
development, it shall state its reasons in writing to the subdivider within 30 days of initial Plan
Commission action. The subdivider may present additional evidence to support the proposed
subdivision. Upon review of the additional evidence, the Plan Commission shall affirm, modify, or
withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
(c) The subdivider may appeal the determination of land suitability as provided in sec. 45.09
(Appeals).
(3) Determination of Adequacy of Public Facilities and Services.
(a) A certified survey, preliminary plat or final plat shall not be approved unless the Plan Commission
and the Village Board determine that adequate public facilities and public services are available to
meet the needs of the proposed subdivision.
(b) The applicant shall furnish any data requested by the Village Engineer who shall transmit this
information to appropriate Village commissions, committees and boards for review and shall act as
coordinator for their reports to the Plan Commission and the Village Board on the adequacy of
water, sanitary and storm sewers, fire service, police, parks and open space and recreation facilities,
and transportation facilities.
(c) Public facilities and public services for a proposed subdivision may be found to be adequate when
the following conditions exist:
1. The proposed subdivision is located in an area where mainline interceptor sewer service is
presently under construction, or designated by the Village Board for extension of sewer
service. The Plan Commission and the Village Board shall also consider the recommendations
of the Village Engineer and the Water and Sewer/Street and Sidewalk Committees on the
capacity of trunk lines, wells, and of sewerage treatment facilities and any other information
presented.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-4-
2. The proposed subdivision is located within an area serviced by an arterial transmission water
main with adequate capacity for the proposed development, or if the water distribution system that
is needed is under construction or scheduled for construction. The Plan Commission and the
Village Board shall consider the recommendations of the Village Engineer and the
recommendations of the Water and Sewer/Street and Sidewalk Committees on line capacities,
water sources and storage facilities as well as any other information presented.
3. The Village Engineer recommends to the Plan Commission and the Village Board that
adequate facilities are available to insure the proper storm water management.
4. Plans of the proposed subdivision can be assured park, recreation and open space areas,
facilities, and services which meet the needs of the community.
5. The appropriate Police Department and Fire Department verify that timely and adequate
service can be provided to the residents.
6. The proposed subdivision is accessible by existing publicly maintained, all weather roads
adequate to accommodate both existing traffic and that traffic to be generated by the
proposed subdivision, or necessary additional roads and road improvements are budgeted for
construction with public or private financing.
7. The proposed subdivision can be adequately served by existing sewerage plant and water well
and water storage plant facilities. Where the Plan Commission and the Village Board
determine that one or more public facilities or services are not adequate for the proposed
development, but that a portion of the area could be served adequately, or that careful phasing
of the development could result in all public facilities and public services being adequate,
conditional approval may include only such portions or may specify phasing of the
development.
(4) Lot Sizes. In the case of all subdivisions, including minor subdivisions, lot sizes shall conform to the
area and width requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
(5) Dedication and Reservation of Land.
(a) Whenever a tract of land to be divided within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance encompasses all or
any part of a street, highway, bikeway, pedestrian way, greenway, environmental corridor,
waterway, or a drainage or utility easement designated in any plan, map, or another ordinance, the
subdivider shall plat said public way in the locations and dimensions indicated on the above. The
Plan Commission shall determine whether said public way should be dedicated to the public or
reserved by the subdivider.
(b) Whenever a tract of land to be divided within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance encompasses all or
part of a park site, open space or other recreation area or school site designated in any plan, map, or
ordinance, said public sites shall be platted and dedicated or reserved by the subdivider at the
discretion of the Plan Commission in the locations and dimensions indicated on said plans or map
in accordance with the requirements of sec. 45.06(3)(k) hereof.
(c) Once a preliminary plat or certified survey is approved, any lands proposed for public use above
shall not be altered without the written approval of the Plan Commission and the Parks, Recreation,
Development Committee.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-5-
(6) Penalties.
(a) Failure to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance shall invalidate purported transfers of
titles at the option of the purchaser in accordance with the provisions of §236.31(3), Wis. Stats..
(b) A building permit shall be refused for any site created in violation of this Ordinance.
(7) Exceptions. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to:
(a) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order;
(b) Leases for a term not to exceed ten (10) years, mortgages or easements;
(c) The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are
not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by the
Zoning Ordinance or other applicable laws or ordinances unless the parcels have been part of a
prior land division or subdivision.
(d) The sale or exchange of parcels involving only a change of lot lines where the land division may be
approved by the zoning administrator after his/her review to determine conformance with the
Village of Ellsworth Municipal Code.
45.04 PROCEDURE FOR DIVIDING LAND. In planning and developing a subdivision or minor subdivision,
the subdivider or agent shall, in every case, pursue the following course:
(1) Pre-Application Procedure. Before filing an application for approval of a preliminary plat or certified
survey, the subdivider shall consult with the Department of Public Works and shall prepare the
following:
(a) A preliminary sketch for review and concept approval of the Plan Commission.
(b) An Environmental Assessment Checklist, or when required, an expanded Environmental
Assessment Report, as required by sec. 45.05(1).
(c) Written requests to the Water and Sewer/Street and Sidewalk Committees and to the Plan
Commission for any water main extensions necessary to serve the proposed plat.
(d) A signed statement listing development projects for which the applicant has received Village
approval in the last 5 years and indicating any outstanding performance or financial obligations on
such projects which derive from application of Village land use regulations. If this statement is
found to contain information which is contrary to fact or to omit the listing of such projects or
obligations or to describe obligations on which performance or payment is delinquent, the
application may be dismissed without prejudice until the application is corrected and/or the
delinquency is cured. On completion of the above documents (a,b,c,d), a pre-application
consultation shall be held with the Public Works Director or his/her designee to assist the
subdivider in appraising the objectives of these regulations, and any pertinent ordinances and to
reach conclusions regarding the objectives and general program for the development.
(2) Preliminary Plat. Prior to submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary
plat and file a written request for its approval with the Secretary of the Plan Commission. A preliminary
plat shall not be submitted prior to approval of the Environmental Assessment Checklist, or when
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-6-
required, the Environmental Assessment Report, as required in sec. 45.05(1). The request for approval
shall be submitted at least five (5) days prior to the date of the meeting of the Plan Commission at which
the request is to be considered, and shall include all data required by this Ordinance and shall be
accompanied by eight (8) copies of the preliminary plat. The Plan Commission may forward a copy of
the plat to Pierce County for review and comment.
(a) The preliminary plat shall include the entire area owned or controlled by the subdivider. The Plan
Commission may waive this requirement to allow the subdivider to submit a Comprehensive
Development Plan (CDP) meeting the requirements of sec. 45.04(4) and 45.05(4) for that portion
of the land which is not to be included in the final plat when the subdivider owns or controls eighty
(80) acres or more. The subdivider shall in all cases submit a preliminary plat for the lands to be
included in the final plat.
(b) The Plan Commission shall within ninety (90) days from the date submitted, approve, approve
conditionally or reject the preliminary plat, and when included, the development plan, based on its
determination of conformance with the intent and provisions of this Ordinance, as well as all
related plans and ordinances, and recommendations of appropriate Village committees and
commissions. In all cases, the time period within which action is required shall not commence until
the Village has received all maps, plans, drawings and related data necessary for plat review as
outlined herein. Such time may be extended by a written agreement with the subdivider. Failure of
the Plan Commission to act within such ninety (90) days or extension thereof, shall constitute an
approval of the preliminary plat and development plan. The reasons for conditional approval or
rejections shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a letter stating such reasons shall be sent
to the applicant. Approval of a preliminary plat shall be valid for six (6) months from the date of
approval.
(c) The action of the Plan Commission shall be noted on three (3) copies of the preliminary plat, one
copy of which shall be returned to the subdivider with the date and action endorsed thereon.
(d) Replats are to be processed in accordance with the provisions of §236.36, Wis. Stats., entitled
"Replats".
(e) If the preliminary plat or certified survey map contains private road(s), the following note shall be
added to the plat or CSM when it is presented for approval as a final plat:
NOTICE OF POSSIBLE LIMITATION OF PUBLIC SERVICES.
This plat or certified survey map contains private road(s), and, as a result, certain Village services
may be limited. The extent of these limitations is spelled out in a document called a
Village/developer agreement or, if this is a condominium plat, in a document called a general
development plan (GDP), which directly relates to this plat or CSM and is filed as a public
document in the offices of both the Village Clerk and the Director of Public Works for the Village
of Ellsworth.
(3) Final Plat Procedure.
(a) The subdivider shall submit the final plat and/or true copies thereof and written request for
approval to the Secretary of the Plan Commission and the State of Wisconsin, in accordance with
§236.12, Wis. Stats. The subdivider shall provide five (5) copies of the plat for review by the
Village at least twelve (12) days prior to the scheduled Plan Commission review.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-7-
(b) The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to record at that time.
(c) The Plan Commission shall examine the final plat as to its conformance with the preliminary plat
and the requirements set forth in sec. 45.03(2) of this Ordinance, and shall recommend approval,
conditional approval or rejection of the plat. The Plan Commission shall transmit the plat, together
with its recommendations, to the President and Village Board within thirty (30) days of its
submission to the Plan Commission.
(d) The Village Board shall approve or reject the final plat within sixty (60) days of its submission to
the Plan Commission, unless the time is extended by written agreement with the subdivider. The
Village Board shall review the final plat for conformity with all conditions of approval, if any, and
sec. 45.03(2) of this Ordinance and shall base approval or disapproval on these requirements. If the
final plat meets the requirements of this Ordinance, and has been submitted within six (6) months
from the approval date of the preliminary plat and the conditions have been met in the case of a
preliminary plat given conditional approval, the Village Board shall approve the final plat.
(e) Following approval of the final plat by the Village Board, the developer shall enter into a contract
for improvements as required by sec. 45.06(4). Prior to the signing of said contract by the President
and the Village Clerk, the developer shall pay to the Village all required fees, area charges and
deposits, and provide any required performance bonds.
(f) Upon recording of the final plat by the subdivider, two (2) copies of the recorded document shall
be furnished to the Village Clerk.
(g) If the Village Board fails to act within sixty (60) days and the time has not been extended by
agreement, and if no unsatisfied objections have been filed within that period, the plat shall be
deemed approved, and upon demand, a certificate to that effect shall be made on the face of the plat
by the Village Clerk.
(4) Comprehensive Development Plan Procedure.
(a) When the subdivider has eighty (80) acres or more of land under his/her or its control, they may,
where authorized by the Plan Commission, elect to file a Comprehensive Development Plan (CDP)
in lieu of a preliminary plat for that land not to be included in the final plat.
(b) The applicant shall file eight (8) blueline prints and eight (8) copies of all required exhibits with the
Secretary of the Plan Commission.
(c) The CDP and its exhibits shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer and the Water and Sewer/
Street and Sidewalk Committees; for conformity with the provisions of this and other pertinent
ordinances. Their comments shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission for review.
(d) The Plan Commission shall approve, conditionally approve or reject the CDP within sixty (60)
days of the filing of the CDP and exhibits. One copy shall be returned to the applicant notifying the
applicant in writing of any conditions of approval or reasons for rejection.
(e) Any subsequent change to the CDP and exhibits shall require filing with the Secretary of the Plan
Commission. Within thirty (30) days of filing, the Plan Commission shall approve, conditionally
approve or reject the revised CDP.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-8-
(5) Minor Subdivision (Certified Survey) Procedure.
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall divide any land located within the corporate limits of the
Village of Ellsworth or within the one and one-half (1 1/2) mile extraterritorial plat approval
jurisdiction thereof which shall result in a minor subdivision as defined by this Ordinance without
first filing an application and a certified survey map for approval by the Plan Commission (and the
Village Board when dedication of land is involved), and subsequently recording said map with the
Pierce County Register of Deeds. The certified survey map shall comply fully with §236.34, Wis.
Stats., and with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance.
(b) Pre-Application Procedure. Before filing an application for approval of a certified survey, the
subdivider shall consult with the Department of Public Works and shall prepare the following:
1. Prepare preliminary sketch for review and approval.
2. Complete an Environmental Assessment Checklist, or when required, an expanded
Environmental Assessment Report, required by sec. 45.05(1), for review and approval.
This procedure is intended to assist the developer in appraising the objectives of these
regulations and other pertinent Village ordinances. The pre-application information shall be
submitted to the Plan Commission for review and approval.
(c) Plan Commission Action. The Plan Commission shall within forty-five (45) days approve, approve
conditionally or reject the certified survey map. The reasons for conditional approval or for
rejection shall be recorded in the minutes, and a letter detailing the action taken shall be sent to the
applicant. After the conditions of approval have been satisfied, the resolution of approval and of
acceptance for any land dedications shall be presented to the appropriate governmental body for
action, and if approved, shall be placed on the face of the map with nonfading ink.
(d) Compliance.
1. The applicant shall comply with the provisions of sec. 45.03 (General Requirements),
45.04(2)(f), 45.06 (Required Improvements), and 45.07 (Design Standards) of this Ordinance.
2. Where streets or other areas are dedicated to the public, the certified survey map shall contain
an owner's and a mortgagee's certificate which are in substantially the same form as required
by §236.21(2)(a), Wis. Stats.
3. Before an approved certified survey map is recorded the applicant must pay to the Village or
other appropriate unit of government any accrued real estate taxes and special assessments
owing on any land dedicated by the survey and to the Pierce County Treasurer any delinquent
taxes on the dedicated land.
4. Upon recordation by the developer, two (2) copies of the recorded document shall be
furnished to the Village Clerk.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-9-
(6) Procedures and Criteria for the Division of Land Within the 1-1/2 Mile Extraterritorial Plat Approval
Jurisdiction of the Village. In all cases, the time period within which action is required shall not begin
until the Town Board, the Pierce County Land Management Office, and the Village of Ellsworth have
received all maps, drawings, and data required for plat approval.
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall divide any land located within the 1-1/2 mile extraterritorial
plat approval jurisdiction of the Village of Ellsworth without first filing an application and a
certified survey map for approval by the Plan Commission.
(b) Pre-application Procedure. Before filing an application for approval of a certified survey, the
subdivider shall consult with the Department of Public Works and shall prepare the following:
1. Prepare a preliminary sketch for review and approval.
2. Complete an Environmental Assessment Checklist, or when required, an expanded
Environmental Assessment Report required by sec. 45.05(1), for review and approval.
This procedure is intended to assist the developer in appraising the objectives of these
regulations and other pertinent Village ordinances. The pre-application information shall be
submitted to the Plan Commission for review and approval.
(c) Minor Subdivision Procedure (Certified Survey). The procedure shall be as specified in sec.
45.04(5) (Minor Subdivision Procedures) and 45.05(5) (Plat and Data Submission Requirements).
The Plan Commission may require approval of the certified survey map by the town board before
acting.
(d) Extraterritorial Land Division Policies. The following policies shall govern the Village Plan
Commission in approving division of land within the 1-1/2 mile extraterritorial area in order to
protect the rural character and farming viability:
1. No subdivisions as defined in this Ordinance will be permitted within the 1-1/2 mile
extraterritorial limits of the Village of Ellsworth.
2. Minor subdivisions not exceeding an overall density of one (1) unit for 35 acres will be
permitted for farm related dwellings and for rural residential dwelling. Lots for commercial
use will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. The standards used to review these land
divisions will be the same as the standards contained in the Pierce County Exclusive
Agricultural Zoning District Ordinance. The only exception to this provision is that lots
resulting in the infill of existing subdivisions may be permitted.
3. The minimum lot size in the 1-1/2 mile extraterritorial area shall be one (1) acre. A smaller lot
size may be allowed if also approved by the Town Board.
4. The Village of Ellsworth will attempt to seek consistency with locally adopted Town Plans.
To the extent that the policies of the Village are more restrictive, they shall prevail. All minor
subdivisions within the extraterritorial area will be subject to the land reservation and
dedication requirements of this Ordinance.
5. Lands falling within the first one and one-half mile of the extraterritorial area shall be required
to meet all of the design standards contained in sec. 45.07 of this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-10-
6. Minor subdivisions within the extraterritorial area will be required to follow erosion control
plans in compliance with this Ordinance.
7. All land divisions within the extraterritorial area shall pay the required review fees contained
in sec. 45.04(7) of this Ordinance.
8. The Plan Commission may require placement of covenants or deed restrictions that are
deemed necessary and appropriate by the Village Plan Commission to ensure compliance with
and to protect the purpose and intent of the Village's plans and ordinances. Any such
restrictions shall be placed on the face of the certified survey map or on surrounding lands
from which the lot or lots were created to verify the density standard established herein.
9. If a variance is granted from the above provision the resulting division of land shall conform
to all of the pertinent regulations of this Ordinance.
(7) Fee and Dedication Schedule. The following schedule is established to insure that each land division,
subdivision, planned development and development project pays its share of costs for public facilities
and services.
(a) Park and Open Space Fee or Dedication. A dedication of land and/or the payment of a fee in
accordance with the provisions of sec. 45.06(3)(k) of this Ordinance is required for each dwelling
unit planned for development.
(b) Fees to Defray Administrative Expenses. The subdivider shall pay to the Village of Ellsworth the
following fees:
1. One hundred dollars ($100.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per acre for land included in a
preliminary plat, payable upon submission of the plat, to defray the administrative costs of plat
review.
2. One hundred dollars ($100.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per lot for each lot shown on a final
plat, payable prior to approval of the final plat, to defray the cost of checking improvement
plans.
3. One hundred dollars ($100.00) plus twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per lot for each lot shown on
a certified survey.
4. These fees may be changed from time to time by resolution of the Village Board.
(c) Payment for Engineering or Legal Services. The subdivider shall pay to the Village of Ellsworth
the actual cost of any engineering or legal work undertaken by the Village at the request of the
developer or the Plan Commission.
(d) Condominium Project Procedures. Each condominium project shall be reviewed on the basis of a
condominium plat prepared pursuant to §703.11, Wis. Stats., and other applicable statutes, as well
as these land division and subdivision regulations, as a plat or certified survey map for the land
development or subdivision elements of the project. Minor subdivision procedures in sec. 45.04(5),
(6), and (7) of this Ordinance shall apply to Village review of condominium plats.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-11-
45.05 PLAT AND DATA SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
(1) Environmental Assessment. A checklist may be prepared by the subdivider for review at the preapplication
conference.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this environmental assessment checklist is to provide the basis for an
orderly, systematic review of the effects of all new subdivisions upon the community environment
in accordance with the principles and procedures of §236.45(1), Wis. Stats. The Plan Commission
will use these procedures in determining land suitability under sec. 45.03(2) of this Ordinance. The
goals of the community in requiring this checklist are to minimize pollution and confine siltation to
an acceptable standard, assure ample living space per capita, preserve open space and parks for
recreation, provide adequate storm water control, maintain scenic beauty and aesthetic
surroundings, administer to the economic and cultural needs of the citizens and provide for the
effective and efficient flow of goods and services.
(b) Coverage. The Environmental Assessment Checklist shall apply to all subdivisions, including
minor subdivisions. The Plan Commission may waive the requirement for the filing of an
environmental assessment checklist for minor subdivisions of less than five (5) acres total area.
(c) Preliminary Checklist for Environmental Assessment of Plats and Land Divisions and Community
Development Plans:
PRELIMINARY CHECKLIST FOR ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT OF PLATS AND
LAND DIVISIONS AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLANS
(all yes answers must be explained in detail by attaching maps and supporting
documentation describing the impacts of the proposed development).
Yes No
A. Changes in relief and drainage patterns (attach a
topographic map showing, at a minimum, two (2) foot
contour intervals)
B. A floodplain (If yes attach two (2) copies of a typical
stream valley cross section showing the channel of the
stream, the 100 year floodplains limits and the
floodway limits [if officially adopted], of each side of
the channel and a cross section of area to be
developed)
C. An area of soil instability - greater than 18% slope
and/or organic soils, peaks, or mucks at or near the
surface
D. A drainageway for 5 or more acres of land
E. Lot coverage of more than 50% impermeable surfaces
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-12-
PRELIMINARY CHECKLIST FOR ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT OF PLATS AND
LAND DIVISIONS AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLANS
(all yes answers must be explained in detail by attaching maps and supporting
documentation describing the impacts of the proposed development).
Yes No
II. WATER RESOURCES. Does the proposed project involve:
A. Location within an area traversed by a navigable
stream or dry run
B. Greater than 10% change in the capacity of a storm
water storage facility or flow of a waterway within 1
mile
C. The use of septic tank-soil absorption fields for on-site
waste disposal
D. Lowering of water table by pumping or drainage
E. Raising of water table by altered drainage patterns
III. BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES. Does the project involve:
A. Removal of over 25% of the present trees
IV. ENERGY, TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS
A. Does the development increase the traffic flow in any
collector system by more than 10%
B. Is the development traversed by an existing or planned
utility corridor (gas, electrical, water, sewer interceptor,
communications, storm sewer)
V. POPULATION.
A. Might the development increase by more than 10% the
school population of any school serving the
development
VI. COMMENTS ON ANY OF THE ABOVE WHICH MAY HAVE A SIGNIFICANT
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
VII. APPENDICES AND SUPPORTING MATERIAL
(d) Determination of Need for Expanded Environmental Assessment. The Environmental Assessment
Checklist shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission at its next regular meeting following
submittal. The Plan Commission may, at that time, for reasons stated in a written resolution setting
forth specific questions on which it requires research, data and input from the developer and other
affected persons, determine the preliminary environmental assessment raises unusually significant
issues concerning the effects of the proposed development on the environment and/or that an
unusually high level of citizen interest has resulted from questions raised in a preliminary
assessment, and that review by other Village committees and commissions is required. The issues
to be reviewed may include items which this Ordinance specifically empowers the Commission to
review and may include additional matters relevant to the issues specified in the resolution. The
resolution may also request data on any specific impact questions raised by other governmental
agencies, the developer or applicant. The resolution shall set a reasonable date for the return of the
requested data and information, and it may specify the format in which the data shall be presented.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-13-
(e) Hearing on Environmental Assessment Report. Following the return to the Plan Commission of the
data required in the resolution adopted under the section above, the Commission shall make such
report available for scrutiny by the applicant or petitioner, by Village departments, commissions
and committees and by other interested persons or agencies. The Plan Commission shall conduct a
public hearing on the report. The hearing shall be preceded by a Class I notice under Chapter 985,
Wis. Stats. Persons attending such hearing shall be afforded an opportunity to comment on the
report.
(f) Review. The Plan Commission shall review the Environmental Assessment Report, with
supporting data, department and committee reviews and any other data required for determining the
suitability of the land for the proposed development. Within 45 days after submission to the Plan
Commission of the final Expanded Environment Assessment Report the Plan Commission shall
decide whether said land is suitable for development and proceed as required by sec. 45.03(3)(c).
(2) Preliminary Plat. The preliminary plat shall be submitted in eight (8) copies using a scale of not more
than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch, and shall provide accurately on its face the following:
(a) Description.
1. Name of the proposed subdivision.
2. Name, address and telephone number of the owner, subdivider, engineer, land surveyor and
land planner.
3. Date, graphic scale and north point.
4. Location of the proposed subdivision by government lot, quarter section, township, range and
county, and a location map showing the relationship between the plan and its surrounding
area.
(b) Existing Conditions.
1. Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two (2) feet for a slope less than five percent
(5%) and five (5) feet for a slope of five percent (5%) or more.
2. A scaled drawing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision referenced to a corner
established by the U.S. Public Land Survey, and the total acreage encompassed thereby.
3. Location of existing property lines, buildings, drives, streams and water courses, dry runs,
lakes, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, environmental corridors, and other similar
significant features within the parcel being subdivided.
4. Location, right of way width and names of any adjacent existing streets, alleys or other public
ways, easements, and railroad and utility rights of way within or adjacent to the proposed
subdivision.
5. Type, width and elevation of any adjacent existing street pavements, together with any legally
established centerline elevations, for streets located outside the Village limits.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-14-
6. Water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey, and known or
determined high and low water elevations and boundaries of the 100-year floodplain and
floodway.
7. Subsurface soil, rock and water conditions including depth to bedrock and average depth to
ground water table.
8. Location, size and invert elevation of any existing sanitary and storm sewers, culverts or drain
pipes and the location and size of any existing water and gas mains on or adjacent to the plat
and proposed for use in the development. If sewers and water mains are not present on or
adjacent to the preliminary plat, the distance and the size of those nearest, and the invert
elevations of sewers shall be indicated.
9. Location and names of adjacent subdivisions, parks, and cemeteries.
10. Existing land use and zoning included within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
(c) Proposed Conditions.
1. Location, width, and name of all proposed streets and walkways.
2. Layout and scale dimensions of all lots and proposed lot and block numbers.
3. Draft of proposed covenants (if any) to be imposed.
4. Location and approximate dimensions of any sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks,
playgrounds, greenways or other public uses or sites which are to be used for group housing,
shopping centers, church sites or other nonpublic uses.
5. Plans and profiles for streets, walkways, greenways and public easements, showing existing
ground surface and proposed grades, including extensions for reasonable distance beyond the
limits of the proposed subdivision, when requested, shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat when unusual topographic or other unusual conditions exist. Otherwise the plans and
profiles shall be submitted with the final plat.
6. When requested by the Village Engineer, because of concern about drainage, groundwater and
tree cover, a lot grading plan showing proposed contours at vertical intervals of not more than
two (2) feet.
(3) Final Plat. The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall comply with the requirements of Chapter
236, Wis. Stats., and sec. 45.04(3) of this Ordinance. The plat shall be accompanied by plans and
profiles required by sec. 45.05(2)(c)6 if these were not submitted with the preliminary plat.
(4) Comprehensive Development Plan. A CDP, as required by sec. 45.04(4), shall be submitted in ten (10)
copies using a scale of not more than two hundred (200) feet to one (1) inch and shall show all lands
under the control of the applicant which are contiguous or separated only by existing public roads, or
railroad rights of way. The plan shall show:
(a) The items under required preliminary plat data in sec. 45.05(2)(a), 45.05(2)(b), and 45.05(2)(c)4.
(b) All proposed collector and arterial streets.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-15-
(c) All proposed storm water drainage facilities.
(d) Projected population broken down by single and multi-family units.
(e) A further breakdown of multi-family units by the number of bedrooms on a percentage basis.
(f) The development schedule indicating the approximate timing of the proposed development.
(g) A preliminary plat meeting the requirements of this Ordinance may be submitted after a minimum
of 20 days after submittal of the comprehensive development plan for that portion of land to be
developed in the first stage.
(5) Minor Subdivision (Certified Survey).
(a) The certified survey map shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and shall comply with the
provisions of §236.34, Wis. Stats., and of this Ordinance.
(b) The certificate of approval shall be placed on the face of the map.
(c) When a dedication of land is required, the Village Board resolution accepting the dedication and
approving the map shall be placed on the face of the map.
45.06 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
(1) Statement of Intent. It is the intent of the Village to insure quality land development and to insure that
each development pays its share of the cost of public facilities and services, including costs associated
with accelerated depreciation of public services such as wells, watertowers, and sewerage plant. The
Village will encourage the use of planned developments employing innovative techniques for the design
of functional and aesthetic neighborhoods and which maximize open space and preserve the natural
environment. Subdivisions shall be serviced by public water and sanitary sewers and by public streets.
(2) Monuments. The subdivision shall be monumented in accordance with the requirements of §236.15,
Wis. Stats. If topography is such that extensive grading is required, the subdivider may, with the
permission of the Village Engineer, place monuments after grading is complete provided the subdivider
executes a surety bond, in an amount required by the Village Engineer, to insure the monuments will be
placed within the required time.
(3) Improvements. Prior to final approval and acceptance of improvements, and prior to the issuance of any
building permits in a subdivision located within the corporate limits and extraterritorial plat approval
jurisdiction of the Village, the subdivider shall install street and utility improvements as hereinafter
provided. A building permit may be issued if access to the lot may be obtained by means other than the
streets under construction.
(a) Water. The subdivider shall install water facilities necessary to serve the subdivision as designated
and approved by the Water and Sewer/Street and Sidewalk Committees. These improvements are
subject to Water Utility specification and inspection. The developer shall guarantee the functional
operation of all system parts for one (1) year from date of acceptance. Acceptance by the Village
shall be contingent upon the developer meeting all conditions, including approved design,
installation, regulatory approvals, payment of all costs for the total project, and any special
provisions indicated for a particular project.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-16-
All water system improvements, upon inspection and acceptance, become the property of the
Village.
(b) Sanitary Sewer. The subdivider shall install sanitary sewer facilities necessary to serve the
subdivision as designated and approved by the Water and Sewer/Street and Sidewalk Committees.
These improvements are subject to Sewer Utility specifications and inspection. The developer shall
guarantee the functional operation of all system parts for one (1) year from the date of acceptance.
Acceptance by the Village shall be contingent upon the developer meeting all conditions, including
approved design, installation, regulatory approvals, payment of all costs for the total project, and
any special provisions indicated for a particular project.
All sewer system improvements, upon inspection and acceptance, become the property of the
Village.
(c) Storm Water Drainage Facilities.
1. The subdivider shall install storm sewers and all other facilities necessary for the management
of all storm water deriving from the lands being developed.
(d) Streets and Sidewalks. The developer shall construct streets and sidewalks as outlined on the
approved plans based on the criteria in sec. 45.07(7) of this Ordinance.
1. Street Grading. With the submittal of the final plat, the subdivider shall furnish standard
drawings which indicate the existing and proposed grades of streets shown on the plat. After
completion of design engineering work on the streets and approval of street grades by the
Village Board and the approval of erosion control measures by the Village Engineer, the
subdivider shall grade as required within the right of way of the streets proposed to be
dedicated, including the vision clearance triangle on corner lots as required in sec. 46.05 of the
Zoning Ordinance. In cases where an existing street right of way is made a part of the plat or
abuts the plat, the subdivider shall grade that portion of the right of way between the existing
pavement and the property line. The bed for the roadways in the street rights of way shall be
graded to subgrade elevation. The Village Engineer shall approve all grading within rights of
way and said grading shall extend for a sufficient distance beyond the right of way to insure
that the established grade will be preserved. The grading of rights of way for principal and
primary arterials shall only be required where necessary to provide access to the streets or lots
in the plat. Lots, where they abut principal and primary arterials, shall be graded to proposed
street grade or to a grade approved by the Village Engineer prior to sale.
2. Street and Sidewalk Construction. After sanitary sewer and water utilities have been installed,
and after storm sewer trunklines, manholes and catch basins have been installed, the
subdivider shall construct and dedicate as part of the subdivision, streets and sidewalks
including those adjacent to platted lots in existing street rights of way abutting the plat, curbs
and gutters, local storm sewer inlets, leads, manholes, catch basins and lines as deemed
necessary by the Public Works Director and required by the Village Board. The subdivider
shall surface roadways to the widths prescribed by the Plan Commission on recommendation
of the Public Works Director and the Village Engineer. Construction shall be to Village
standard specifications for street improvements.
The Plan Commission may opt to not require the construction of sidewalks within the street
rights of way where it determines sidewalks are not necessary because of low density land use
and low pedestrian volumes or for access to schools and bus routes or for continuity of
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-17-
existing sidewalk or bicycle route systems because of a cul de sac or loop street pattern.
Consideration shall also be given to the pattern of development of adjoining lands and to the
possibility of damage to trees.
Dedicated sidewalks, pedestrian ways and bikeways shall be improved by the subdivider to a
grade, width, and surfacing approved by the Village Plan Commission and Street and
Sidewalk Committee based on the location and the amount and character of use. The
subdivider shall be only responsible for the cost of such improvements that are internal to the
development. The subdivider shall submit standard drawings indicating the existing and the
proposed grades of all such improvements.
Street and sidewalk construction must comply with Village standard specifications and be
inspected by the Village Engineer. The maintenance responsibility for pedestrian ways and
bikeways that are not located in the public street right of way shall lie with abutting property
owners in the same manner as those in the public right of way.
(e) Street lighting. The developer shall deposit with the Village sufficient funds in escrow to allow for
the construction of street lights.
(f) Mailboxes. The developer shall deposit with the Village sufficient funds in escrow to allow for the
construction of cluster mailboxes.
(g) Street Signs. The developer shall install all street name signs, temporary street dead end barricades
and signs, all no parking signs, and traffic control signs as required by the Village Board or submit
a fee deposit in lieu thereof, prior to acceptance of the subdivision.
(h) Street Trees. Prior to recording of the final plat, the developer shall submit a tree and shrub
planting plan for street terraces, parkways, boulevards, cul de sacs, dedicated off road
pedestrianways and bikeways.
Trees shall be planted at the time and in the manner determined by the Village with the cost of the
street terrace plantings to be borne by the subdivider or developer. The fees for such planting shall
be deposited with the Village in an escrow account prior to approval of the final plat or made part
of the subdivision agreements provided for herein.
(i) Buffer Strips. Where a plat, certified survey or planned development project contains a buffer strip
required by sec. 45.07(9) of this Ordinance, the developer shall, prior to recording of a final plat or
certified survey or prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a development project,
install plantings or shall file with the Village Clerk a contract, guaranteed by bond in an amount
determined by the Village Engineer, in which the developer agrees to provide such plantings. The
plantings are to be trees and shrubs and shall be of sufficient density to accomplish visual
screening.
(j) Erosion Control. The subdivider shall install all temporary and permanent erosion control and
sediment control structural aid works as outlined in approved plans required by sec. 45.07(12)
(Erosion Control).
(k) Dedication of Parks and Public Sites. The requirements of this subsection are established to insure
that adequate parks, open spaces and sites for other public uses are properly located and preserved
as the Village grows and that the cost of providing the park and recreation sites and facilities
necessary to serve the additional people brought into the community by land development may be
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-18-
equitably apportioned on the basis of the additional needs created by the development. These
requirements shall apply to all lands proposed for all residential developments:
1. In the design of a subdivision, including minor subdivisions or planned developments,
provisions shall be made for suitable sites of adequate area for parks, playgrounds, open
spaces, schools and other public purposes. Such sites as shown on the Official Map, Master
Plan or Parks and Open Space Plan shall be made a part of the design. Where same are not
shown on said plans or map, consideration shall be given to the preservation of scenic and
historic sites, stands of trees, marshes, ponds, streams, woodland, prairie, wetland, and plant
and animal communities.
2. The subdivider shall dedicate suitable land for the park, recreation and open space needs
required by the Plan Commission. All required land dedication under this subsection is in
addition to the dedications or reservations required in sec. 45.06(3)(j).
3. The subdivider shall dedicate sufficient land area and/or fees to provide adequate park,
playground, recreation and open space to meet the needs to be created by and to be provided
for the subdivision, minor subdivision, or planned development project. At least 1,450 square
feet of land shall be dedicated for each proposed residential dwelling unit within the
subdivision, minor subdivision or planned development project. Where a definite commitment
is made by the subdivider with respect to the number of dwelling units to be constructed on
any parcel of land, the dedication shall be based on that number. Where no such commitment
exists, the dedication shall be based on the maximum number of dwelling units permitted in
the zoning district.
If the number of lots in the plat or survey is increased, or the zoning classification is changed
to increase the number of dwelling units allowed, or the committed number of dwelling units
is increased by the subdivider, developer or landowner, the Plan Commission shall require
additional dedications commensurate with the increase in dwelling units.
4. All subdivisions, minor subdivisions and planned development projects shall provide
convenient pedestrian and bicycle linkages to park and recreation sites. Where in the opinion
of the Plan Commission such linkages are required outside the public right of way, they shall
be reserved by easement and developed by the subdivider or developer. The development of
linkages shall not be counted toward the minimum park land dedication requirements in
paragraph 3 above.
5. Whenever a park site, recreation site or other public site is of a larger area than the required
dedication established herein, the required dedication shall occur at the same time as final plat
approval. The remaining lands may be reserved by the Village Board for a period not to
exceed three (3) years, unless extended by mutual agreement. During such time period, the
Village may, in its discretion, agree to purchase the reserved lands at the "fair market value"
established at the time of the final plat approval, plus any real estate taxes accrued from the
date of reservation.
6. Any land to be dedicated as a requirement of this section shall be reasonably adaptable for the
intended park and recreational uses and shall be at a location convenient to the people to be
served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of a proposed park and recreation area shall
include, but not be limited to, size, shape, topography, geography, tree cover, access, and
location. The determination of land suitability will be at the sole discretion of the Plan
Commission. All lands dedicated under this section shall have at least one hundred feet of
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-19-
frontage on a public street. The Plan Commission may adjust this frontage requirement if it
determines there are better alternatives for access. The prorated costs of public streets,
sidewalks, and utilities (normally assessable) shall be paid by the subdivider or the developer
for the abutting frontage, up to a maximum of 100 feet of same.
7. The Plan Commission may require or permit the subdivider to satisfy the dedication
requirements of this section by a combination of land dedication and fee payments in lieu
thereof.
8. The amount of any fee imposed in lieu of land dedication shall be established by the Village
Board by resolution.
9. Payments in lieu of dedication shall be paid in a lump sum prior to the recording of a final plat
or certified survey map or prior to the issuance of any building permit for a development
where no plat or certified survey map is involved.
10. The Village Board shall place any fee collected pursuant to the provisions of this section in a
separate non-lapsing segregated fund to be used for land acquisition and development of open
space. Monies spent may be expended in other neighborhoods or community facilities in
reasonable proximity to the subdivision.
11. Outside the corporate limits but within the 1-1/2 mile extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction
of the Village, where it is determined by the Plan Commission that a portion of a minor
subdivision is required for public sites or open spaces, the subdivider may be required to
dedicate such areas to the appropriate municipality or otherwise provide for said public land as
agreed to by the Village and the Town. Where dedication is not completed at the time of
platting, the subdivider shall reserve such area for a period not to exceed three (3) years and
cooperate with all efforts to complete dedication.
12. Credit for Private Park and Recreation Areas. Where private park and recreation areas are
provided in a proposed planned development district, and such space is to be privately owned
and maintained by the future residents of the development, such areas may be credited toward
the requirement of dedication for park and recreation purposes, as set forth in paragraph 3
above, but such credit shall not exceed 25% at such requirement, provided the Village Plan
Commission determines it is in the public interest to do so, and that the following standards
are met:
a. That yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required to be dedicated or
maintained by this Ordinance and the Zoning Regulations shall not be included in the
computation of such private open spaces; and
b. That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for
by written agreement; and
c. That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by
recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property
within the tract and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the
Village Board; and
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-20-
d. That the proposed open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreation
purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology,
access, and location of the private open space land; and
e. In making the evaluation of the credit for private recreation facilities, the Plan
Commission may retain independent professional services to determine the amount of
credit, if any, that should be allowed. The fees for such independent evaluations shall be
paid by the developer.
(4) Contract Requirements for Installation of Improvements. Before final approval of any plat located
within the corporate limits of the Village of Ellsworth, the subdivider shall be required to enter into a
contract with the Village agreeing to install all required improvements. The subdivider shall file with
said contract, subject to the approval of the Village Attorney, a bond, certificate of deposit, irrevocable
letter of credit, certified check or other security in an amount equal to the estimate of the cost prepared
by the Village Engineer as a guarantee that such improvements will be completed by the subdivider or
his or her contractors not later than eighteen (18) months from the date of recording of the plat. As a
further guarantee that all obligations for work on the improvements are satisfied, the contractor and
subcontractors who are to be engaged in the construction of utilities or street improvements on
dedicated street rights of way, shall be listed as qualified for such work by the Street and
Sidewalk/Water and Sewer Committees. Governmental units to which these bond and guarantee
provisions apply may file in lieu of said contract or instrument of guarantee, a letter from officers
authorized to act on its behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this section. The subdivider
shall provide for connecting with water and sanitary sewer mains, stormwater drainage facilities, curb
and gutter, sidewalk and street improvements, walkways and bikeways on all abutting streets, and on
any street in the plat not included in the contract.
In those cases where the Village Board determines it is in the interest of the Village to install
improvements by Village contract and at such time as the Village may designate, the subdivider shall
petition the Village for water, sanitary sewer main, sanitary sewer laterals, curb and gutter, sidewalk and
street improvements. The cost of such improvements shall be paid by assessments to the benefited
properties. When improvements are partially installed by Village contract in lieu of the preceding
contract, the subdivider shall provide a contract and bond for all other required improvements.
(5) Documentation. The subdivider shall furnish the Village with a reproducible "as built" set of plans
showing all improvements for the plat. The subdivider shall also furnish an itemized cost for the
improvements in the contract prior to Village approval and/or acceptance of the development.
45.07 DESIGN STANDARDS.
(1) All proposed development shall conform to all Village plans and ordinances.
(2) Relationship to Existing and Future Development.
(a) The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of
existing streets in adjoining areas.
(b) Where adjoining areas are not subdivided or developed, and the Plan Commission believes future
development is likely, the arrangement of streets in the proposed development shall provide for
proper projection of streets to the boundary of the proposed development.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-21-
(3) Access. Every lot or parcel created shall have a minimum frontage on a public right of way as set forth
in the Village Zoning Ordinance.
(4) Streets. All streets must meet the design standards in Table 1 as well as the following:
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-22-
MINIMUM ROADWAY DESIGN STANDARDS REVISED TABLE 1
Insert Table Here
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-23-
(a) Additional Right of Way on Existing Streets. Developments, which adjoin existing streets having
rights of way less than the minimum roadway standard as classified in this ordinance, shall
dedicate additional right of way to meet those minimum standards.
(b) Temporary Roadway Termination. Where a street is terminated temporarily at the edge of a
development and the street is longer than two hundred forty (240) feet or two (2) lot widths, a
temporary turn-around shall be provided by one of the following methods:
1. If the adjacent land is owned by the subdivider, a temporary turn-around can be provided
through a restriction (temporary easement) on said land. Such a turn-around shall be
constructed to Village standards.
2. The subdivider may provide the required turn-around on one of the last lots fronting on the
temporary dead end street through the use of a temporary easement running to the Village.
Such a turn-around shall be constructed to Village standards.
(c) Reserve Strips. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets except where control of
such strips is placed in the Village under conditions approved by the Plan Commission.
(d) Half Streets. Where an existing dedicated or platted half street is adjacent to a tract being
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. In new plats, the
creation of half streets is prohibited.
(e) Street Jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be allowed. On
collectors and arterials, offsets of less than 600 feet shall not be allowed.
(f) Intersections.
1. No more than two streets shall intersect at one point.
2. Such intersection shall be laid out so that the angel of intersection is as nearly as possible a
right angle.
3. No street shall intersect another street at less than a 75 degree angle.
4. Intersections along arterial streets shall be minimized. The minimum distance between
intersections shall be twelve hundred (1200) feet.
(g) Restriction of Access (Protection of Arterial Streets and Highways). Whenever a proposed
subdivision contains or is adjacent to an arterial street or highway, adequate protection of
residential property, limitation of access, and the separation of through and local traffic shall be
provided by:
1. Reversed frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear
property line; or
2. Marginal access street (Frontage Road).
(h) Street Names. A proposed street which is in alignment with or adjoins an existing and named street
shall bear the name of the existing street. In no other case shall the proposed name of the street
duplicate the name of an existing street within the Village. The use of the suffix "street", "avenue",
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-24-
"boulevard", "drive", "place", or "court" or similar descriptions shall not be distinction sufficient to
constitute compliance with this subsection.
(i) Alleys. Alleys shall not be allowed in Residential Districts. In Retail, Commercial and Industrial
Districts, alleys or other definite and assured provisions shall be made for off-street parking,
loading and service access consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed, but not inconsistent
with the operation and use of the abutting street. No dead end alleys shall be allowed, nor shall any
alley have its point of connection on an arterial street.
(j) Cul de Sac Streets. All cul de sac streets shall terminate in a circular turn-around meeting the
dimension standards in Table 1, sec. 45.07(4).
(k) Grades. The maximum street grades shall be those in Table 1, sec. 45.07(4). Pedestrianways shall
have a maximum grade of 8%. Changes in street grades shall provide such sight distances as the
Village Engineer determines are required. Street grades shall be established to avoid, wherever
possible, excessive grading, removal of ground cover and trees, and leveling of the topography.
(l) Pedestrianways and Bikeways. In the design of the plat, the developer shall make provisions for
pedestrianways and bikeways for transport and recreation as required by the Plan Commission.
Where it is deemed necessary by the Plan Commission, and in conformance with the provisions of
(5)(c) below, walks and paths away from streets in common areas shall be lighted for safety and to
permit visual surveillance.
(5) Blocks.
(a) The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be compatible with the planned use of the land,
zoning requirements, need for convenient access, control and safety of street traffic, and the
limitations and opportunities of topography. Block lengths in residential areas shall not be less than
six hundred (600) feet between street lines unless dictated by exceptional topography or other
limiting factors of good design.
(b) Blocks shall be of sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth except
where otherwise required to separate residential development from through traffic.
(c) Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than ten (10) feet in width, shall be provided near the center
and entirely across any block nine hundred (900) feet or more in length or elsewhere where deemed
essential, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, to provide convenient pedestrian circulation or
access to parks, schools, shopping centers, churches or transportation facilities.
(6) Lots.
(a) The size, shape, and orientation of the lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision
and for the type of development and use contemplated.
(b) Lot dimensions and setback lines shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided and a proportion of two to one (2:1) shall
normally be considered a desirable maximum for lots.
(d) Side lot lines shall be right angles to straight lines or radial to curved street lines on which the lots
face whenever possible.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-25-
(e) Corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit adequate building setbacks from side streets so as
to conform with the Zoning Ordinance.
(f) Every lot shall front or abut on a public street.
(g) Lot lines shall follow municipal boundary lines.
(h) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited except where necessary to provide
separation of residential development from through traffic, or to overcome specific disadvantages
of topography and orientation.
(i) Residential lots fronting or backing on arterial streets shall be platted with extra depth as required
in sec. 45.07(9).
(7) Building Setback Lines.
(a) Where not controlled by the Zoning Ordinance, the Plan Commission shall establish building
setback lines appropriate to the location and type of development.
(b) Where lots abut navigable waters, building setback lines for all buildings and structures except
piers, marinas, boathouses and similar uses shall be shown on the plat and shall not be less than
seventy five (75) feet from the ordinary high water line as measured on a horizontal plane.
(8) Lighting. In areas where underground electric facilities are installed, poles for lighting shall be
ornamental in appearance. The subdivider shall provide street, pedestrianway and bikeway lighting
systems within the area being developed. Upon consultation with the appropriate electric utility and as
approved by the Village Engineer, ornamental lighting will be installed by the serving electric utility of
the Village of Ellsworth.
(9) Treatment of Railroad Rights of Way and Limited Access Highways. Whenever the proposed
subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad right of way or limited access highway, the subdivider
shall proceed as follows:
(a) In residential districts a buffer strip at least thirty (30) feet in depth, in addition to the normal lot
depth required, shall be provided adjacent to the right of way of a limited access highway. This
strip shall be a part of the platted lots, but the following restriction shall be written on the plat:
"This strip reserved for the planting of trees or shrubs by the owner. The building of structures
hereon is prohibited, and this strip shall not be counted as any required yard. Maintenance of this
strip is a responsibility of the lot owner."
(b) The Plan Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right
of way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land.
(c) Location of local streets immediately adjacent and parallel to railroad rights of way shall be
avoided.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-26-
(10) Utility Easements.
(a) Underground Requirements.
1. All new electric distribution lines, all new telephone lines from which individual lots are
served, all new telegraph lines, community antenna television cables and services, and gas
utility services shall be underground unless the Plan Commission shall find upon study that:
a. The placing of such facilities underground would not be compatible with the
development, or
b. Location, topography, soil, swamp, solid rock, boulders, stands of trees, rows of trees,
hedges or other physical conditions would make underground installation unreasonable or
impracticable.
2. Associated equipment and facilities such as, but not limited to, substations, pad-mounted
transformers, pad-mounted sectionalizing switches and pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, may
be located above ground, provided they are located in an inconspicuous manner, screened
from public view, and fit into the development plans for the subdivision.
3. The subdivider shall furnish proof to the Plan Commission that such arrangements as may be
required under the applicable rates and rules filed with the Public Service Commission of the
State of Wisconsin have been made with the owners of such lines or services for placing their
respective facilities underground as required by this section, as a condition precedent to
approval of the final plat, development plan or certified survey map.
4. Temporary overhead facilities may be installed to serve a construction site or where necessary
because of severe weather conditions. In the latter case, within a reasonable time after weather
conditions have moderated or upon completion of installation of permanent underground
facilities, such temporary facilities shall be replaced by underground facilities and the
temporary facilities removed.
(b) Easement Conditions.
1. Adequate easements shall be provided and dedicated on each side of all rear lot lines, and on
side lot lines, across lots, or along front lot lines where necessary, for the installation of storm
and sanitary sewers, gas, water, electric lines, communication lines, and heat mains. Such
easements shall be noted as "Utility Easements" on the final plat or certified survey map. Prior
to approval of the final plat, the specific implementation plan for the Planned Development
District (PDD), the comprehensive development plan, or certified survey map, concurrence of
the appropriate electric and communications companies as to the location and width of the
utility easements shall be noted on the final plat, specific implementation plan for the PDD,
comprehensive development plan, or certified survey map. All easements for storm and
sanitary sewers, water and heat mains, pedestrian walks and other public purposes shall be
noted thereon as "Public Easements for" followed by reference to the use for which they are
intended.
2. Where the electric and communications facilities are to be installed underground, the utility
easements shall be graded to within six (6) inches of final grade by the subdivider, prior to the
installation of such facilities, and earth fill, piles or mounds of dirt shall not be stored on such
easement areas. Utility facilities when installed on utility easements whether overhead or
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-27-
underground shall not disturb monumentation in the plat. In cases where monumentation is
disturbed, the utility shall bear the cost of replacement. Failure to comply will be subject to
penalty as provided by §236.32, Wis. Stats.
3. Where the electric and communication facilities are to be installed underground, a plat
restriction shall be recorded with the final plat or certified survey map stating that the final
grade established by the subdivider on the utility easements shall not be altered by more than
six (6) inches by the subdivider, her or his agent, or by subsequent owners of the lots, except
with written consent of the utility or utilities involved. The purpose of this restriction shall be
to:
a. Notify initial and future lot owners of the underground facilities at the time of purchase;
b. Establish responsibility in the event of damage to such facilities; and
c. Establish the need to alter such facilities. When the utility company uses a service
application, said application should also notify the initial and subsequent lot owners of
their responsibility regarding such underground facilities.
(11) Drainage and Greenway/Environmental Corridor Easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
waterway, drainageway, channel or stream, an adequate drainageway or easement shall be provided as
required by the Plan Commission conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse. The
location, width, alignment and improvement of such drainageway or easement shall be subject to the
approval of the Plan Commission. Parallel streets or parkways may be required. Storm water drainage
shall be maintained by landscaped open channels of adequate size and grade to accommodate the flow
resulting from the 100 year rainfall event of any duration; such sizes and design details to be subject to
review and approval by the Village Engineer.
(12) Erosion Control. The subdivider shall employ erosion control measures to prevent erosion, siltation,
sedimentation, and washing and blowing of dirt and debris from excavation, grading, open cuts, side
slopes and related activities of the subdivider or contractors. Such measures shall include, but not be
limited to, seeding, sodding, mulching, watering, ponding, and the construction of berms. Plans for
erosion control may be submitted to the Pierce County Soil and Water Conservation District for review
and comments. These comments shall be available to the Village Engineer for review two (2) weeks
prior to submittal of the final plat and before any land surfaces are disturbed. Guidelines, standards and
specifications contained in the Soil Conservation Service publication "Minimizing Erosion in
Urbanizing Areas", shall be the minimum criteria for the development, review and implementation of
the erosion control plan.
(13) Intra-Block Drainage and Foundation Design.
(a) Two (2) weeks prior to submittal of final plat for review and approval, the subdivider shall submit
to the Village Engineer a Surface Water Drainage Plan for the plat. This plan may be part of the
Best Management Practices. The plan shall indicate but not be limited to the following: elevation
of streets, existing topography of the block, proposed drainage swales, and indication of the
direction of drainage.
(b) Upon approval of the plan, the developer shall place on the final plat arrows to indicate the
direction of drainage swales required for intra-block drainage and the following note:
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-28-
"Arrows indicate direction of drainage swale construction during grading and said swales shall be
maintained by the lot owner unless modified with approval of the Village Engineer."
(c) A minimum of a 10-foot wide drainage easement (5 feet on each side of the property line) shall be
retained along all joint property lines on the plat. Such easement shall be designated as a
stormwater drainage easement, and shall conform to the drainage plan.
(d) Where a subdivider's subsoil investigation indicates potential for groundwater less than ten (10)
feet from the proposed street center line elevation, the subdivider shall so note on the face of the
plat and indicate the lots affected.
(14) Storm Water Management.
(a) Goals and Objectives.
1. To prevent significant loss of life and property due to runoff from any foreseeable rainfall
event.
2. To encourage the design of systems which minimize potential erosion and sedimentation
problems.
3. To maintain the water quality of lakes, streams and ponds.
4. To encourage the design of systems which respond to the need to maintain or enhance ground
water resources, including ground water quality, except where land stability might be
impaired.
5. To encourage the design of systems which will reduce capital and environmental costs to the
community.
(b) At the time a preliminary plat, a certified survey, or a planned development is submitted to the Plan
Commission for approval, the developer or subdivider shall prepare a study of the drainage basin of
the area in which the proposed development is located. The study shall include the design, routing
and estimated construction cost of a storm water management system to serve the site and/or
drainage basin of the area in which the proposed development is located.
(c) The proposed development shall not increase stormwater runoff (peak) from that which would have
resulted from the same storm occurring over the site with the land in its natural undeveloped state,
for storms of a 24 hour duration and all reoccurrence intervals of less than or equal to 100 years. In
the case of closed drainage basins, which have no outlets during normal rainfall, the volume of
runoff resulting from a ten (10) year storm of 24 hour duration shall not be greater after
development than when the land was in its natural undeveloped state, defined as number (CN) 70,
and used in the runoff methodology promulgated by the United States Soil Conservation Service
National Engineering Handbook.
(d) Determination of storm volumes shall be computed by established procedures equivalent to and
calibrated against that procedure promulgated by the United States Soil Conservation Service in its
National Engineering Handbook or the technical publication entitled "Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, TR-55".
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-29-
(e) Design of stormwater management facilities shall be in accordance with this Ordinance and subject
to the approval of the Water and Sewer/ Street and Sidewalk Committees. Stormwater peaks and
volumes shall be addressed either through on-site detention, retention, infiltration, or a combination
thereof. It is the intent of these provisions to encourage on-site detention and infiltration to the
greatest extent possible.
(f) Where on-site detention is found to be unfeasible by the Water and Sewer/Street and Sidewalk
Committees or where adequate storm water facilities have been provided by the Village
downstream of the proposed development (with the approval of the Water and Sewer/Street and
Sidewalk Committees), the subdivider or developer shall be required to make a cash contribution to
a regional stormwater management facility based on a proration of costs allocable to the proposed
development as approved by the Water and Sewer/Street and Sidewalk Committees.
45.08 VARIANCES.
(1) In cases where a subdivision or minor subdivision is part of a Planned Development District (see sec.
10.82, Zoning Ordinance), or other planned development district, for which a Specific Implementation
Plan containing revised design standards is approved by the Plan Commission and the Village Board
and recorded with the Pierce County Register of Deeds, the waiver of, or variance in, the design
standards required by this Ordinance shall be considered to have been granted.
(2) Variances not related to a planned development district may be granted by the Plan Commission so that
substantial justice may be done provided the public interest is secured and where, in its judgment, it
would be inappropriate to apply a provision of this Ordinance or when such application would cause
extraordinary hardship.
(3) A variance may be granted by the Plan Commission to permit a parcel to be created by certified survey
map in the extraterritorial review area when it is shown that the application satisfies the following
standards:
(a) A finding of fact must be made that the purpose of the proposed parcel is to be a lot for a dwelling
unit which is to be occupied by a person who, or a family at least one member of which earns a
substantial part of his or her livelihood from farm operations on the parcel, and/or contributes work
which is substantially needed in the farm operation, and/or is the parent or child of the farm
operator or the spouse of the farm operator; and
(b) A finding that the public interest has been secured may be made where the proposed parcel and use
is reasonable after consideration of these factors:
1. The potential for conflict with agricultural use.
2. The need of the proposed use for a location in an agricultural area.
3. The availability of alternative locations.
4. Compatibility with existing or permitted use on adjacent lands.
5. The productivity of the lands involved.
6. The location of the proposed use so as to reduce to a minimum the amount of productive
agricultural land converted.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-30-
7. The need for public services created by the proposed use.
8. The availability of adequate public services and the ability of affected local units of
government to provide them without an unreasonable burden.
9. The effect of the proposed use on water on air pollution, soil erosion and rare or irreplaceable
natural resources.
When the site is zoned A-1 under the Pierce County Zoning Ordinance, the Commission shall
defer to the County and require a conditional use permit from the County, addressing the forgoing
standards (6).
(c) The minimum parcel size allowable under (3) by variance is one acre, exclusive of any area
dedicated to the public.
(d) If a variance is granted under this subsection the division of land shall be subject to all other
pertinent provisions of this and related ordinances.
(4) Reasons and conditions for any waiver or variance granted shall be entered in the minutes of the Plan
Commission.
45.09 APPEALS.
The following decisions of the Plan Commission may be appealed to the Village Board
(a) Rejection of a preliminary plat, a final plat or a certified survey map;
(b) A determination that land is unsuitable for subdivision;
(c) The requirement of a preliminary plat for a land division.
45.10 SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason
held to be invalid by reason of a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof.
45.11 DEFINITIONS. The following terms, whenever they occur in this Ordinance, are defined as follows:
(1) Act of Division: The division of a lot or parcel of land into two or more parcels.
(2) Bikeway: a general term describing any or all of the following defined types of facilities used for bikes.
A network of bikeways constitutes a bike route system.
(3) Certified Survey Map: A map or plan, or record of a minor subdivision meeting all the requirements of
§236.34, Wis. Stats., and of this Ordinance.
(4) Closed Drainage Basin: a drainage basin which, during periods of normal rainfall, has no surface outlet.
(5) Village Board: The Village of Ellsworth Village Board.
(6) Comprehensive Development Plan: a total site plan for an area of land eighty (80) acres or more in size
under the control of a developer(s) at the time of submission for review. Said plan specifies and
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-31-
illustrates the location, relationship and nature of all uses, easements, streets, pedestrian paths, bikeways
and common open space.
(7) Condominium Development: A real estate development, redevelopment or ownership regime
conversion project involving establishment or alteration of the condominium form of ownership for all
or part of the development.
(8) Division of Land: The division of a lot or parcel of land into two or more parcels.
(9) Driveway: a vehicle access from private property to a public street.
(10) Environmental Corridors: continuous open space systems based on natural resources and
environmentally important lands. The corridors are based primarily on streams, lakes, shorelands,
floodplains, waterways and wetlands.
(11) Extra-Territorial Plat Approval Jurisdiction: as defined in §236.02(2), Wis. Stats. (one and one-half
miles from corporate limits).
(12) Final Plat: the map or plan of record of a subdivision and any accompanying material as required in sec.
45.05(3) and sec. 45.06(3) of this Ordinance.
(13) Governing Body: the Village of Ellsworth Village Board.
(14) Greenway: an open area of land included under the definition of "Parkway", the primary purpose of
which is to carry storm water on the surface of the ground in lieu of an enclosed storm sewer.
Greenways may serve the following multiple public purposes in addition to their principal use,
including but not limited to vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm
sewers, storm water retention basins, waterways, conservancy areas, environmental corridors, and park
development.
(15) Land Division: the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels. Also referred to as Division of
Land.
(16) Land in its Natural Undeveloped State: Land which has runoff characteristics equivalent to runoff curve
number (CN) 70, as used in the runoff methodology promulgated by the United States Soil Conservation
Service National Engineering Handbook.
(17) Minor Subdivision: the division of a lot or parcel of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or
building development where the act of division creates four (4) or fewer parcels, lots or building sites,
any one of which is thirty five (35) acres or less in area. A minor subdivision of a lot or parcel shall
occur not more than once in five years.
(18) Other: all other pertinent terms shall be as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Ellsworth
and in Chapter 236, Wis. Stats.
(19) Parcel: contiguous lands under the control of subdivider(s), not separated by streets, highways or
railroad rights of way.
(20) Parkway: any right of way for vehicular traffic including bicycles or pedestrian traffic, or both, with full
or partial control of access and usually within a part of a ribbon of park like development. Said parkway
may include greenways required for storm water drainage purposes where the drainage improvement is
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-32-
to include park like treatment and where pedestrian or vehicular travel, including bicycles, may be
permitted.
(21) Plan Commission: the Village of Ellsworth Plan Commission.
(22) Planned Development District: any zoning district that allows diversification and variation in land
development to achieve an improved living environment and to preserve open space.
(23) Plat: a map of a subdivision.
(24) Preliminary Plat: a map delineating the features of a proposed subdivision as described herein,
submitted to the Plan Commission for preliminary consideration prior to the final plat.
(25) Prime Agricultural Land: lands containing Class I, II, III soils and other lands having a history of
agricultural production.
(26) Replat and Resubdivision: the process of changing, or the map that changes, the boundaries of a
recorded plat or a part thereof. The legal division of a larger block, lot or outlot within a recorded plat,
without changing the exterior boundaries of said block, lot or outlot is not a replat. See §236.36, Wis.
Stats.
(27) Street: a public way for vehicular and pedestrian traffic whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, thruway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated.
(a) Arterial Streets and Highways. Those streets which provide for rapid movement or concentrated
volumes of traffic over relatively long distances.
1. Principal Arterials. Streets serving the major interstate and interregional traffic corridors and
providing the highest mobility level and a high degree of access control.
2. Primary Arterial. Streets serving major regions or connecting important cities and major
intracommunity corridors in the metropolitan area. These routes provide high mobility and a
high degree of access control.
3. Standard Arterials. Those streets which more commonly provide for intermediate length trips,
thus serving thru traffic movement in trade areas or feeding traffic to the principal and primary
arterial streets from lower activity areas not served by such routes.
(b) Collector Streets. Streets that provide moderate speed movement of persons and goods between
major arterials and/or activity centers. They are basically local streets which, because of directness
of routing and higher capacity, receive higher volumes of traffic to be distributed or collected
toward nearby arterial streets.
(c) Local Streets. Streets designed for low speeds and low volumes that provide access from low
traffic generating areas to collector and arterial systems.
1. Industrial Street. A local street serving an Industrial or Commercial area as defined in the
Zoning Ordinance.
2. Residential Streets.
a. Residential. A standard residential street.
CHAPTER 45 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
-33-
b. Residential Lane. A very low density cul de sac street having a maximum length of 500'
or serving a maximum of ten (10) single family dwellings (whichever is less), each
dwelling of which would provide all necessary off street parking.
(d) Marginal Access Streets (frontage roads). Streets parallel and adjacent to arterial streets and
highways that provide access to abutting properties and separation from thru traffic.
(e) Alley. A public right of way that affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
(f) Cul de Sac Streets. Streets closed at one end with turnarounds.
(g) Dead End Streets. Streets closed at one end without turnarounds.
(28) Structure: anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on
the ground, or attached to something having permanent location on the ground, except public utility
facilities and appurtenances attached thereto.
(29) Subdivider: any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, estate, trust or other legal entity
requesting review or action on a minor subdivision or condominium, except the Village of Ellsworth.
[Ord. 577 07/07]
(30) Subdivision: the division of a lot or parcel of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or of building
development, where:
(a) The act of division creates five (5) or more parcels or building sites of thirty five (35) acres each or
less in area, or;
(b) The act of division creates five (5) or more parcels or building sites of thirty-five (35) acres each or
less in area by successive divisions within a period of five years.
(31) Waterways: rivers, streams, creeks, ditches, drainage channels, watercourses, lakes, bays, ponds,
impoundment reservoirs, retention and detention basins, marshes and other surface water areas,
regardless of whether the areas are natural or artificial.
(32) Zoning Ordinance: Chapter 46, Municipal Code of the Village of Ellsworth.
p:\proj\ellsw\0104\rep\ordinance 45.doc
CHAPTER 46
ZONING
46.01 Introduction Page 1
46.02 General Provisions Page 1
46.025 Adult Establishments Page 8
46.03 Zoning Districts Page 10
46.04 Conditional Uses Page 27
46.045 Special Use Permits Page 29
46.05 Traffic, Parking, and Access Page 33
46.06 General Regulations Page 36
46.07 Signs Page 42
46.08 Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots Page 44
46.09 Performance Standards Page 45
46.10 Definitions Page 45
46.11 Board of Appeals Page 53
46.12 Plan Commission Page 54
46.13 Zoning Administrator Page 55
46.14 Annexations Page 56
46.15 Conflicting Provisions Repealed Page 56
46.16 Extraterritorial Zoning Page 57
Updated 2/11/2020
ZONING 46.01
1
SEC. 46.01 INTRODUCTION. (1) PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to
promote the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of this community.
(2) INTENT. It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate and restrict the use of
all structures, lands and waters; regulate and restrict lot coverage, population distribution and
density, and the size and location of all structures so as to: lessen congestion in and promote the
safety and efficiency of the streets and highways; secure safety from fire, flooding panic and
other dangers; provide adequate light, air, sanitation and drainage; prevent overcrowding; avoid
undue population concentration; facilitate the adequate provision of public facilities and utilities;
stabilize and protect property values; further the appropriate use of land and conservation of
natural resources; preserve and promote the beauty of the community and implement the
community's development plan or plan components. It is further intended to provide for the
administration and enforcement of this ordinance and to provide penalties for its violation.
(3) ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. It is not intended by this
chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants,
deed restrictions, agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or
issued pursuant to laws. However, wherever this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this ordinance shall govern.
(4) INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the
Village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the
Wisconsin Statutes. All reference to state statutes or administrative codes is intended to include
any subsequent revisions or amendments.
(5) SEVERABILITY. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this
chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(6) REPEAL. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances and other sections of this
Code inconsistent or conflicting with this chapter, to the extent of the inconsistency only, are
hereby repealed.
(7) TITLE. This chapter shall be known as, referred to or cited as the "ZONING
ORDINANCE," VILLAGE OF ELLSWORTH, WISCONSIN.
46.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS. (1) JURISDICTION. The provisions of this
ordinance shall extend to the uses of all lands, waters and adjoining vertical air space located
within the limits of the Village.
(2) COMPLIANCE. No structure, land or water shall hereafter be used and no
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a zoning permit, and a building permit issued
under chapter 14 if applicable, and without full compliance with the provisions of this ordinance
and all other applicable local, county, state and federal regulations; except, however, no zoning
permit shall be required where a remodeling permit for an alteration has been issued under
Section 14.06, there will be no changes affecting side, front or rear yards and the remodeling is
completed within 24 months of issuance of the building permit.
ZONING 46.02(3)
2
(3) ZONING PERMITS.
(A) Applications for zoning permits shall be made in duplicate to the Village Clerk on
forms furnished by the Village Zoning Administrator and shall include the following
where applicable:
(1) Names and Addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect,
professional engineer or contractor.
(2) Description of the Subject Site by lot, block and recorded subdivision or
by metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type and present use of
structures currently on the site; present zoning district of the site; proposed
operation or use f the structure or site; number of employees and the
zoning district or Conditional Use which the subject site is desired to be
transferred or used.
(3) Plat Plan or Survey showing the location, boundaries, dimensions, slope of
terrain, uses and size of the following: subject site; existing and proposed
structures; existing and proposed easements, streets and other public ways;
off-street parking, loading areas and driveways; existing highway access
restrictions; existing and proposed street, side and rear yards. In addition,
the plat of survey shall show the location, slope or terrain and use of any
abutting lands and their structures within forty (40) feet of the subject site.
The plat plan or survey shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor in all
instances where approval of the proposed use will involve measurement of
the distance from a structure to adjoining lot lines. By way of example the
following would require a plat plan or survey prepared by a licensed
surveyor: new principal structure. The plat plan or survey costs shall be
paid by the applicant. The plat plan submitted shall include a “lot
envelope”, the lot envelope being an area within the plat plan marked by a
dotted line on the interior of the lot, which dotted line must be located at
the minimum distance of the required setbacks of each adjacent lot line
and within which a principal or accessory structure may be erected. See
Appendix A for example of dotted line denoting a lot envelope.
(4) Proposed Sewage Disposal Plan if municipal sewerage service is not
available. This plan shall be approved by an appropriate competent
authority who shall certify in writing that satisfactory, adequate and safe
sewage disposal is possible on the site as proposed by the plan in
accordance with applicable local, county and state health regulations.
(5) Proposed Water Supply Plan if municipal water service is not available.
This plan shall be approved by an appropriate competent authority who
shall certify in writing that an adequate and safe supply of water will be
provided in accordance with applicable local, county and state health
regulations.
ZONING 46.02(3)(a)(6)
3
(6) Additional information as may be required by the Village.
(B) If the proposed use of the site requires a zoning district change, or a Conditional
Use determination by the Plan Commission or Village Board, the Zoning
Administrator shall arrange the necessary public hearings and presentation of a
recommendation to the Village Board within 60 days.
(C) A zoning or use permit shall be granted or denied in writing by the Zoning
Administrator not less than 3 nor more than 10 days after application is made. The
permit shall expire within twelve (12) months after issuance of the permit, unless
substantial work has commenced. Any permit issued in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance shall null and void.
(4) SITE SUITABILITY.
(A) No land shall be used, or structure erected, where the land is held to be unsuitable
for such use or structure by the Village Board, upon the recommendation of the
Plan Commission, by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate
drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, low percolation
rate or bearing strength, erosion susceptibility or any other feature likely to be
harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the
Village. In applying the provisions of this section, the Plan Commission shall, in
writing, recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land
is not suitable for certain uses. The applicant shall have an opportunity to present
evidence contesting such unsuitability if he/she so desires. Thereafter, the Plan
Commission may affirm, modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability
when making its recommendation to the Village Board. [Ord. 554 06/2005]
(B) Preservation of topography. In order to protect the property owner from possible
damage due to change in the existing grade of adjoining lands, and to aid in
preserving and protecting the natural beauty and character of the landscape, no
change in the existing topography of any land shall be made which would result in
increasing any portion of the slope to a ratio greater than 1 ½ horizontal to one
vertical, within a distance of 20 feet from the property line, except with the
written consent of the owner of the abutting property, and with the approval of the
Plan Commission, or which would alter the existing drainage or topography in
such a way as to adversely affect the adjoining property. No slope shall exceed
the normal angle of slippage of the material involved (in other words, the angel at
which the material on the slope would be more likely than not to slip), and all
slopes shall be protected against erosion. [Ord. 554 06/2005]
(C) All lots or parcels upon which a building is to be constructed shall abut upon a
public street and each fan-shaped lot shall have a minimum street frontage of
sixty (60) feet, measured diagonally from the corners abutting the street. [Ord. 554
06/2005]
ZONING 46.02(4)(D)
4
(D) No Zoning Permit for a primary residence shall be issued for a lot which
abuts a public street that has not been dedicated to its required width. [Ord. 554
06/2005]
(E) Private sewer and water. In any district where a public water supply or public
sewerage service is not available, the minimum lot area shall be determined in
accordance with COMM 85 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code. [Ord. 554
06/2005]
(5) USE RESTRICTIONS. The following use restrictions and regulations shall apply in
all districts:
(A) Principal Uses. Only those principal uses specified for a district, their essential
services and the following uses shall be permitted in that district.
(B) Accessory Uses and structures are permitted on a lot or parcel in any district but
not until a principal structure is located or under construction thereon.
(C) Conditional Uses and their accessory uses are deemed special uses requiring
review and approval by the Plan Commission.
(D) Unclassified or Unspecified Uses may be permitted by the Board of Appeals after
the Plan Commission has made a review and recommendation, provided such uses
are similar in character to the principal uses permitted in the district.
(E) Temporary Uses such as real estate sales field offices or shelters for materials and
equipment may be used in connection with the construction of a permanent
structure. Temporary structures may be used only in connection with construction
of a new principal use. A temporary structure may be used only pursuant to
permit issued by the Zoning Administrator, which permit shall terminate at the
sooner of 12 months from date of issue or substantial completion of the principal
use structure. [Ord. 566 10/2006]
(F) No distribution, warehousing, wholesaling, packaging, assembly, processing or
manufacture of fireworks designated as 1.3G (formerly Class “B” fireworks)
under the Wisconsin Enrolled Commercial Building Code, shall be permitted in
any district [Ord. 546 01/2005]
(6) REDUCTION or JOINT USE. No lot, yard, parking area, building area or other
provisions of this ordinance. No part of any lot, yard, parking area or other space required for a
structure or use shall be used for any other structure or use.
(7) SITE PLAN APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS. (A) Purpose and Intent. For purposes of
promoting compatible development and ensuring adequate public facilities, no person shall
obtain a building permit or commence a use of land without first obtaining site plan approval
from the Plan Commission; however, no approval is required for construction in R-1 and R-2
districts or for any building remodeling that does not substantially change the character or use of
the structure or add substantial floor area. [Ord. 549 04/2005]
ZONING 46.02(7)(B)
5
(B) PRELIMINARY CONSULTATION. Prior to the preparation and official
submittal of the site plan and supporting data, the applicant shall meet with the
Zoning Administrator for a preliminary consultation. The purpose of this
preliminary consultation is to have an informal discussion of the proposed project,
a review of the regulations and policies applicable to the project and discussion of
the land use implications of the project. [Ord. 549 04/2005]
(C) REQUIRED SITE PLAN INFORMATION. The site plan shall be drawn to a
scale not smaller than 30 feet to the inch, certified by a registered land surveyor,
professional engineer, planner, architect or landscape architect and shall show the
following:
(1) The dimensions of the land area and lot line included in the project and the
area of the site or lots included in the project.
(2) Existing and proposed grades based on Village datum (U.S.C.G.S.),
drainage systems and structure, and topographic contours at intervals not
to exceed 2 feet.
(3) The shape, size, location, height, floor area and the finished ground and
basement floor grades of all proposed buildings and structures.
(4) Natural features such as wood lots, streams and lakes or ponds, and
manmade features such as existing roads and structures, with indication as
to which are to be retained and which are to be removed or altered.
(5) Adjacent properties and their building locations and their uses, and zoning
classification shall be identified.
(6) Existing and proposed sidewalks, paths, streets, driveways, parking spaces
and loading spaces showing direction of travel for one-way drives.
(7) The width of existing and proposed streets, driveways, parking spaces and
loading spaces showing direction of travel for one-way drives.
(8) Architectural renderings and general floor plans shall be provided for all
new buildings. These drawings and plans should show sufficient detail to
indicate the architectural design of the proposed building, but all design
details are not required at this stage.
(9) An exterior lighting plan describing fixtures and designating placement.
(10) The site and locating of all existing and proposed public and private
utilities.
(11) A vicinity sketch showing the location of the site in relation to the
surrounding street system.
ZONING 46.02(7)(C)(12)
6
(12) The name, address and telephone number of the owner, developer and
designer.
(13) The anticipated resident population contained within the project or the
number of employees anticipated to determine the impact on public
utilities, including estimates of average daily quantities of waste
consumption and wastewater discharge and strengths and cooling water
volume, if any.
(14) A description of and the plan for the exterior of the structure to be erected
including, size and types of window and door openings, styles of windows
and doors, type and color of proposed siding, type, color design of
proposed roof. The purpose of this requirement shall be to assure
compatibility of the proposed structure with existing structures in the
district. For example, warehousing is not permitted in the commercial
district. Therefore, a pole type structure, and generally a steel sided type
structure, would not be found compatible in the commercial district,
particularly where the commercial lot fronts on a major traveled street or
highway or is located in a business corridor.
(15) Any other information requested by the Zoning Administrator or Plan
Commission and deemed necessary to establish compliance with this
Chapter and to assure the proposed development is compatible with
existing uses in the neighborhood, and elsewhere in the district, and
assuring adequate public facilities exist, or will exist, to service the
proposed use and structure.
(16) A deposit, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, in an amount
sufficient to cover the application fee, anticipated special meeting and
publication fees and an advance toward anticipated engineering review or
legal fees where any are anticipated. [Ord. 549 04/2005]
(D) SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE.
(1) Upon receipt of the completed application the Zoning Administrator shall
review the site plan information and assemble a report for the Plan
Commission. The report to the Plan Commission shall be submitted
within 14 days of the date the application is filed with the Zoning
Administrator.
(2) The Plan Commission shall schedule a public hearing to review the site
plan information. Such hearing shall be held within 31 days of the date the
Zoning Administrator files his report in the office of the Village Clerk.
(3) The Plan Commission shall make recommendation for approval, approval
with proposed modifications or rejection of the site plan application. This
recommendation shall be made to the Village Board with copy, in writing,
ZONING 46.02 (7)(D)(3)
7
furnished the applicant. The Village Board shall consider the application at its
next regularly scheduled Village Board meeting unless arrangements are made by
the applicant for a special meeting.
(4) The cost of a site plan review application shall be established by the
Village Board pursuant to resolution adopted, from time to time, for that
purpose. In addition to any such fee imposed the applicant shall pay the
cost of any newspaper publication charges associated with the review and
the cost of any special meetings. Furthermore, the applicant shall pay the
cost of all engineering and review and legal fees incurred by the Village in
connection with the site plan review.
(5) The Village Board shall grant or deny the application or grant it with
modification. The Village Board shall take into account the
recommendations made by the Plan Commission but shall not be bound by
the recommendations. Any building or use permit issued shall be
contingent upon full compliance by the applicant with the site plan
approval authorization given by the Village Board. [Ord. 549 04/2005]
(8) FRONT YARD TO REMAIN VACANT. All unattached garages may protrude
not more than 6 feet from the front wall (i.e., the side of the house facing the street, or streets in
the case of a corner lot) of the principal structure (dwelling) provided all setbacks are met. All
other accessory structures/buildings must be located 6 feet back (i.e., away from the street, or
streets in the case of a corner lot) from the front wall of the principal structure/dwelling. [Ord. 549
04/2005]
(9) TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINERS/COMMERCIAL TRAILERS. No
temporary storage container or commercial trailer moved by mechanical means shall remain on a
premises longer than thirty (30) days in a twelve (12) month period. Any such containers or
trailers shall not be placed within the required setback area. [Ord. 549 04/2005]
(10) NO POLE BARN TYPE CONSTRUCTION OR CONTAINER HOUSES IN
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. No structures in any Residential District shall be of pole barn, or
shed type construction. This type construction includes galvanized or corrugated steel exterior
siding as is customarily found on sheds and grain bins. All exterior siding shall be brick, stucco,
or lap style siding consisting of wood, vinyl, steel or composite materials customarily used in
residential dwellings. No container houses may be placed in Residential District.
(14) VIOLATIONS.
(A) It shall be unlawful to construct or use any structure, land, water or
adjoining vertical air space in violation of any of the provisions of this
ordinance. In case of any violation, the Plan Commission, Board of
Appeals or Zoning Administrator, on behalf of the Village, or any other
person damaged by such violation, may institute appropriate action or
proceeding to enjoin a violation of this ordinance.
(B) Any person found in violation of this chapter may be issued a warning by
ZONING 46.02(14)(B)
8
the Zoning Administrator setting forth the alleged violation, the corrective action
to be taken and the date by which the corrective action must be completed.
The date by which corrective action must be taken shall be not more than
90 days from the date of the decision of the Plan Commission, or upon
specific recommendation of the Plan Commission. If corrective action is
not taken within the specified time period, the Village may institute action
to impose the penalties set forth in this Chapter. [Ord. 549 04/2005]
(15) PENALTIES.
(A) In addition to the injunctive relief provided in the foregoing subsection,
any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of
this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100.00
nor more than $500.00 for each violation plus costs, together with the cost
of remedying or enjoining each violation. Each day a violation exists or
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) As an alternative to prosecution hereunder the Zoning Administrator is
authorized in appropriate cases to enter an agreement with the violator
where under the violator forthwith makes application for permit, pays the
standard permit application fee and pays a surcharge application fee (to be
determined by the Zoning Administrator) in lieu of such prosecution. [Ord.
549 04/2005]
(16) FEES. Fees charged for permit, applications and appeals under this Chapter are
as set forth in this Ordinance. However, effective January 1, 2001, said fees may be amended
from time to time by resolution of the Village Board. [Ord. 549 04/2005]
SEC. 46.025 ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.
(1) PURPOSE. To create an overlay zoning district whereby adult establishments are
sufficiently separated from each other and conflicting uses so as to ameliorate the negative
secondary effects of adult uses while providing adult establishments sufficient area and
opportunity to operate within the Village so as not to suppress their existence.
(2) DEFINITIONS.
(A) Adult Establishment. Shall include, adult book stores, adult motion
picture theaters, adult novelty stores, and further means any premises to
which public patrons or members are invited or admitted that is
substantially devoted to the purveyance, demonstration or display or
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(B) Adult Bookstore. Means an establishment which as its substantial course
of conduct, presents adult entertainment for observation by patrons
therein, or which, as part of its substantial course of conduct, offers for
sale, rent, trade, lease, inspection or viewing books, films, video cassettes,
ZONING 46.025(2)(B)
9
magazines or other such media, which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified
anatomical areas of specified sexual activities.
(C) Adult Entertainment. Any exhibition of any motion picture, live
performance, display or dance of any type which has as a significant or
substantial portion of such performance, or is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on, any actual or exhibition and viewing of
specified anatomical areas.
(D) Adult Motion Picture Theatre. Any establishment for the presentation of
motion pictures that as its dominant theme, or distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on, matters depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas for
observations by patrons therein.
(E) Adult Novelty Store. Any establishment which as its substantial course of
conduct offers for sale, rent, trade, lease, inspection or viewing any adult
novelty items, sex toys, sexual gratification appliances, or other similar
products, excluding contraceptives or similar products of medical value,
that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters
depicting, describing, or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities.
(F) Specified Anatomical Areas. Means simulated or actual:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals pubic
region.
2. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if opaquely
covered.
3. Less than completely and opaquely covered nipples or areolas of
the human female breast.
(G) Specified Sexual Activities. Means simulated or actual:
1. Showing of human genital in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal: or
2. Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus; or
3. Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts.
(H) Substantial. Forty percent (40%) or more of a business stock in trade,
display space, floor space or retail sales in any one month. Upon
ZONING 46.025 (2)(H)
10
reasonable belief that an entity is in excess of the forty percent (40%)
threshold, that entity shall provide all necessary records, receipts and
documentation to the Village upon request. Failure to do so shall result in
a presumption that the entity is operating in excess of the threshold.
(3) LOCATION.
(A) No adult establishment shall be located:
1. Within any zoning district other than the commercial, light
industrial and heavy industrial district.
2. Within __750__ (plus) feet of an existing adult establishment.
3. Within __750__ feet of any dwelling as defined in subsection
46.10 (16).
4. Within __750__ feet of any pre-existing school, school owned
lands, church, daycare, public park or County Fairground.
5. Within __750__ feet of any pre-existing establishment licensed to
sell or dispense fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor.
(B) For purposes of this section, distances are to be measured in straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the property line
of the adult establishment, to the nearest property line of another adult
establishment, dwelling, school, church, daycare, establishment selling or
dispensing fermented malt beverages of intoxicating liquor or public park.
(4) HOURS OF OPERATION.
(A) No adult establishment shall be open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and
8:00 a.m. on Saturdays, or between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 12:00 noon
on Sundays.
(B) All adult establishments shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times
by the police department and the code enforcement officer.
SEC. 46.03 ZONING DISTRICTS. (1) DISTRICTS. The following zoning Districts are
established:
Residential-One Family Dwelling (R-1)
Residential-Two Family Dwelling (R-2)
Multiple Family Dwelling (R-3)
Residential Mobile Home (RM)
Commercial (C)
Commercial II (C-2)
Business Park District (BP)
Light Industrial (LI)
Heavy Industrial (HI)
ZONING 46.03
11
Agriculture (A)
Conservancy (E)
(2) BOUNDARIES.
(A) District boundaries are as shown on the most current map entitled
"Ellsworth Zoning District Map.” Such boundaries shall be construed to follow:
corporate limits; U.S. Public Land Survey Lines; lot or property lines; centerlines
of streets, highways, alleys, easements and railroad right-of-way or such lines
extended unless otherwise noted on the zoning map.
(B) Vacated portions of public streets and alleys shall have the same zoning
district classification as the land immediately abutting the side to which the
vacated land reverts.
(3) ZONING MAP.
(A) A zoning map adopted and approved with the text as part of this chapter
shall bear upon its face the attestation of the Village President and Village Clerk
and shall be available to the public in the office of the Village Clerk. Certified
copies of the map may be obtained from the Village Clerk.
(B) Changes thereafter made to the district boundaries shall be entered and
attested on the zoning map.
(4) INTERPRETATION. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as
shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
(A) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets,
highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
(B) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines.
(C) Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipal boundaries
shall be construed as following municipal boundaries.
(D) Boundaries indicated as following railroad right-of-way lines shall be
construed as following railroad right-of-way lines.
(E) Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of, features indicated in
the preceding shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated
on the zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
(5) NUMBER OF BUILDINGS. On each lot there shall be not more than one
principal dwelling and one accessory building except as otherwise provided herein.
(6) HOUSEHOLDS. Neither a family nor a household shall exceed more than four
ZONING 46.03 (6)
12
(4) unrelated adult persons, except where permitted as a Conditional Use. The purpose
of this prohibition is to reduce the use of R-1 District buildings as rental property and thus to
control congestion of persons, automobiles and traffic in residential areas.
(7) DISTRICT USES AND PROHIBITIONS. Only those uses identified as
permitted uses for a District are permitted in the District. All uses not specifically permitted are
prohibited.
(a) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1).
(1) PURPOSE. The R-1 Residential District is intended to provide a quiet, pleasant
living area for single family homes, protected from traffic, congestion, and incompatible land
uses. This District is designed to maintain compact residential development near existing
residential areas presently served or readily serviceable by public sewer or in areas that comply
with minimum lot sizes for private sewage systems as specified by COMM 85 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(2) PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
(a) Single family dwellings constructed on site or manufactured homes.
(b) Home occupations conducted in the principal dwelling and no more than
one accessory building. [Ord. 586 07/2008]
(c) Neighborhood park or playground.
(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
(a) One unattached private garage not to exceed eight hundred sixty four
(864) square feet in floor area provided there is no garage attached to the
principal dwelling. The garage height shall not exceed the height of the
principal structure. The height of the principal structure shall be
determined by the horizontal line intersecting the highest point of the
principal structure, excluding antennas, chimneys, vents or the like, and no
garage should be erected on the lot so as to be above said horizontal line.
An unattached garage must resemble the residential structure to-wit, it
must have the same type of siding, color, roof type and roof color as the
principal residential structure. [Ord 591 06/01/2009, Ord 655 08/2016]
(b) Ornamental structures, accessory structures, and one accessory building
not to exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and having a floor area of not
more than 200 square feet. [Ord. 459 05/1997]
(c) Essential services.
(4) PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
(a) Home occupations conducted entirely in accessory buildings upon an
affirmative finding and subject to such conditions as may assure, among
ZONING 46.03(a)(4)(a)
13
other things, that no noise, light or odor shall be emitted from or generated
by the Conditional Use other than such noise, light or odor as customarily
emanates from a permitted use in a principal residential dwelling and does
not violate, nor is likely to violate, any other Village Municipal Code
provisions, including those relating to nuisance; and further, upon an
affirmative finding that the use will not more than nominally and then only
occasionally, increase traffic or parking in the neighborhood.
(b) Municipal office buildings.
(c) Accessory structures and accessory buildings exceeding 200 square feet
where features unique to the lot justify the larger structure or building.
(d) A second garage, attached or unattached. An unattached private garage
where the principal dwelling already has an attached garage. Where an
affirmative finding is made that the structure or building is both incidental
and reasonably necessary for one of the Principal Permitted Uses. Any
such second garage must resemble the residential structure to-wit, it must
have the same type of siding, color, roof type and roof color as the
principal residential structure. It shall not exceed 864 square feet in floor
area. [Ord.586 07/2008,Ord. 675 04/2019]
(e) Plant crop agriculture.
(f) R-2 - Two Family Dwellings, provided the owner of the premises has
his/her primary place of residence (i.e., more than 6 months per calendar
year) at the premises and the premises otherwise comply with all R-2
Zoning District requirements. [Ord.622 06/2012]
(5) MINIMUM LOT AREA. 8,400 square feet per dwelling unit.
(6) MINIMUM LOT WIDTH. Each lot shall have a minimum width of 66 feet.
(7) MINIMUM YARDS.
(a) Front. Twenty Five (25) feet from the street line or lot line of all local and
county highways or streets, whichever results in the greater setback, and
thirty five (35) feet from the street line or lot line of all State or Federal i.e.
highways.
(b) Rear. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifty (50)
feet for the principal structure, and eight (8) feet for accessory structures,
except, however, the setback in the following areas shall be thirty-five
(35) feet:.
(1) Twin-home lots numbered 31-40 and 44-55 in Phase II of
Southgate Addition to the Village of Ellsworth. These lots shall be
used only for twin homes. The two-halves of a twin home shall
ZONING 46.03(a)(7)(b)(1)
14
have a common wall which meets at the common lot line shared by the
twin home No deck or other appurtenance or extension of the structure
(except roof overhang) shall extend into the required rear yard setback.
The only permitted structure in the rear yard setback area shall be a
detached accessory storage shed.
(c) Side. The required side yards shall be not less than twenty (20) feet total,
and no single side yard shall be less than eight (8) feet in width. For
structures of two (2) or two and one half (2½) stories the sum of the
widths of required side yards shall be not less than twenty five(25)feet and
no single side yard shall be less than ten (10) feet in width.
(8) CORNER LOT. On a corner lot, bounded by two or more public street rights-ofway,
there shall be a minimum of at least twenty five (25) feet from each street line or lot line,
using that line that results in the largest setback. A corner lot shall not be less than eighty (80)
feet in width.
(9) VARIANCE. Where, because the lot is odd sized or its width on this effective
date of this ordinance is less than sixty six (66) feet, the width of any single side yard where a
variance is obtained shall be not less than forty (40) percent of the total required side yard width,
but in no case less than four (4) feet.
(10) HEIGHT. The maximum height of any structure shall be thirty-five (35) feet or
two and one-half (2½) stories, whichever is less.
(11) MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE. No more than fifty (50) percent of the lot may
be covered by structures or impervious surface.
(12) MINIMUM BUILDING SIZE. The minimum ground floor area shall be not less
than 960 square feet for a 1-story dwelling and not less than 720 square feet for a dwelling
having more than 1-story.[Ord. 682 2/3/2020]
(b) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2).
(1) PURPOSE. The R-2 Residential District is intended to provide a quiet, pleasant
living area for two dwelling unit buildings, and low density two dwelling unit buildings,
protected from traffic, congestion, and incompatible land uses. This district is located in areas
presently served or readily serviceable by public sewer or in areas that comply with minimum lot
sizes for private sewage systems as specified in COMM 85 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
(2) PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
(a) One or two unit dwellings.
(b) Home occupations. [Ord. 586 07/2008]
(c) Neighborhood park or playground.
ZONING 46.03(b)(2)(d)
15
(d) Parking and Loading areas - See Section 46.05 (d) & (e)
(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
(a) One private garage attached to each residential unit. [Ord 655 08/2016]
(b) Essential services.
(4) PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
(a) Home occupations conducted entirely in accessory buildings upon an
affirmative finding and subject to such conditions as may as sure, among
other things, that no noise, light or odor shall be emitted from or generated
by the Conditional Use other thank such noise, light or odor as
customarily emanates from a permitted use in a principal dwelling and
does not violate, nor is likely to violate, any other Village Municipal Code
provisions, including those relating to nuisance; and further, upon an
affirmative finding that the use will not more than nominally and then only
occasionally, increase traffic or parking in the neighborhood.
(b) A second garage unattached not to exceed eight hundred sixty four (864)
square feet in floor area, where the principal dwelling already has an
attached garage and where an affirmative finding is made that the structure
or building is both incidental and reasonably necessary for one of the
Principal Permitted Uses. Any such second garage must resemble the
residential structure, to-wit, it must have the same type of siding, color,
roof type and roof color as the principal residential structure. It shall not
exceed 864 square feet in floor. [Ord 655 08/2016, Ord. 675 04/2019]
(5) MINIMUM LOT AREA.
(a) All single dwelling unit and two family "over/under" duplex or twin home
two story dwelling units shall have a minimum lot area of 8,400 square
feet.
(b) Two unit side-by-side and twin home dwellings shall each have a
minimum lot area of 4,650 square feet; that is, each half of such twin
home or unit shall be located on a lot which is not less than 4,650 square
feet.
(6) MINIMUM LOT WIDTH. Each lot shall have a minimum width of sixty six (66)
feet. Each two unit side-by-side or twin home lot shall have a minimum width of 33 feet; that is,
each half of such twin home or unit shall be located on a lot which is not less than 33 feet wide.
(7) MINIMUM YARDS.
(a) Front. Twenty Five (25) feet from the street line or lot line, which ever
results in the greatest setback, from all local and county highways or
ZONING 46.03(b)(7)(a)
16
streets, and thirty five 35) feet from the street line or lot line of all State
System (Federal or State numbered) highways. (Main Street and Maple
Street north of Main St).
(b) Rear. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifty (50)
feet for the principal structure, and eight (8) feet for accessory structures;
except, however, the setback in the following areas shall be thirty-five
(35) feet:
(1) Twin-home lots numbered 31-40 and 44-55 in Phase II of
Southgate Addition to the Village of Ellsworth. These lots
shall be used only for twin homes. The two-halves of a
twin home shall have a common wall which meets at the
common lot line shared by the twin home. No deck or
other appurtenance or extension of the structure (except
roof overhang) shall extend into the required rear yard
setback. The only permitted structure in the rear yard
setback area shall be a detached accessory storage shed.
(c) Side. The required side yards shall be not less than twenty (20) feet total,
and no single side yard shall be less than eight (8) feet in width. For
structures of two (2) or two and one half (2 1/2) stories of the sum of
widths of required side yards shall be not less than twenty five (25) feet
and no single side yard shall be less than ten (10) feet in width. [Ord 655
08/2016]
(8) CORNER LOT. On a corner lot, bounded by two or more public street rights-ofway,
there shall be a minimum of at least twenty five (25) feet from each street line or lot line,
using that line that results in the largest setback. A corner lot shall not be less than eighty (80)
feet in width.
(9) VARIANCE. Where, because the lot is odd sized or its width on this effective
date of this ordinance is less than sixty six (66) feet, the width of any single side yard where a
variance is obtained shall be not less than forty (40) percent of the total required side yard width,
but in no case less than four (4) feet.
(10) HEIGHT. The maximum height of any structure shall be thirty-five (35) feet or
two and one-half (2½) stories, whichever is less.
(11) MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE. No more than fifty (50) percent of the lot may
be covered by structures or impervious surface.
(12) MINIMUM BUILDING SIZE. The minimum ground floor area for each
dwelling unit shall not be less than 960 square feet for the 1-story dwelling and not less than 720
square feet for a dwelling having more than 1-story.[Ord. 682 2/3/2020]
(c) MULTIPLE FAMILY (R-3).
(1) PURPOSE. The R-3 Multiple Family Dwelling District is designed to provide a
ZONING 46.03(c)(1)
17
location for higher density buildings and people than is typically found in single or two family
home districts. The same concern for quiet surroundings, minimal traffic congestion, and
compatible surrounding land use applies to the R-3 district as it does to the R-1 and R-2 districts.
This district, because of the expected population density, shall only be located in areas served by
public sewer systems.
(2) PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
(a) Buildings with three or more dwelling units.
(b) Home occupations. [Ord. 586 07/2008]
(c) Neighborhood park or playground.
(d) Parking or loading areas.
(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
(a) One service building, such as a storage shed or yard maintenance
structure, not to exceed 200 square feet in horizontal (floor) area,
provided it is associated with operation of the principal structure. Such
shed must resemble the residential structure, to-wit, it must have the
same type of siding, color, roof type and roof color as the principal
residential structure. [Ord 655 08/2016]
(4) PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
(a) One unattached private garage with a maximum space to shelter not more
than one full-size automobile or mid-size pick-up truck per dwelling unit.
Each space must be assigned to a corresponding residential dwelling unit,
and not more than one (1) such space shall be assigned to a corresponding
residential dwelling unit. There shall be no more garage units or spaces
than there are residential dwelling units in the residential dwelling
Structure (principal structure). The garage height shall not exceed the
height of the principal structure. The height of the principal structure shall
be determined by the horizontal line intersecting the highest point of the
principal structure, excluding antennas, chimneys, vents or the like, and no
garage should be erected on the lot so as to be above said horizontal line.
An unattached garage must have the same type of siding, color, roof type
and roof color as the principal residential structure. [Ord 655 08/2016, Ord.
675 04/2019]
(5) MINIMUM LOT AREA.
(a) Buildings containing 3 or more, but less than 9, dwelling units shall have a
minimum lot area of 3,500 square feet per unit.
(b) Buildings with nine (9) dwelling units or more shall have 2,000 square
feet of additional lot area for every one (1) bedroom dwelling unit, 2,500
ZONING 46.03(c)(5)(b)
18
square feet of additional lot area for every additional two (2) bedroom
dwelling unit and 2,800 square feet of additional lot area for every
additional three (3) bedroom dwelling unit.
(6) MINIMUM LOT WIDTH. The minimum lot width for buildings containing 3
dwelling units shall be 100 feet; the minimum lot width for buildings containing more than 9
dwelling units shall be 120 feet.
(7) MINIMUM YARDS.
(a) Front. Twenty Five (25) feet from the street line or lot line, which ever
results in the greater setback, from all local and county highways or
streets, and thirty five (35) feet from the street or lot line of all State
System (Federal or State numbered) highways. (Main St. and Maple St.
north of Main St.)
(b) Side. The side yard requirements of the R-1 and R-2 Districts shall apply
to the buildings and structures in the R-3 District when they adjoin
property of such districts. If multiple buildings are part of a development
with common fee ownership the side yard requirements between
individual buildings within the complex may be modified as a Conditional
Use in order to develop a more land-efficient higher density development.
(c) Rear. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twentyfive
(25) feet for the principal structure and eight (8) feet for accessory
structures.
(8) CORNER LOT. On a corner lot bounded by two or more public street rights-ofway
there shall be a minimum setback of at least twenty-five (25) feet from each street line or lot
line using that line that results in the greater setback. A corner lot in the R-3 District shall be not
less than one hundred (100) feet in width
(9) MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT. The maximum building height of a structure
shall be three stories or forty five (45) feet, whichever is less.
(10) MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE. No more than sixty (60) percent of the multifamily
dwelling lot area shall be covered with buildings or impervious surfaces without
Conditional Use approval of an on-site storm water management plan.
(d) RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME (RM).
(1) PURPOSE. The RM district is intended to be protected from traffic congestion
and well buffered from other land uses by use of landscaping techniques and spatial distances.
All mobile homes shall be located in a mobile home park or subdivision to prevent this less
compatible form of housing from interspersal with other traditional housing. Mobile homes in
this district shall be served or readily serviceable by public sewer and water or shall meet the
specifications of COMM 85 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
ZONING 46.03(d)(2)
19
(2) PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. Mobile homes on individual lots within a
mobile home subdivision or mobile home park. Any reference herein to a mobile home park
shall also apply to a mobile home subdivision unless otherwise expressly stated.
(3) ACCESSORY USES.
(a) Private garage and one accessory building.
(b) Essential services.
(c) Mobile home park office.
(d) Laundries, washrooms, recreation rooms and maintenance and equipment
storage structures serving only the residents of the mobile home park.
(e) Public buildings.
(f) Utility structures provided they are enclosed by a protection fence at least
eight (8) feet high.
(4) MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. In designating lands as RM district,
the following development standards shall apply:
(a) All mobile homes and mobile home parks shall comply with §66.058,
Wis. Stats., and any applicable Wisconsin State Administrative Codes
provisions.
(b) The minimum parcel size for a mobile home park shall be 6 acres.
(c) The minimum lot size for a single mobile home shall be forty (40) feet
wide by one hundred twenty (120) feet deep.
(d) The minimum lot area for a mobile home shall be 4,800 square feet if
public sewer is available otherwise the lot area shall conform with COMM
85 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(e) The minimum distance between mobile homes, including additions and
accessory structures, shall be twenty (20) feet.
(f) The minimum front yard setback for a mobile home from any service road
shall be 15 feet from the road right of way.
(g) There shall be two 8 ft. x 20 ft. off-street gravel or paved auto parking
spaces on each mobile home lot.
(h) All service roads and driveways shall be surfaced with blacktop, seal coat,
concrete, or gravel
ZONING 46.03(d)(4)(i)
20
(i) All service roads in a mobile home park shall be at least 20 ft. wide.
(j) Mobile homes shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from all front, side
and rear lot lines of the mobile home park.
(k) Each mobile home shall be placed upon a gravel or breaker run rock or
hard surfaced pad or foundation.
(l) All mobile homes shall have tie downs which distribute the load and are
attached to ground anchors so as to resist wind overturning and sliding.
Each tie down shall be designed to resist an allowable working load equal
to or exceeding 3,150 pounds and shall be capable of withstanding a 50
percent overload without failure. Unless the specific tie down system is
designed by a registered professional engineer or architect, tie downs shall
be designed, placed, and secured in accordance with the specifications set
forth by the manufacturer of the specific mobile home model, or in
accordance with the specifications of American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) A225.1. Not more than 6 feet open end spacing shall be
permitted at the rear wall of the mobile home. Each mobile home will be
skirted with an opaque surface non-flammable material. This tie-down
and skirting shall be provided by the mobile home owner within 30 days
of locating on the site.
(m) The mobile home park owner shall set aside 5% of the total mobile home
park area for recreation and be maintained by the mobile home park
owner.
(n) The maximum height of a mobile home (excluding the chimney) shall be
not more than 16 feet from the ground.
(o) Each mobile home park shall be well drained, properly graded and free
from stagnant pools of water. The drainage and grade of said parks shall
be established by the Village Board.
(p) Each mobile home park or subdivision shall provide public water and
sewerage system hook-up for the mobile homes located therein.
(q) Except for permitted entrances and exits, each mobile home park shall be
enclosed by a permanent planting, or acceptable privacy fencing not less
than eight feet in height along roadways.
(r) All developers of a mobile home park shall present for review and
approval by the Village Board a site plan showing street design, lot layout,
water and sewer system needs and a timetable for developing the mobile
home park.
(s) The RM-District shall be considered a Planned Unit Development (PUD)
with location of commercial/service uses within a mobile home park to be
ZONING 46.03(e)
21
determined by conditional use standards.
(e) COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C).
(1) PURPOSE. The Commercial District provides an area for commercial, business
and professional service uses in the Central Business District and other areas of compact
development served by public sewer or in areas that comply with the minimum lot sizes for
private sewage systems as specified in COMM 85 of the Wisconsin Administrative Codes.
(2) PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. By way of illustration, and not exclusion, the
following and like business services are permitted: appliance dealers; art, gift, jewelry and
notions shops; bakeries, insurance and real estate offices; barber shops; beauty parlors; banks and
financial institutions; clinics; clothing stores; drug stores and pharmacies; eating and drinking
establishments; florists; food lockers; fruit, vegetable, meat, fish, grocery, supermarkets, and
other retail food stores; furniture, department, and hardware stores; funeral homes, hotels,
motels, motor lodges, and inns; laundries and dry cleaners; liquor stores; music, radio and
television stores; news-stands; offices; optical stores; parking lots; places of entertainment; retail
stores; sporting goods stores; clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodges operated for profit;
vehicular sales and service; gasoline stations; funeral homes; municipal buildings; state licensed
daycare. Any land or building use which utilizes a ‘drive through’ for conducting business, such
as a bank or fast food restaurant, or any business which is primarily motor vehicle oriented such
as an auto body repair shop, gasoline service station, auto repair, auto sales or machinery and
equipment sales and service.[Ord. 466 10/1997, Ord. 546 01/2005, Ord. 608 01/2011, Ord. 610 03/2011, Ord.
675 04/2019].
(3) ACCESSORY USES.
(a) Residential uses as part of a principal business structure on other than the
main floor. Every residential dwelling unit shall comply with height, setback,
corner lot, yard dimension, lot area, dwelling size, parking, home
occupation, sign, private garage, accessory building and ornamental and
accessory structure restrictions and requirements of Section 46.03 (7)(a). [Ord.
459 05/1997, Ord. 596 09/09]
(b) Essential services.
(4) CONDITIONAL USES.
(a) A building in which a ground floor residential dwelling unit is located
provided the dwelling unit is not located on the street side of the ground
floor and does not occupy more than the rear one-half (1/2) of the ground
floor. The street side of the ground floor shall be used for a Commercial
purpose.
(b) Light industrial uses provided such uses are specifically found to be
consistent with neighboring uses in the District and provided there is an
affirmative finding that no excessive odor, noise or light shall emanate
ZONING 46.03(e)(5)
22
from the permitted structure or use.
(5) MINIMUM LOT AREA. There shall be no minimum lot area.
(6) MINIMUM YARDS.
(a) Front. There shall be a minimum setback of at least eight (8) feet from the
property line.
(b) Side. There shall be a minimum side yard of fifteen (15) feet where
adjacent to a Residential District. The minimum side yard shall be eight
(8) feet if the structure or the adjoining structure is not of fireproof
construction; otherwise, there shall be no side yard required if the structure
is in compliance with State Fire Code and Regulations.
(c) Rear. There shall be a rear yard of at least twenty (20) feet for buildings
of two (2) stories or less in height. For each additional story the required
rear yard shall be increased by three (3) feet.
(d) Height. The maximum height of a structure shall be forty-five (45) feet or
3 stories, whichever is less.
(e) Corner Lots. The minimum setback from the lot line on each street side of
a corner lot shall be 8 feet from the lot line. [Ord.549 04/2005]
(e-1) COMMERCIAL DISTRICT II (C-2) [Ord. 546 01/2005]
(1) PURPOSE. The Commercial District II (C-2) provides an area for all commercial
uses which are permitted in the Commercial District and, in addition, provides and permits
location therein of uses associated with warehousing.
(2) PRINCIPAL USES. All uses permitted in the Commercial District are permitted
in the Commercial District II. In addition, warehousing is permitted in Commercial District II.
(3) OTHER. The rules pertaining to accessory uses, conditional uses, minimum lot
area and minimum yards set forth in §46.03 (7)(e), pertaining to the Commercial District, shall
also apply to the Commercial District II.
(f) INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS (LI, HI).
(1) PURPOSE. These districts are intended to provide an area for manufacturing and
industrial activities. They are also intended to provide an area for a variety of uses which require
relatively large installations, facilities or land areas; or which would create or tend to create
conditions of public or private nuisance, hazard, or other undesirable conditions; of which for
these or other reasons may require special safeguards, equipment, processes, barriers or other
forms of protection, including spatial distance, in order to reduce, or shield the public from such
conditions.
(2) PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
ZONING 46.03(f)(2)(a)
23
(a) Light Industrial (LI) District. Permitted uses in the Light Industrial district
are as follows: Cleaning, pressing, and dyeing establishments; commercial
bakeries; commercial greenhouses; distributors; fire stations; food locker
plants; laboratories; machine shops; manufacture and bottling of nonalcoholic
beverages; painting; printing; publishing; warehousing and
wholesaling; mini-storage or self-storage facilities; fabrication, packing,
assembly, and packaging of products from processed furs, glass, tanned
leather, metals, paper, plaster, plastics, textiles, or wood; manufacture,
fabrication, processing, packaging and packing of confections, cosmetics,
electrical appliances, electronic devices, food (except cabbage, fish and
fish products, meat and meat products, and pea vining), instruments,
jewelry, pharmaceuticals, tobacco, toiletries; automobile, RV, truck and
trailer dealerships.
(b) Heavy Industrial (HI) District. All the uses of the Light Industrial District
are permitted in the HI- Heavy Industrial District. All other uses are
Conditional, and include, but are not limited to: Manufacture and
processing of abrasives, asphalt, batteries, bone, cabbage, carpeting,
cement, cereals, charcoal, chemicals, fish, kiln drying, lime and lime
products, meat, paint, paper, peas, pickles, plaster of paris, pulp, rubber,
sausage, sizing, starch, varnish; processing or storage of building
materials, explosives, fat, fertilizers, flammable material, grains, grease,
radioactive material, vinegar, yeasts; and the manufacture and bottling of
alcoholic beverages.
(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES. Essential Services.
(4) MINIMUM LOT AREA. The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet when
serviced by a public sewerage system, and where not so serviced the lot area shall comply with
COMM 85 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(5) MINIMUM LOT WIDTH. The minimum lot width shall be one hundred (100)
feet.
(6) MINIMUM YARDS.
(a) Front. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet
from the street right of way. The minimum setback shall be seventy-five
(75) feet if parking is permitted in the front yard.
(b) Rear Setback. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20)
feet.
(c) Side Setback. The side yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20)
feet.
(d) Activity Setback. When the LI or HI District is adjacent to any residential
ZONING 46.03(f)(6)(d)
24
(R-1, R-2, R-3 District, no manufacture, repair, painting or storage of material
may be performed within twenty (20) feet of the property line adjacent to
the "R" District.
(e) Corner Lots. The minimum setback from the lot line on each street side of
a corner lot shall be 25 feet from the lot line. [Ord. 549 04/2005}
(7) HEIGHT. The maximum height of a structure shall be forty-five (45) feet or
three stories, whichever is less.
(8) ENCLOSURE. All activities involving the manufacturing, fabricating, repairing,
storing, cleaning, servicing, and testing of materials, goods, or products shall be within
completely enclosed buildings, except they may be outdoors if completely screened by a solid
wall or uniformly painted solid fence or suitable substitute at least eight (8) feet high, and if there
is no open storage at a greater height than that of the element to be screened. Where the
element to be screened requires a fence over eight (8) feet in height, a conditional use permit
shall first be obtained for such fence or screening wall. In addition to, but not in place of, the
fence or screen enclosure required herein, any other fence may be constructed in accordance with
Sec. 46.06 (f). Provided the element to be screened is screened thereby, the highest two (2) feet
of the eight (8) foot high (or higher as the case may be) fence or screening wall may utilize
barbed wire type construction in a verticular or angular position.
(9) SERVICE FACILITIES. Service facilities such as restaurants and fueling
stations are permitted provided all such services are oriented physically, and in sales marketing,
toward industrial users and employees, and other users are only infrequent, irregular and
incidental customers.
(10) SITE PLAN. When an application for a use permit is submitted, the owner or
developer shall also submit a site plan of the proposed development showing the location of the
building, required setback lines, internal streets and parking areas, landscaping, screening,
adequate street lighting, and other information as may be required by the Plan Commission. No
use permit shall be issued unless the site plan has been approved by the Plan Commission. The
applicant shall comply with all of the requirements of §46.02(7). [Ord. 549 04/2005]
(11) SANITARY CRITERIA. Where the property is not serviced by the public
sewerage system no more than 75 percent of the minimum lot area shall have a slope greater than
12 percent. The soil shall be suitable for septic tanks.
(g) BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT (BP).
(1) PURPOSE. This district is a planned development with a minimum area of 5
acres in which commercial and light industrial uses shall be blended. When establishing a
Business Park District the Village Board may impose minimum lot sizes for the commercial and
light industrial uses, and may limit the uses of specified lots to commercial or light industrial
uses.
(2) ACCESSORY USES. Essential services.
(3) MINIMUM LOT AREA, WIDTH, YARDS. The minimum lot area, lot width
ZONING 46.03(g)(3)
25
and setbacks shall be as set forth in the Commercial District regulations for lots having a
commercial use, and as set forth in the Industrial District regulations for lots having a light
industrial use.
(4) HEIGHT. The maximum height of a structure shall be as specified in the
Commercial District regulations for a commercial use and as specified in the Light Industrial
District for a light industrial use.
(5) SITE PLAN AND ENCLOSURE. Light industrial uses shall be enclosed as
provided in Sec. 46.03(7)(f)(8). Applications shall be submitted with a site plan as specified in
Sec. 46.03 (7)(f)(10), and no permit for an LI use shall be permitted unless the site plan has been
approved by the Plan Commission. [Ord. 549 04/2005]
(h) AGRICULTURE DISTRICT (A).
(1) PURPOSE. The Agriculture District is intended to preserve productive farmlands
and to protect farming operations from conflicting land uses. Further, this District is designed to
prevent the inefficient spread of urban development into agricultural areas that are inadequately
served by public facilities.
(2) PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
(a) Farming operations which do not cause extraordinary noxious odors, noise
or other health and sanitation hazards.
(b) Forestry, nurseries, orchards, specialty cropping and similar agricultural
production operations.
(c) In season removable roadside stands for the sale of farm products
produced on the premises, and up to two (2) signs not larger than ten (10)
square feet each for advertising the permitted roadside stand.
(d) Farm dwellings which serve as the principal residence for the owner,
operators and employees of the agricultural enterprise.
(e) Home occupations. [Ord. 586 07/2008]
(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
(a) Essential services.
(b) Private garages.
(c) Accessory structures customarily incidental to the operations of the
agricultural enterprise.
(4) CONDITIONAL USES.
(a) Single-family dwellings occupied by the parents, children or farm
ZONING 46.03(h)(4)(b)
26
employees of the principal farm operator.
(b) Enterprises engaged in the sale and service of machinery used in
agricultural production.
(c) Facilities for the centralized bulk collection, storage, and distribution of
agricultural products to wholesale and retail markets.
(d) Storage and sale of seeds, feeds, and similar products essential to
agricultural production.
(e) Bed and Breakfast Inns.
(f) Other uses essential for the support of agricultural production, provided
such uses do not conflict with the purposes of the Agriculture District.
(g) Raising and caring for livestock.
(h) Structures exceeding forty-five (45) feet in height.
(5) MINIMUM LOT AREAS. The minimum lot area shall be 5 acres. All residential
lot sizes shall comply with COMM 85 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(6) MINIMUM YARDS.
(a) Front. The front yard shall be not less than sixty-three (63) feet as
measured from the centerline of the street or thirty (30) feet from the street
right-of-way line, whichever is the greater.
(b) Side & Rear. The minimum side and rear yard shall be fifty (50) feet for
all buildings.
(7) HEIGHT. The maximum height of a structure shall be forty-five (45) feet.
(8) MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE. The minimum ground floor area shall be not less
than 960 square feet for a 1-story dwelling and not less than 720 square feet for a dwelling
having more than 1-story. [Ord. 682 2/3/2020]
(i) CONSERVANCY DISTRICT (E).
(1) PURPOSE. The Conservancy District delineates those areas where substantial
development of the land in the form of buildings or structures is prohibited due to:
(a) Special or unusual conditions of topography, drainage, shorelands,
wetlands, flood plain or other natural conditions, and/or in areas where
considerable damage to buildings or structures and possible loss of life
may occur due to the processes of nature.
(b) The lack of proper facilities or improvements resulting in the land not
ZONING 46.03(i)(1)(c)
27
being suitable for improvement at the present time.
(c) Potential future public use such as a recreational trail following
abandonment of a railroad line.
(d) A need for a buffer or spatial distance between a wastewater treatment
plant and developing areas.
This District also provides for the preservation and protection of scenic, historic, scientific and
biologically important areas, abandoned railroad right-of-ways and ground water source.
(2) PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. Erosion control practices involving planting
vegetative cover, water and water course diversion and control via municipal culverts and other
systems, forestry under professional guidance, woodlands, flood plain areas, wildlife habitat,
orchards, and wild crop harvesting, and village open park land, and conversion of an abandoned
railroad to a hiking or biking trail.
(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES. Essential services.
(4) CONDITIONAL USES. The following conditional uses are permitted:
Dumping, filling, cultivation, mineral extraction, soil or peat removal, drainage areas, water
measurement and control facilities and grazing under professional guidance.
(5) PROHIBITED USES. No structures are permitted except those housing essential
services accessory to the principal or permitted uses.
SEC. 46.04 CONDITIONAL USES. (1) APPLICATION. Application for conditional
use permits shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms provided and shall be
accompanied by a plan showing the location, size and shape of the lot(s) involved and of any
proposed structures, and the existing and proposed use of each structure and lot. The cost of
conditional use permits shall be established from time to time by the Village Board.
(2) REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION. Following review the Plan Commission
shall make its recommendation concerning issuance, issuance with recommended conditions, or
non-issuance to the Village Board. In all cases where a conditional use is proposed, the Plan
Commission shall review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans,
neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation and
circulation, drainage, sewerage and water systems and other aspects of the proposed use. [Ord 659
2/2017]
(3) STANDARDS. No permit for a conditional use shall be granted unless it shall be
found that, in addition to all other requirements set forth applicable to the proposed use in the
District, all of the following conditions are present:
(a) That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the conditional use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort or general welfare.
ZONING 46.04(3)(b)
28
(b) That the uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the
neighborhood, used for purposes permitted in that portion of the
neighborhood located in the District, shall be in no reasonably foreseeable
manner substantially impaired, diminished or adversely affected by the
establishment, maintenance or operation of the Conditional Use. The
Applicant must affirmatively show that the proposed Conditional Use will
be consistent with other uses, structures or accessory uses or structures in
the neighborhood. The fact a similar proposed Conditional Use already
exists in the neighborhood is only one factor to be considered, and the
weight given to it shall be negligible if the other existing Conditional Use
is not visible from the Lot upon which the Applicant proposes the new
Conditional Use. Restrictions may be imposed as a condition of issuing
the Conditional Use to reasonably assure that excessive odors, noise and
light, shall not be generated by the reasonably anticipated uses of the
Conditional Use. Excessive odors, noise and light are those which do not,
and which reasonable persons would not expect to, normally emanate
from a residential structure or use.
(c) That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of the neighborhood for uses
permitted in the District.
(d) That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and other necessary site
improvements have been or are being provided.
(e) That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion and traffic hazards in
the public streets. [Ord 659 2/2017]
(f) The Conditional Use must be affirmatively determined to be consistent
with the Purpose of the District in which it is proposed to be located and
used. The fact that the use is designated as a Permitted Conditional Use in
a District does not mean, nor shall it be so interpreted, that such use shall
be automatically permitted unless this affirmative finding is so made by
the Village Board.
(4) REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION. Prior to recommending a permit for a
conditional use, the Village Board may propose such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, maintenance and operation of the conditional use as it may find necessary to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community, and to secure
compliance with the standards specified in 46.04(3) above. Establishment, maintenance and
operation shall be construed to include, but shall not be limited to, landscaping, architectural
design, type of construction, construction commencement and completion dates, sureties,
lighting, fencing, operational control, hours of operation, traffic circulation, deed restrictions,
access restrictions, yard and parking requirements, insofar as the Village Board shall find same
are necessary or desirable to fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter. The Plan Commission,
after Public Hearing, shall make recommendation to the Village Board concerning issuance or
ZONING 46.04(4)
29
non-issuance of the Conditional Use Permit. In all cases where a permit for conditional use is
granted, the Village Board shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary
to ensure the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
{Ord 659 2/2017] The Village Board can impose stricter front yard or rear yard requirements as a
condition of issuing the Conditional Use Permit, having in mind reasonably foreseeable or
expressed concerns of neighbors whose views from their respective properties may be adversely
affected by such proposed use.
(5) COMPLIANCE. Conditional uses shall comply with all other provisions of this
chapter including lot width and area, yards, height, parking and loading.
(6) PERMIT ISSUANCE. The Village Board may authorize the Zoning
Administrator to issue a conditional use permit after review and public hearing, provided such
uses are in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter. Such permit shall be issued to
a specific person, partnership or corporation for a specific property, and only for those uses
stated in the permit. The conditional use permit shall terminate upon sale of the property or
business for which it was issued, and may not be transferred to another person or location
without a new application, review, and public hearing. [Ord 659 2/2017]
(7) TIME PERIOD. A conditional use permit shall allow the permittee to use the
subject premises or structure in the manner conditionally permitted as long as the conditions
upon which the permit was issued are followed. If the permittee desires to continue the use, the
permittee shall apply for a permit review. Upon receipt of an application for a permit review the
Village Board may extend the conditional use indefinitely, subject to such periodic review as the
Village Board may in its discretion deem appropriate.
(8) REVIEW OF CONDITIONAL USES. The Zoning Administrator shall from time
to time conduct a review of the conditional use to ensure all conditions set by the conditional use
permit are being met. Failure at any time by the permittee to adhere to the conditions set forth in
the permit may result in a public hearing to determine whether the conditional use permit should
be modified or cancelled.
(9) RESUBMISSION. No application for a conditional use which has been denied
wholly or in part by the Village Board shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date
of said denial, except where substantial new evidence or proof of compliance with the applicable
conditions is demonstrated. [Ord 659 2/2017]
SEC. 46.045 SPECIAL USE PERMITS. The Village Board, after investigation and
public hearing by the Plan Commission, may authorize the location of the uses specified herein
in the districts specified, from which they would otherwise be excluded, provided the Village
Board shall find the proposed location is appropriate or necessary in order to serve the public
health, safety, convenience or general welfare, and provided each such structure or use shall
comply with all other regulations for the District in which it is proposed to be located. The
Village Board may attach reasonable conditions and safeguards to the Special Use Permit in
order to protect the value of neighboring buildings or uses. The conditions set forth at 46.04(3)
concerning Conditional Uses shall be used as the minimum standards to be considered by the
Village Board in determining the appropriateness of a Special Use Permit. The uses permitted
herein are not Conditional Uses. They are Special Uses permitted by the Village Board. Except
as otherwise specified herein, they are intended to be permanent permitted uses and therefore all
ZONING 46.045(1)
30
requirements shall be strictly construed against the applicant.
(1) PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC USES. The following uses may be permitted:
(a) Airports, airstrips and landing fields in the A district provided these
facilities meet the regulations contained in Sections 114.135 and 114.136,
of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Government and cultural uses such as administrative offices, fire and
police stations, community centers, libraries, public emergency shelters,
parks, playgrounds and museums in all residential and business districts.
(c) Utilities in all districts provided all principal structures and uses are not
less than fifty (50) feet from any residential district lot line, and all utility
structures are enclosed by a protection fence at least 8 feet high.
(d) Public, parochial, private, preschool, elementary and secondary schools
and churches in all residential, commercial and agricultural districts.
(e) Hospitals and cemeteries in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts provided all
principal structures are not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any lot
line. Cemeteries in the A district.
(2) RESIDENTIAL USES. The following residential and quasi-residential uses may
be permitted:
(a) Planned residential developments provided the proper preservation, care
and maintenance of the exterior, all common structures, facilities, utilities
and access and open spaces shall be assured by deed restrictions
enforceable by the community. All Planned Unit Developments (PUD)
shall have at least a twenty (20) foot yard space between any principal
structures and the external lot lines.
(1) Building Area. The structure and impervious surface of the lot
shall not be more than 40 percent of the lot area.
(2) Yards.
(a) Front. There shall be a minimum front yard of 20 feet.
(b) Rear. There shall be a minimum rear yard of 50 feet.
(c) Side. There shall be a minimum side yard of 20 feet as
measured from street right-of-way.
(3) Donation of Public Park. The owner or developer shall donate
land for public park at the ratio of one (1) of every ten (10) acres or
one (1) acre for every twenty-five (25) dwelling units, whichever
provides the largest amount of such park lands.
ZONING 46.045(2)(b)
31
(b) Nursing homes, convalescent homes and homes for the aged in the R-2
and R-3 and Commercial Districts provided all principal structures are not
less than twenty-five (25) feet from any lot line.
(c) A foster home, adult family home or community living arrangement in any
Residential District provided all principal structures are not less than ten
(10) feet from any lot line.
(d) Town Houses in the R-2 and R-3 Districts. Where permitted, the
following standards shall apply to the construction of town houses:
(1) The overall density shall not exceed 25 dwelling units per acre.
(2) The lot width shall be not less than 20 feet.
(3) The maximum lot area occupied by principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 50 % of the total lot area.
(4) The front yard setback shall be not less than 20 feet.
(5) Side yards of not less than 20 feet in width shall be provided at
least every 160 feet and for every corner lot.
(6) The rear yard shall be not less than 20 percent of the depth of the
lot.
(7) No structure shall be higher than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever is
less.
(8) Two off-street parking spaces totaling not less than 360 square feet
in area, exclusive of access drive or aisle, shall be provided for
each dwelling unit.
(e) Planned Development Groups.
(1) The application shall show the proposed use or uses, dimensions
and locations of proposed structures and of areas to be reserved for
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, parking, public uses such as
schools and playgrounds, landscaping and other open spaces,
architectural drawings and sketches showing design structures and
their relationships, and such other information as may be requested
for a determination that it is desirable to deviate from certain other
provisions of this chapter.
(2) The following standards shall apply to the construction of planned
development groups:
ZONING 46.045(e)(2)(a)
32
(a) Exterior walls of opposite buildings shall be located no
closer than a distance equal to the height of the taller
building.
(b) A building group shall not be so arranged that any
permanently or temporarily occupied building is
inaccessible to emergency vehicles.
(c) There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient
arrangement of pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways,
driveways, off-street parking and loading space.
(d) There shall be an adequate amount, in a suitable location,
of pedestrian walks, malls and landscaped spaces to prevent
pedestrian use of vehicular ways and parking spaces and to
separate pedestrian walks, malls and public transportation
loading places from general vehicular circulation facilities.
(e) Buildings and vehicular circulation open spaces shall be
arranged so that pedestrians moving between buildings are
not unnecessarily exposed to vehicular traffic.
(f) There shall be adequate design of grades, paving, gutters,
drainage and treatment of turf to handle storm waters and
prevent erosion and formation of dust.
(g) Signs and lighting devices shall be properly arranged with
respect to traffic control devices and adjacent residential
(3) COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES. The following commercial or
industrial uses may be permitted as conditional uses:
(a) Bed and Breakfast Inns. B&B's may be permitted in the R1, R2, R3, and
A districts. Meals and beverages shall not be provided to non-overnight
guests. In addition to all other review criteria, review of a B & B’s permit
application shall include parking, signs, and maximum number of guests.
(b) Mini-Storage Facilities. Commercially operated mini-storage or selfstorage
units may be permitted in the Commercial and Business Park
Districts. Consideration shall be given to the type of storage, size of
vehicles typically used to move the goods to and from the units and the
frequency that any given unit may be visited with large vehicles.
Adequate loading must be provided at each individual unit to
accommodate a pick-up truck or automobile with trailer, enabling same to
park perpendicular to the unit's door opening.
(c) Mineral Extraction. Mineral extraction operations including washing,
ZONING 46.045(e)(3)(c)
33
crushing or other processing are conditional uses and may be permitted in
the Agricultural District provided:
(1) The application for the conditional use permit shall include an
adequate description of the operation; a list of equipment,
machinery and structures to be used; the source, quantity and
disposition of water to be used; a topographic map of the site
showing existing contours with minimum vertical contour interval
of five (5) feet, trees, proposed and existing access roads, the depth
of all existing and proposed excavations and a restoration plan.
(2) The restoration plan provided by the applicant shall contain
proposed contours after filling, depth of the restored topsoil, type
of fill, planting or reforestation, restoration commencement and
completion dates. The applicant shall furnish the necessary fees to
provide for the inspection and administrative costs and the
necessary sureties which will enable the village to perform the
planned restoration of the site in event of default by the applicant.
The amount of such sureties shall be based upon cost estimates
prepared by the Engineer and the form and type of such sureties
shall be approved by legal counsel.
(3) The permit shall be in effect for a period not to exceed two (2)
years and may be renewed upon application for succeeding periods
not to exceed two (2) years each. Modifications or additional
conditions may be imposed upon application for renewal.
(4) The Plan Commission shall particularly consider the effect of the
proposed operation upon existing streets, neighboring
development, proposed land use, drainage, water supply, soil
erosion, natural beauty, character and value of the land in the
neighborhood and in adjoining Districts and shall also consider the
practicality and suitability of the proposed restoration plan for the
site.
SEC. 46.05 TRAFFIC, PARKING AND ACCESS. (1) TRAFFIC VISIBILITY. A
vision triangle shall be required at the intersection of any two existing or proposed highways,
streets or alleys. Within such vision triangle, no obstructions including but not limited to
structures, mail boxes, fences, parking or vegetation shall be permitted between the heights of
two (2) feet and ten (10) feet above the plane through the mean pavement grade. The triangle
area required shall consist of the area from the corner of the street intersection (at the curb line,
and if no curb line then at the street line) then (50) fifty feet along the lot lines, then diagonally
along a line connecting the end points of these lines.
(2) ACCESS REQUIREMENTS. (a) Adequate access to a public street shall be
provided for each lot or parcel. In R1 and R2 districts driveways shall be between 10 and 24 feet
wide, except where such driveways enter onto a state system highway, in which case the
minimum width shall be 16 feet. Shared driveways, between two or more lots, shall not be
ZONING 46.05(2)
34
permitted unless the proposed lots are part of a Planned Unit Development in which case a
conditional use permit must be obtained.
(b) In the RM District, the required driveways may be built straddling the line
between two lots in the same mobile home subdivision, and may be shared
by two lot occupants for residential purposes. The R1 and R2 district
width standards will apply.
(c) All other driveways shall have a minimum width of 16 feet. In no case
will driveways be wider than 24 feet, except in Agricultural District where
a 30 foot wide driveway to serve a farmstead or field will be permitted.
(d) In all districts, all driveway openings shall be located a minimum of five
(5) feet from the edge of the driveway to the lot line. On adjacent lots,
other than specific conditional use Planned Unit Development, or RMMobile
Home subdivisions, the driveways on two adjoining lots shall be
separated by at least ten (10) feet, edge to edge. Multiple driveways
serving the same parcel shall be separated by islands with a minimum of
ten (10) feet between openings, edge to adjacent edge. No more than onehalf
the frontage of any lot or parcel shall be occupied by a driveway,
access openings or vehicular entrances.
(3) HIGHWAY ACCESS AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS. (a) No direct
private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed right-of-way of any street, highway
or road without permission of the highway agency that controls the right-of-way. Prior to the
development of the access verification of access approval by the highway agency shall be
provided to the Zoning Administrator.
(b) No direct public or private access shall be permitted within one hundred
thirty (130) feet of the intersection of the centerline of intersecting arterial
highways or within eighty (80) feet of the intersection of the centerline of
any intersecting collector or local road with an arterial road.
(c) The minimum setback from State or Federal highways in all districts shall
be as follows: 50 feet from the right-of-way or 110 feet from the center
line of said highway, whichever is more restrictive.
(4) LOADING REQUIREMENTS. (a) In all districts adequate loading areas shall
be provided so all vehicles loading, maneuvering or unloading are completely off the public right
of way and such that no vehicle need back onto any public right-of-way. Each loading space
shall be not less than twelve (12) feet in width, thirty-five (35) feet in length, have a minimum
vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet and may occupy all or any part of any required yard.
(b) REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES
Uses Square Feet of Required Off Street
Gross Floor Area Loading Spaces
School ---- 1
Under 10,000 None
ZONING 46.05(4)(b)
35
Hospital From 10,000 – 30,000 1
For each additional 30,000
Or major fraction thereof 1 Additional
Funeral Home ---- 1
Office, hotel, retail Under 10,000 None
Service, wholesale, From 10,000 – 25,000 1
Warehouse, manufacturing From 25,001 – 40,000 2
Processing, repairing From 40,001 – 60,000 3
Uses and other From 60,001 – 100,000 4
For each additional 50,000
Or major fraction thereof 1 Additional
(5) PARKING REQUIREMENTS. In all districts, and in connection with every use,
there shall be provided at the time any use or building is erected, enlarged, extended or
increased, off-street parking stalls for all vehicles in accordance with the following:
(a) Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each parking
space.
(b) The size of each parking space shall be not less than one hundred eighty
(180) square feet exclusive of the space required for ingress and egress. A
single stall in a garage may replace any single required parking space.
(c) Location of parking stalls shall be on the same lot as, or within two
hundred (200) feet of the principal use.
(d) Screening. Fences or shrubs erected as screening shall conform with the
provisions of Sec. 46.06 (5)(f).
(e) Lighting. If parking lots are lighted, the lights shall be shielded to prevent
undesirable glare or illumination of adjoining residential property.
(f) Surfacing. All off-street parking areas shall be graded and surfaced so as
to be dust-free and
(g) Curbs or Barriers shall be installed so as to prevent parked vehicles from
extending over any lot lines.
(h) Parking Stalls. The number of parking stalls required are as follows:
Use Minimum Parking Required
Single and duplex family dwellings 2 stalls for each dwelling unit
Multi-family dwellings 2 stalls for each dwelling unit
Motels and hotels 1 stall for each guest room plus 1 stall
for every 3 persons at maximum occupancy
allowed in public meeting rooms
1 stall for each 3 employees
Clubs, lodges, dormitories, lodging, 1 stall for each 2 beds plus 1 stall for
ZONING 46.05(5)(h)
36
and boarding houses every 3 persons at maximum occupancy
allowed in public meeting rooms
1 stall for each 3 employees
Group homes, institutions, rest homes 1 stall for each 5 beds plus
And nursing homes 1 stall for each 3 employees of largest
work shift
Medical and dental clinics 3 stalls for each doctor plus 1 space
for each employee at largest work shift
Theater, auditoriums, churches, 1 stall for each 4 permanent seats or 1
community center, vocational and stall for each 3 persons of public
spaces at maximum capacity
Colleges, secondary and elementary 1 stall for each 2 employees plus
schools 1 stall for each 5 students of 16 years
of age or more
Restaurants, bars, places of 1 stall for each 3 persons at maximum
Entertainment capacity of public spaces plus
1 stall for each 3 employees on largest
shift
Retail and service stores, repair shops 1 stall for each 500 sq. ft. of patron
area plus 1 space for each 3 employees
Manufacturing and processing plants, 1 stall for each 3 employees on largest
laboratories, and warehouses shift
Financial institutions, business, 1 stall for each 500 sq. ft. of public
government, and professional floor area plus 1 stall for each 3
employees
Funeral home 1 stall for each 5 seats
Bowling alleys 3 stalls for each alley plus 1 stall for
each 3 employees on largest shift
(i) Uses Not Listed. In the case of structures or uses not mentioned, the
parking provisions for a use which is similar shall apply.
(j) Where any of the above uses are combined there shall be provided a total
number of stalls equal to the sum required for each individual use.
SEC. 46.06 GENERAL REGULATIONS. Except as specifically provided otherwise in
this chapter, the following regulations shall apply to all districts:
(1) NUISANCE. No provision of this section shall be construed to bar an action to
enjoin or abate the use or occupancy of any land or structure as a nuisance under the appropriate
laws of the State of Wisconsin or this Village.
(2) LOCATION ON LOT. Every building hereafter erected, converted, enlarged or
structurally altered shall be located on a lot. There shall be no more than one (1) primary
building on a lot, except however, a lot may have more than one (1) primary building where it is
demonstrated by metes and bounds description that each primary building, and its accessory
ZONING 46.06(2)
37
buildings, is located on a separate and distinctly identifiable part or portion of said lot, each of
which individually satisfies all of the requirements of this chapter without utilizing the land on
any other such adjoining or abutting separate part or portion of said lot.
(3) HEIGHT REGULATIONS. (a) Communication Structures such as radio and
television broadcasting and receiving towers, microwave radio relay structures, aerials,
observation towers, and the necessary mechanical appurtenances and accessory structures
essential to the use and protection of these structures shall not exceed in height three (3) times
their distance from the nearest lot, right-of-way or easement line.
(b) Agricultural Structures such as silos, windmills and grain handling towers
and conveyors shall not exceed in height twice (2x) their distance from the
nearest lot line of the property upon which they are located.
(c) Ornamental Accessory Type Structures or towers, tanks or conveyors
necessary for the manufacture, processing or handling of material at an
industrial or commercial location shall not exceed a height of thirty (30)
feet, or twice their distance from the nearest lot line upon which they are
located, whichever is less.
(d) Measurement, Different Grades where a lot abuts on two (2) or more
streets or alleys having different average established grades, the higher of
such grades shall control for a distance of 120 feet from the line of the
higher average established grade
(e) Measurement, Through Lots. On through lots, which extend from street to
street, the height of the main building shall be measured from the mean
elevation of the finished grade along the end of the building facing the
street with the lowest elevation above sea level.
(4) FRONT, SIDE, AND REAR YARD REGULATION.
(a) Through Lots. Structures on through lots which extend from street to
street may satisfy the rear yard requirements by furnishing an equivalent
open space on the same lot in lieu of the required rear yard, provided the
setback requirements on both streets are met.
(b) Architectural Projections such as chimneys, flues, sills, eaves, overhangs,
roofs, belt courses and ornaments may project into any required yard but
such projection shall not exceed two (2) feet. [Ord. 577 07/07]
(e) Off-Street Parking is permitted in all yards of the business and industrial
districts but no part of a parked vehicle shall extend over any public rightof-
way.
(f) Essential Services, utilities, electric power and communication
transmission lines are exempt from the yard and distance requirements of
this chapter.
ZONING 46.06(5)
38
(5) FENCES.
(a) Fences in all Residential and Commercial Districts shall not exceed a
height of eight (8) feet in the side or rear yard, and a height of four (4) feet
in the front yard, or any yard abutting a street, and shall not be located on
any public right-of-way. The post side shall be located on the side of the
fence owner's property.
(b) Fences in the Industrial Districts shall not exceed (10) feet in height.
(c) Material. Fences and walls may be wood, clay, stone, brick or chain-link,
with the finished side facing out. Except in the Agricultural District,
barbed wire, electric single strand, "chicken wire," and similar fences are
not permitted. All such fences and walls shall be kept in good repair,
painted if wood and well maintained. Solitary posts or poles demarcating
or establishing boundaries or lines are prohibited, except that the Zoning
Administrator may issue a special use permit authorizing the placement of
posts, poles, or other barriers to protect lots, parcels or the general public
from damage or injury by motor vehicles. [Ord. 459 05/1997]
(d) Agricultural. Barbed wire fences may be erected and maintained in the
agricultural district for the control of livestock. Single strand, "chicken
wire," electric and similar fences may be erected and maintained in the
agricultural district only where they are wholly within the boundaries of a
lot or parcel and do not exceed six (6) feet in height.
(e) Swimming Pools. See Section 46.06(12).
(f) Hedges, Trees. Hedges shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet. Hedges
and trees or individual shrubs not part of a row or hedge shall be well
maintained and trimmed. New plantings or transplants of evergreen or
pine trees shall be no closer than ten (10) feet to any lot line.
(g) Retaining Walls. Retaining walls exceeding four (4) feet in height may be
constructed only upon securing approval from the Zoning Administrator
where, in his/her discretion, such wall is necessary for public health or
safety, does not interfere with vision clearance triangles and does not
unreasonably detract from the aesthetic character of the neighborhood
given the district zoning designation and the type of neighboring
properties. The decision of the Zoning Administrator regarding the
issuance of such permit may be appealed to the Board of Appeals.
(h) Access. No fence or hedge shall interfere with the free access and use of
any utility easement. A gate opening for utility and emergency personnel
shall be provided where no other reasonable access is provided.
(6) STORED VEHICLES. Recreational vehicles may be stored in any side yard or
rear yard area not exceeding 180 consecutive days. Not more than one recreational vehicle may
ZONING 46.06(6)
39
be stored at one time on any lot. Automobiles and pick-up trucks may be stored as follows:
(a) Not more than one (1) licensed automobile or pick-up truck for a period
not exceeding 180 days in a rear yard.
(b) Not more than two (2) automobiles or pick-up trucks in any front yard or
side yard between November 1 and March 31 of the succeeding year
provided such vehicle is not left substantially unmoved for a period of
more than thirty (30) consecutive days. A vehicle is considered
substantially unmoved if during a thirty day period it is not regularly used
as a mode of transportation off site, and that the moving of the vehicle is
not designed merely to alter the location in which the vehicle is parked so
as to attempt to establish or claim that the vehicle has been “moved.”
(7) AREA REQUIRED FOR RUBBISH CONTAINERS. On all premises upon
which there will be constructed, after the effective date of this ordinance, a new building which
will house six or more dwelling units or any existing building converted to six or more dwelling
units after such date, or any rooming house, fraternity or sorority house having six or more
occupants, there shall be provided a sufficient area as determined by the Plan Commission for
rubbish collection containers. Such areas shall not be located in the front or street side yard and
shall be accessible by motorized vehicles or other motorized equipment. Such areas shall not be
a required off-street parking area and shall be shown on the plot plan submitted at the time of
application for a building permit.
(8) PARKING ON LAWNS. It shall be unlawful to park any automobile, truck or
motorcycle on the lawn or any portion thereof in the front yard of premises in a single family
residence district, residence district, multiple dwelling district and the special multiple dwelling
district.
(9) NUMBER OF TENANTS. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dwelling
unit to lease or enter any lease of any one dwelling unit to more than four (4) adult persons not
related by blood, marriage, adoption or legal guardianship living together as a single
housekeeping unit and using common cooking facilities. The purpose of this restriction is to
reduce congestion of persons, automobiles and traffic in the residential district.
(10) SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS. Earth Satellite T.V. dish Antennas, including
receiving or transmitting dishes, discs, bowls, plates or other similar objects, whether attached to
a tower, pole or other base, are permitted as accessory uses.
(a) The installation of an earth satellite station dish antenna shall require a use
permit. The property owner, lessor, or installer of any earth satellite
station dish antenna shall submit to the Zoning Administrator plans which
indicate the appearance, proposed location and installation method of the
dish antenna. A fee to be established from time to time by the Village
Board shall accompany all applications for a permit. Earth satellite station
dish antennas shall be located to minimize their visual impact on
surrounding properties. Site location shall be viewed and approved by the
Zoning Administrator, and the location shall be such as creates the least
ZONING 46.06(10)(a)
40
interference with the appearance, view from and use of neighboring
premises, is most compatible with location of other structures on or off the
subject premises and shall be as close as reasonably possible to the
principal structure upon the subject premises.
(b) If a property owner in the R1 and R2 zoning districts proposes a buildingmounted
antenna location in which the antenna would be visible from the
front lot line, the property owner must demonstrate reception would not be
possible from a less conspicuous location.
(c) Ground-mounted dish antennas shall comply with the height restrictions
for accessory structures in the zoning district in which they are located.
Building-mounted dish antennas shall be deemed part of the building to
which they are attached for purpose of determining compliance with
height restrictions.
(d) Earth satellite station dish antennas in the R1 and R2 districts shall not
exceed twelve (12) feet in diameter.
(e) Ground-mounted earth satellite station dish antennas shall meet the
following setbacks: Rear portion of lot only, being 20 ft. from side and 20
ft. from rear lot lines.
(f) Earth satellite station dish antennas shall be constructed and anchored in
such a manner to withstand winds of not less than 80 miles per hour and
such installations shall be constructed of corrosive-resistant materials.
(g) Earth satellite dish antennas shall be filtered and/or shielded so as to
prevent the emission or reflection of electromagnetic radiation that would
cause any harmful interference with the radio and/or television
broadcasting or reception on adjacent properties. In the event harmful
interference is caused subsequent to its installation, the owner of the dish
antenna shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference and
shall comply with Federal Communications Commission regulations.
(h) All electrical lines, cables or conduits running to or from the earth satellite
station dish antennae shall be buried.
(i) All earth satellite station dish antennas, and the construction and
installation thereof, shall conform to applicable Village building and
electrical code regulations. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a
building-mounted earth satellite station dish antenna that exceeds six (6)
feet in diameter, the applicant shall submit a plan or document prepared by
a registered professional engineer which certifies the proposed dish
antenna installation is structurally sound.
(j) No advertising messages are permitted on dishes or framework located in
the R1 or R2 districts other than the manufacturer's identification. In other
ZONING 46.06(10)(j)
41
zoning districts each earth satellite station dish antenna shall comply with
all applicable sign and advertising regulations.
(k) Not more than one (1) satellite station dish antenna exceeding 3 ft. in
diameter shall be permitted on a lot or parcel in the R1 and R2 districts.
(l) The location of a mobile earth satellite dish antenna on any premises shall
not be permitted longer than ten (10) days in any ninety (90) day period.
All such objects shall be located in the rear yard of a parcel or lot unless
practical necessity requires otherwise and the Zoning Administrator
approves an alternate location.
(11) FAN SHAPED LOT. Each fan shaped lot shall have a minimum street frontage
of 30 feet as measured from the farthest corner abutting the street.
(12) SWIMMING POOL REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Permit Required. A permit shall be required for any swimming pool with
a capacity of 5,000 or more gallons.
(b) Application. An application for a building permit shall show:
(1) Type and size of pool.
(2) Site plan to include:
(a) Location of pool.
(b) Location of house, garage, fencing, locking pool cover,
well, drain field, septic tank, utilities on the lot.[Ord. 577
07/07]
(c) Grading plan, finished elevations and final treatment
(decking, landscaping, etc.) around pool.
(c) In Single-Family and Two-Family Districts.
(1) Pools for which a permit is required shall not be located within 25
feet of any side or rear lot line. Pools shall not be located within
any required front yard, or within 15 feet of a septic tank or 25 feet
of the well.
(2) Pools shall not be located beneath overhead utility lines nor over
underground utility lines of any type.
(3) Pools shall not be located in or on any easement of any private or
public utility, walkway, drainage area or other easement.
(4) To the extent feasible, back flush water or water from pool
drainage shall be discharged on the owner’s property or into
approved public drainage ways. Water shall not drain onto
adjacent or nearby private land without permission of owner
thereof.
ZONING 46.06(12)(c)(5)
42
(5) The filter unit, pump, heating unit and any other noise-making
mechanical equipment shall be located at least 30 feet from any
adjacent or nearby residential structure or shall be enclosed in a
sound restrictive enclosure, not closer than 25 feet to any lot line.
(6) Lighting for the pool shall be directed into or onto the pool and not
onto adjacent property.
(7) A non-climbable safety fence of at least 6 feet in height from grade
shall completely enclose the pool or the pool enclosure may be
omitted if a swimming pool cover is installed that meets or exceeds
the Underwriters Laboratories standard F1346-91 and provides
enough strength to withstand 475 lbs of pressure on top of the pool
cover. Said cover shall also be sealed tight with a lock and key
whenever the pool is not in use.[Ord. 577 07/07]
(8) Required safety fencing shall be installed immediately upon
completion of the pool.
(9) Water in the pool shall be maintained in a suitable manner to avoid
health hazards.
(10) Drainage of pools into public streets, public roads, or other public
drainage ways shall require permission of the Village Public
Works Director.
(13) NO MUNICIPAL LIABILITY. This section shall not be construed as creating or
assuming any liability on the part of the Village or its officials for damages to anyone injured or
any property damaged or destroyed by any defect in any building or equipment, or in any
plumbing, electric wiring or equipment, or any flammable materials, equipment or devices.
SEC. 46.07 SIGNS. (1) PERMITTED LOCATIONS OF SIGNS.
Type of Development Types of Signs Permitted (References are to type
categories set forth in (2))
Residential 2, 3, 6
Commercial 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
Industrial 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
Agricultural 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
Conservancy 1, 3, 6, 7
All signs must meet State and local codes.
(2) TYPES OF SIGNS, MAXIMUM SIZE, NUMBER AND LOCATION.
(a) Type 1. Directory signs advertising a business or activity conducted, an
ZONING 46.07(2)(c)
43
area of interest or a service available at a specific location. Such signs
shall be not more than eighteen (18) square feet in gross area. There shall
not be more than 2 such signs relating to any one such use in the
approaching direction along any one street. Such signs may be placed at
the right-of-way line of the street. A larger number of signs may be
permitted by the Board of Appeals if the Board shall find it necessary for
directing the traveling public.
(b) Type 2. Signs advertising a customary home occupation. Such signs shall
not exceed 6 square feet in gross area, shall be attached to the building
and, if illuminated, shall be indirectly lighted. [Ord. 596 09/09]
(c) Type 3. Signs advertising the sale, rent or lease of the property on which
the sign is placed. Also, political campaign signs provided same are not
posted for longer than 60 days, and rummage or garage sale signs
provided same are not posted for longer than 5 days. Such sign shall not
exceed sixteen (16) square feet in gross area and must be placed outside of
the right of way line of the street.[Ord. 608 01/2011, Ord. 610 03/2011]
(d) Type 4. Signs located off premises advertising a general brand or product,
an area of interest, a business conducted or a service available. Such signs
shall not be more than one hundred (100) square feet per side in area and
erected outside a line parallel to and twenty-five (25) feet from the street
right-of-way line.
(e) Type 5. Signs on the premises of commercial, industrial, agricultural, and
public buildings advertising a business conducted or a service available on
the premises. No such sign shall exceed two hundred (200) square feet in
gross area, be higher than ten (10) feet above the top of the roof line, nor
be more than twenty (20) feet in height above the main centerline of the
adjoining street. Signs which are free-standing or extend from buildings
may extend over the public right-of-way, in accordance with applicable
state regulations. Free standing or mounted building signs shall not extend
to a point closer than 2 feet to the curb line (or edge of vehicular travel
way where no curb is present) of the adjoining street.
(f) Type 6. On-premise signs advertising a public or semipublic use. Such
signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in gross area. There
shall be no more than one sign facing each street adjoining the property.
(g) Type 7. Recreational directory signs indicating the direction to a cottage,
resort residence or similar use. Such signs shall not be more than one (1)
square foot in gross area. Where a common posting standard is provided,
all such signs shall be attached to the standard recreational directory.
(3) PROHIBITED CHARACTERISTICS OF SIGNS. (a) No sign shall be so placed
as to interfere with the visibility or effectiveness of any official traffic sign or signal or with
driver vision at any access point or intersection.
ZONING 46.07(3)(b)
44
(b) No sign will be permitted that resembles the size, shape, form or color of
official traffic control signs, signals or devices.
(c) No sign shall contain or be illuminated by a flashing light without permit
of the Board of Appeals.
(d) No sign in a conspicuous state of disrepair shall be permitted to exist. The
Zoning Administrator may order removal upon giving a 20 day notice
except where public danger exists the removal may be ordered summarily.
(4) EXISTING SIGNS. Any sign which becomes a nonconforming sign at the
effective date of this chapter or which becomes a nonconforming sign at any future date may be
continued provided no increase in size, illumination or flashing of such sign shall be made and
further provided any sign, including structures and all supporting members, shall be discontinued
and removed not more than five (5) years after the date such sign becomes a nonconforming sign
unless such sign shall be made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
(5) BONDS AND INSURANCE. Every applicant for a "Type 4" sign permit may be
required by the Plan Commission or Board of Appeals to execute a surety bond or show evidence
of liability insurance coverage in an amount to be determined by same. removal of any sign shall
be the financial responsibility of the owner of the sign and/or property.
SEC. 46.08 NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS. (1)
EXISTING NONCONFORMING USES. The nonconforming use of a structure, land or water
existing at the time of the adoption or any amendment of this chapter may be continued by the
existing owner and any subsequent owner so long as the nonconforming use does not cease at
any time for a period of 6 (six) consecutive months or more.
(2) ABOLISHMENT OR REPLACEMENT. When a nonconforming use or structure
is damaged by fire, explosion, flood, the public enemy or other calamity, it may not be replaced
or restored except as a conforming structure and use.
(3) EXISTING NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES. The nonconforming structure
existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter may be continued although its
size or location does not conform with the lot width, lot area, yard, height, parking, loading and
access provisions of this chapter. Residential nonconforming structures may be extended,
enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered as long as such activities do not increase
the extent to which the structure fails to conform to the standard of this chapter. A mobile home
located in any district other than R-M, is nonconforming. Removal of any mobile home from its
location in a nonconforming district shall constitute a termination of the non-conforming use.
(4) CHANGES AND SUBSTITUTIONS. Once a nonconforming use or structure
has been changed to conform, it may not revert to a nonconforming use or structure.
ZONING 46.08(5)
45
(5) NONCONFORMING SIGNS. This Section shall not apply to nonconforming
signs, such signs being governed by Sec. 46.07 (d).
SEC. 46.09 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. (1) COMPLIANCE. This chapter
permits specific uses in specific districts and these performance standards are designed to limit,
restrict and prohibit the effects of those uses outside their premises or districts. No structure,
land, water or adjoining vertical air space shall hereafter be used except in compliance with the
district regulations and in which it is located together with the performance standards contained
in this section.
(2) SOUND. The volume of sound inherently and recurrently generated shall be
controlled so as not to be a nuisance to adjacent uses.
(3) VIBRATION. An operation which creates vibrations that can be measured or
readily detected without instruments, e.g., heavy drop forges and heavy hydraulic surges, shall be
set back:
(a) In the Commercial District and the Industrial District, a distance of not
less than 500 feet from all lot lines.
(b) In an Industrial District with open storage, a distance of not less than 500
feet from the district boundaries
(4) RADIOACTIVITY AND ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES. No activity shall
emit radioactivity or electrical disturbances outside its premises which are dangerous or
adversely affect the use of neighboring premises.
(5) TOXIC, ODOROUS OR NOXIOUS MATTER. No discharge beyond lot lines of
any toxic, odorous or noxious matter in such quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business, shall
be permitted.
(6) GLARE AND HEAT. No activity shall emit glare or heat visible or measurable
outside its premises; except activities in the industrial district may emit direct or sky reflected
glare provided it is not visible outside the district. All operations producing intense glare or heat
shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. Exposed sources of light generation
shall be sheltered so as not to be visible outside the premises.
SEC. 46.10 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions
shall be used. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes
the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not optional.
(1) Accessory building. A building or portion of a building (not including a garage)
subordinate to the primary building and used for a purpose customarily incidental to the
permitted use of the primary building or the use of the premises. When an accessory building is a
ZONING 46.10(1)
46
part of the primary building or is substantially attached thereto, the side yard and rear yard
requirements of the primary building shall be applied to the accessory building.
(2) Accessory Structure. A structure, not an accessory building or ornamental
structure, used for a purpose customarily incidental to the permitted use of the premises.
(3) Alley. A public right-of-way affording only secondary access to abutting
properties.
(4) Arterial Street. A street which directly connects the Village with surrounding
communities.
(5) Average. The numerical result obtained by dividing the sum of two (2) or more
quantities by the number of quantities. Also, the approximation of the arithmetic mean or
numerical result obtained as aforedescribed.
(6) Basement. That portion of any structure located partly below the average
adjoining lot grade.
(7) Bed and Breakfast. Establishment: A commercial establishment in a pre-existing
building offering overnight lodging and meals to registered overnight guests. See Sec. 254.61,
Wis. Stats.
(8) Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or
intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, equipment, machinery or
materials.
(9) Building Area. The total interior area bounded by the exterior walls of a building
at the floor levels but not including basement, utility rooms, garages, porches, breezeways and
unfinished attics.
(10) Building Height. The vertical distance measured from the mean elevation of the
finished lot grade along the street yard face of the structure to the highest point of flat roofs; to
the mean height level between the eaves and ridges of gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs or to
the deck line or mansard roofs.
(11) Business Park. A planned development in which commercial and light industrial
uses shall be blended.
(12) Centerline. A line equidistant from the edges of the median separating the main
traveled ways of an existing or planned divided road or highway or the centerline of the main
traveled way of a non-divided road or highway.
(13) Collector Street. A road that collects traffic from local streets and channels traffic
out to the arterial roads.
(14) Conditional Uses. Uses of a special nature as to make impractical their
predetermination as a principal use in a district.
ZONING 46.10(15)
47
(15) Container House. A container house is a house constructed in whole or in part
using converted or repurposed ISO or similar shipping containers.
(16) Corner Lot. A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection provided that
the corner of such intersection shall have an angle of one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees or
less measured on the lot side.
(17) Dwelling. A detached building designed or used exclusively as a residence or
sleeping place for human habitation and which may include an attached garage, but not including
boarding or lodging houses, motels, hotels, tents, cabins, camping trailers, or motor homes. [Ord.
577 07/07]
(18) Dwelling Unit. One (1) or more rooms designed as a unit for occupancy by not
more than one (1) family for living and sleeping purposes. Multiple family buildings may have
several dwelling units within one building.
(19) End of Taper. The point of intersection between the outer edges of the ramp
pavement and the main line pavement.
(20) Essential Services. Services provided by public and private utilities necessary for
the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure. These services include
underground, surface, overhead gas, electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, storm water
drainage, communication systems and accessories thereto such as poles, towers, wires, mains,
drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables,
fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations and hydrants, but not
including buildings.
(21) Expressway. A divided principal or primary arterial highway with full or partial
control of access and with or without grade separated intersections.
(22) Family. Any number of persons related as father, mother, son, daughter, brother
or sister by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together in one dwelling as a single
housekeeping entity.
(23) Floodplain. Land adjacent to a body of water which has been or may be hereafter
covered by floodway including but not limited to the regional flood.
(24) Floodway. The channel of a stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining
the channel that are required to carry and discharge the floodwater or flood flows of any river or
stream including but not limited to flood flows associated with the regional flood.
(25) Freeway. An expressway with full control of access and with fully graded
separated intersections.
(26) Front Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which
shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the existing or proposed street or highway line
and line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure. Corner lots shall
ZONING 46.10(27)
48
have two such yards. A driveway or parking pad in the front yard, paved or unpaved, is
considered part of the front yard.
(27) Frontage. The smallest dimensions of a lot abutting a public street measured
along the street line.
(28) Garage. A building used in a residential district primarily for the storage of
motor-driven vehicles. An attached garage shall not exceed 864 square feet. A ‘private garage’ is
a garage primarily used by the occupant of the residential dwelling. [ord.677 8/5/19]
(29) Group Home. A residential facility, licensed by the state, to provide a family
residential living environment for persons who have developmental disabilities and/or are being
treated for chemical addiction or other problems. A counselor or house parent(s) shall be
resident in the structure during those times residents are living in the structure. A Group Home
provides overnight lodging for the residents. Variations of the traditional group home are Day-
Care facilities described below. A Foster Home is the placement of children in a traditional
family setting, which may include biological children of the adult family, and is not considered a
Group Home.
(a) Family Day-Care Home. A family day-care home is a dwelling also
licensed as a day-care center by the state Department of Health and Social
Services where, for compensation or consideration, a resident of the
dwelling provides group care for at least four (4) but not more than eight
(8) children between the ages of infancy and seven (7) years of age at a
location other than the child's own home or the home of relatives or
guardians. Overnight lodging is not to be provided at a day-care center.
(a) Elderly Day-Care Home. Locations which provide
day-care and food service for adults who are unable to be
left alone while other family members are at work or
otherwise not at home during the day. Overnight lodging is
not to be provided at a day-care center.
(30) Home Occupation. Any occupation for gain or support conducted entirely within
buildings by resident occupants which are customarily incidental to the principal use of the
premises. It shall not involve any structural alteration to the structure or any external
construction not customary in dwellings, not be conducted in more than one accessory building,
no article may be sold or offered for sale on the premises except such as are incidental to such
occupation, no stock in trade shall be kept or sold, no mechanical equipment shall be used other
than such as is normally consistent with and permissible for domestic purposes, and no person
other than a member of the immediate family living on the premises may be employed in such
occupation, the occupation shall be conducted entirely within the residential dwelling or one
accessory building of the resident dwelling and no storage or display of materials, goods,
supplies or equipment related to the home occupation shall be visible outside any structure on the
premises.
(31) Household. One person, or two or more unrelated persons, living in the same
dwelling unit.
ZONING 46.10(32)
49
(32) Impervious Surface. The ground level area of a lot or parcel which, by virtue of
the location of structures or other material such as rock, concrete, aggregate, blacktop, brick,
paver stone or the like, is incapable of being penetrated by moisture to a substantial degree.
(33) Interchange. A grade-separated intersection on a state trunk highway with one or
more turning roadways for travel between intersection legs.
(34) Intersecting Highway. A highway of any political jurisdiction which forms one or
more legs of an interchange and to which access is not fully controlled.
(35) Junk Yard. An area consisting of buildings, structures or premises where junk,
waste, discarded or salvage materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed,
disassembled or handled including automobile wrecking yards, house wrecking, structural steel
materials and equipment yards but not including the purchase or storage of used furniture and
household equipment or used cars in operable conditions. At present this Chapter does not allow
a junk yard as a permitted use.
(36) Living Rooms. All rooms within a dwelling except closets, foyers, storage areas,
utility rooms and bathrooms.
(37) Loading Area. A complete off-street space or berth on the same lot for the
loading or unloading of freight carriers having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or
alley.
(38) Local Street. Roads intended to move vehicles from individual parcels to the
higher order road systems and not intended or designed to carry thru traffic. Local roads carry
low traffic volumes.
(39) Lot. A parcel of land having frontage on a public street, occupied or intended to
be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot
frontage, lot area, yard, parking area and other open space provisions of this ordinance.
(40) Lot Lines and Area. The peripheral boundaries of a parcel of land and the total
area lying within such boundaries.
(41) Lot Line, Front. The line of the lot, which adjoins the street. Where the lot abuts
two streets it is a corner lot with respect to which special provisions apply. See for example
§46.03(7)(a)(8). In the case of a lot fronting a curved road or cul-de-sac where the line is not
straight, for purposes of measuring minimum setbacks and establishing the rear lot line on a lot
with an inverted (concave) front line such as a lot in a cul-de-sac, the point of measurement shall
be at that point of the inverted (concave) curve making the greatest encroachment on the lot; and
on a lot with a convex curve, measurement shall be at that point on the center of an imaginary
line drawn between the two ends of the front yard line; and further, the imaginary line to which
the rear line must be parallel shall be a straight line extending between the ends of the curved
front lot line. See Appendix A for examples.
(42) Lot Line, Rear. On a four-sided lot the line which is opposite and most distant
from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular shaped lot such as a triangular lot, a hexagon
ZONING 46.10(42)
50
shaped lot, a fan shaped lot or other non-rectangular lots the rear lot line is a line ten (10) feet in
length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line as measured
to the center point of the said ten (10) foot line. See Appendix A for example.
(43) Lot Width. The width of a parcel of land measured at the narrowest portion of the
front yard.
(44) Manufactured Home. A dwelling unit primarily assembled at an off-site location,
with interior electrical wiring, plumbing, and interior finishing substantially installed before
location on the final site, but which is not ready for occupancy without substantial preparation
and construction at the site. Such homes are trucked to the site, but are not intended for frequent
transport by highway; the wheels are for initial transport only and are removed from the structure
upon its placement at the site. Such homes are to be placed on a permanent footing foundation
with either a poured slab or dug basement, and foundation walls meeting the house walls beneath
the entire house. The structure must have a minimum width of 18 feet.
(45) Mobile Home. Any structure which is, or as originally constructed was designed
to be transported by any motor vehicle upon a public highway and designed, equipped and used
primarily for sleeping, eating and living quarters, or is intended to be so used which does not
require substantial on-site fabrication and which is intended for occupancy as a year-round
residence; and includes any additions, attachments, annexes, foundations and appurtenances; and
includes any double-wide or modular unit.
(46) Motel. A series of attached, semi-attached or detached sleeping units, including a
hotel or similar establishment, with or without cooking facilities for the accommodation of
transient guests.
(47) Neighborhood. A cohesive area occupied by people living near or adjoining one
another, including all lots in the block upon which a lot is located as well as all lots immediately
abutting the block (but for the street(s) separating same). A block is a group of lots surrounded
by streets or other geographic markers or barriers or abutting District or platted boundaries.
(48) Nonconforming Uses or Structures. Any structure, land or water lawfully used,
occupied or erected at the time of the effective date of this chapter, amendments thereto or the
chapters and zoning ordinances which are predecessors hereto, which does not conform to the
regulations of this chapter, amendments or predecessor chapter or ordinances thereto. Any such
structure conforming in respect to use but not in respect to frontage, width, height, area, yard,
parking, loading or distance requirements shall be considered a nonconforming structure and not
a nonconforming use.
(49) Odorous Matter. Any matter or material which yields an odor offensive in any
way.
(50) Ornamental Structure. A structure whose principal use or purpose is to adorn,
decorate, beautify or embellish a lot, except such structures as are architectural features attached
to a building.
(51) Parking Lot. A structure or premises containing ten (10) or more parking spaces
ZONING 46.10(52)
51
open to the public.
(52) Parking Space or Stall. A graded and surfaced area of not less than one hundred
eighty (180) square feet in an area either enclosed or open for the parking of a motor vehicle
having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley.
(53) Parties in Interest. Includes all abutting property owners, all property owners
within one hundred (100) feet and all property owners of opposite frontages.
(54) Planned Residential Developments. Residential developments including cluster
homes, garden apartments, row housing and similar unit developments.
(55) Planned Unit Development. A large lot or tract of land containing two or more
principal structures or uses developed as a unit where such structures or uses may be located in
relation to each other rather than to a lot line or to zoning district boundaries.
(56) Principal Use or Structure. The primary use of the land or building(s) as
distinguished from an incidental and/or subordinate accessory use of the land or building(s).
(57) Property Line. The exterior boundary of a lot or parcel, except where any such
boundary is encroached by a street or right of way easement the property line shall follow the
line of the street or right of way which most encroaches upon the said lot or parcel. [Ord. 580
10/2007]
(58) Rear Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which
shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto
through the nearest point of the principal structure. This yard shall be opposite the front yard or
one of the front yards on a corner lot. A driveway or parking pad in the front yard, paved or
unpaved, is considered part of the front yard.
(59) Recreational Vehicles. Canoes, kayaks, boats, pontoons, camper units affixed to
or designed to be affixed to the bed of a pick-up truck, trailers, motorcycles, jet skis, ATVs,
UTVs, snowmobiles and airborne machines.
(60) Side Yard. A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard of the lot, the
width of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and a line
parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure. A driveway or parking pad in
the front yard, paved or unpaved, is considered part of the front yard.
(61) Signs. Any words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems,
devices, designs, trade names or trademarks by which anything is made known and which are
used to advertise or promote an individual, firm, association, corporation, profession, business,
commodity or product and which is visible from any public street or highway.
(62) Storage Shed. A structure less than 200 square feet in area. [Ord. 549 04/2005]
(63) Storage Tank. A container or enclosure, located above, on or below the surface of
the ground, used for the holding or preservation of liquids, solids, chemicals or gases.
ZONING 46.10(64)
52
(64) Story. One story is the ceiling height of the room plus the thickness of the space
between the ceiling of the room and the base of the floor above, not to exceed 10 feet.
(65) Street. A street or highway not otherwise defined lying within a recorded
subdivision with a right-of-way not less than fifty (50) feet wide providing primary access to
abutting properties.
(66) Street line. The edge of the paved portion of a street.
(67) Structure. Anything constructed or attached to something on, above or below the
ground, such as buildings, towers, masts, poles, booms, signs, decorations, carports, machinery
and equipment.
(68) Structural Alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a structure such
as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
(69) Subdivision. A division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the owner thereof or
the owner's agent for the purpose of sale or of building development, where the act of division
creates five (5) or more parcels or building sites of one and one-half acres each or less in area; or
five (5) or more parcels or building sites of one and one-half acres each or less in area are created
by successive divisions within a period of five (5) years.
(70) Temporary Structure. A moveable, non-permanent structure not designed for
human occupancy, the use of which is restricted to 12 months or less. Temporary structures
include hut design structures, carports and similar storage shelters constructed with plastic,
galvanized and other materials; except where such structures are used in the Commercial District
(C-1) for the sale of plants, vegetables, fruits and produce, for a collective period not exceeding
90 days in any calendar year. [Ord. 566 10/2006]
(71) Town House. An owner-occupied structure composed of two or more dwelling
units, with common walls and customarily located in a cluster of such units having common
grounds and shared maintenance responsibilities typically governed by an Association.
(72) Turning Lanes. An existing or proposed connecting roadway between two (2)
arterial highways or between an arterial highway and any other highway. Turning lanes include
grade separated interchange ramps.
(73) Trailers. A portable vehicle designed and used for temporary sleeping purposes
while its occupants are engaged in the pastime of camping.
(74) Unattached Garage. A garage, not attached to the principal dwelling, not less than
200 square feet in area and not greater than 864 square feet in area. An unattached garage is an
accessory structure. [Ord. 549 04/2005]
(75A) Utilities. Public and private facilities such as water wells, water and sewage
pumping stations, water storage tanks, power and communication transmission lines, electrical
power substations, static transformer stations, telephone and telegraph exchanges, microwave
ZONING 46.10(75A)
53
radio relays and gas regulation stations but not including sewage disposal plants, municipal
incinerators, warehouses, shops and storage yards.
(76) Variance. An exception to the requirements of this chapter where strict
application of the chapter would result in a practical difficulty or undue hardship. Such an
exception may be granted by the Board of Appeals.
(77) Village. The Village of Ellsworth Village Board and any Committee,
Commission, or person designated by the Village Board to administer and enforce this chapter.
(78) Yard. An open space on the same lot with a structure, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except for vegetation. The front and rear yards extend the
full width of the lot. [Ord. 580 10/2007]
SEC. 46.11 BOARD OF APPEALS. (1) A Board of Appeals shall be appointed as
specified in Sections 61.35 and 62.23, Wisconsin Statutes. The members shall serve with
compensation and shall be removable by the Village Board for cause upon written complaint
following public hearing. In addition to the procedures specified in Sections 61.35 and 62.23,
Wisconsin Statutes, the Board of Appeals may make and file in the office of the Village Clerk its
own rules of procedure consistent with the Wisconsin Statutes. It shall have the following
powers:
(a) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged the Building Inspector has
made an erroneous finding or order.
(b) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this ordinance upon
which the Board is required to pass.
(c) To grant variances from the terms of this ordinance where it is shown that
unique physical circumstances peculiar to a lot cause hardship to the
owner and the use proposed will be in fundamental harmony with
surrounding uses. The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall
be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on
which it is required to pass or to effect a variance. The ground of every
such determination shall be stated and recorded. A public hearing is
required.
(d) No action of the Board of Appeals shall have the effect of permitting in
any district uses prohibited in such district by this ordinance.
(e) The minutes of proceedings and hearings before the Board and all
variances and special exceptions granted by it shall be filed promptly at
the office of the Village Clerk and shall be open for public inspection
during regular office hours.
(f) The Board of Appeals may impose conditions granting of variances to
ZONING 46.11(1)(f)
54
ensure compliance with the variance, to protect adjacent and neighboring
properties and premises, and to secure substantially the objectives of the
regulations or provisions to which the variance is granted, as to the public
health, safety, comfort and general welfare.
(g) The Board of Appeals may grant a written waiver or permit authorizing
reduction in the commercial district of vision clearance requirements
where the lot is not large enough to accommodate a structure as well as
comply with such minimum vision clearance requirements, or is in an area
of the district which by custom or prior use has permitted or provided for
less restrictive vision clearance requirements.
(h) The Board of Appeals may grant a written permit for the use and location
of a temporary structure in the residential district, such permit to be issued
for a period of not more than one (1) year, provided the purpose of the
temporary structure is incidental to development of the premises as a
residential use.
(i) The Board of Appeals shall interpret the provisions of this chapter in such
a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan as shown on the
district map accompanying and made a part of this chapter, where the
street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout on the
aforesaid map.
(2) Where a variance is granted by the Board of Appeals the use authorized by the
variance must be initiated and utilized by the applicant within one year from the date of issuance
of the variance, and once initiated and utilized continue to be so utilized through the end of said
one year period, or the variance shall be deemed void and the applicant will be required to
reapply for the variance as though none had ever been granted.
SEC. 46.12 PLAN COMMISSION. (a) The Plan Commission shall have those
powers, and operate in accordance with, §62.23, Wisconsin Statutes. [Ord. 553 06/2005]
(b) In addition to the powers specifically enumerated in §62.23, Wisconsin
Statutes, the Plan Commission has the power to issue conditional use
permits authorizing the location of certain structures or uses in a district
from which they are otherwise excluded as provided in Sec. 46.04.
(c) The Plan Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
Village Clerk and shall be a public record.
(d) The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Plan Commission shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from, or to decide in favor of the petitioner on any matter on
ZONING 46.12(e)
55
which it may pass, or to effect any variance or variation in the
requirements of this chapter as in its opinion ought to be made.
(e) All decisions of the Plan Commission shall be reduced to writing, and a
copy thereof furnished to the petitioner. Failure to give a copy of its
determination to the petitioner shall not affect the validity of the said
determination of the Plan Commission. Where this section requires a
variance, permit, grant or waiver be made in writing, it shall be sufficient
if the decision shall be reduced to writing in the written minutes of the
Plan Commission. All decisions of the Plan Commission shall be filed in
the office of the Village Clerk.
(f) In exercising the foregoing powers the Plan Commission may in
appropriate cases establish suitable conditions and safeguards in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
SEC. 46.13 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. (1) The office of the Village Zoning
Administrator is hereby created. The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the Village
Board and shall serve such term as so designated.
(2) Every person or entity desiring to build a structure on any premises in the Village
of Ellsworth, to structurally alter a structure in said Village, to change the use of a premises, to
change the zoning or use designation of a premises, or obtain a special use permit shall first
make application to the Zoning Administrator for a use permit. No construction, structural
alteration, or change in such use shall be commenced or effected without first receiving approval
and written permit therefore from the Zoning Administrator and where also necessary, from the
Plan Commission or Board of Appeals.
(3) The application for a use permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee established from time to time by resolution of the Village Board.
(4) Interpretation. (a) The Zoning Administrator shall strictly interpret the
provisions of this chapter in considering any application for a use permit.
(b) Consistent with the declared purposes of this chapter, the desire for
compatibility of uses within the Village and respective zoning districts, the
protection of the safety, health, general welfare and comfort of the public,
the Zoning Administrator shall exercise his/her discretion in issuing
special use permits, unless otherwise directed by the Board of Appeals,
Plan Commission or Village Board to issue same.
(c) The Zoning Administrator is empowered with the primary responsibility
to enforce the provisions of this chapter. He/she may advise applicants as
to the provisions of this chapter and assist them in preparing applications
for use permits. He/she shall issue use permits in connection with those
applications that meet all applicable terms of this chapter. He/she may
inspect any premises for which a use permit has been issued at reasonable
ZONING 46.13(4)(d)
56
times and hours. He/she may direct the issuance of citations for
violations of the ordinance.
(d) The Zoning Administrator shall have the following power to enforce the
provisions of this chapter:
(1) Examine and approve any application pertaining to the use of land,
buildings or structures to determine if the application conforms
with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Issue all zoning certificates and keep permanent records thereof.
(3) Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to
determine their compliance with this chapter.
(4) Receive, file and forward for action all applications for appeals,
variation, special uses, and amendment to this chapter which are
filed with him/her.
(5) Initiate, direct and review, from time to time, a study of the
provisions of this ordinance, and make reports of his
recommendations to the Plan Commission and the Village Board
not less frequently than once a year.
(6) Revoke certificates of zoning compliance where provisions of this
chapter are being violated.
(7) Maintain permanent and current records of Zoning Ordinance,
including all maps, amendments, special uses, and variations.
(8) Provide and maintain public information relative to all matters
arising out of this chapter.
(5) In all cases of new construction involving excavation, no excavation shall be
commenced unless the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee has been on site to verify
excavation is consistent with the stakes set on the premises. Notwithstanding, the applicant is
responsible for construction consistent with the permit plan, and dimensions shown on the plan,
submitted to the Zoning Administrator as part of the application for the zoning permit under
§46.02(3).
SEC. 46.14 ANNEXATIONS. All territory annexed by the Village of Ellsworth shall
be assigned a zoning district within ninety (90) days of its annexation. During the period
between annexation and the assignment of a permanent district, the territory will be zoned as an
interim district based on its predominant use at the time of annexation.
SEC. 46.15 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS REPEALED. All ordinances, parts of
ZONING 46.15
57
ordinances or other provisions of the General Code of Ordinance of the Village of Ellsworth
which conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.
SEC. 46.16 EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONING ORDINANCE.
(1) Statement of policy, purpose and intent. The Village Board does hereby adopt the
following as its statement of policy, purpose and intent in connection with and in support of
adoption of this ordinance.
(a) The Board specifically finds that the adoption of an Extraterritorial Zoning
Ordinance is a particular benefit to the community because the community
of the Village and its adjoining Towns has vision which the County Board
and County Zoning Ordinance necessarily lack in that:
(1) County rules and regulations take no account of the proximity of
districts to villages or cities, imposing the same rules and
regulations with respect to specific districts whether or not those
districts lie within the ETZ boundaries of a municipality.
(2) The County Zoning Ordinance does not provide setbacks, or
suitable setbacks, with respect to uses in or near residential
communities.
(b) The Joint Extraterritorial Zoning Committee, through its representative
members from Village and Town respectively, are in better position to
control application, review and processing fees with respect to zoning
applications and appeals in the Extraterritorial Zoning jurisdiction.
(c) The Extraterritorial Zoning Ordinance provides for local review.
(d) The Joint Extraterritorial Zoning Committee ensures local control of the
Extraterritorial Zoning jurisdiction area by the Village and Town in
collaboration empowering each by assuring a majority, which must always
include at least one member of the other body, makes decision for the
public good.
(2) Extraterritorial Zoning District Limits. The Extraterritorial Zoning District is that
area lying outside the Village Of Ellsworth but within 1 ½ miles of the Village limits, as shown
on the map titled “Extraterritorial Zoning. Village of Ellsworth.” The purpose of the
Extraterritorial Zoning District is to provide for proper zoning and control over said area and
allow for the orderly growth and expansion of the area surrounding the Village of Ellsworth:
(3) Districts. Within the Extraterritorial Zoning District there shall, in addition to the
districts identified in Section 46.03(7), be the following districts:
(a) Rural Residential (RR). This district shall provide for the continuation of
agricultural practices in areas of the Extraterritorial Zoning District which
ZONING 46.16(3)(a)
58
have historically been devoted to farm/agricultural operations, while
providing location for certain recreational and other nonresidential uses as
well as single family rural housing opportunities not served by public
sewer or community wastewater treatment facilities. The minimum lot
size in the Rural-Residential district shall be 2 ½ acres; except, however,
there shall not be more than 8 single family residential units constructed
per forty acre parcel. As used herein the term “forty” refers to a
recognized and established forty acre parcel as determined by the
rectangular survey description determined from the Fourth Principal
Meridian in the Towns affected by these regulations, to wit, the Towns of
Ellsworth and Trimbelle, an example of such of such forty (or fractional
forty) acre parcel being as follows: Northwest Quarter/Northwest Quarter,
Section Sixteen (16), Township Twenty Six (26) North, Range Seventeen
(17) West, Town of Ellsworth. Subject to any other limitations imposed
under this Sec. 46.16, except lot size limitations, uses permitted in the R-
1District shall be permitted in this district.
(b) Rural Flexible (RF). This district is intended to achieve the same
objectives as the Rural- Residential district but to allow a greater density
of residential development upon approval of the Joint Extraterritorial
Zoning Committee. In this district the Committee may allow a density of
more than 8 single family residential units per forty provided such planned
development meets the approval of the Committee and is subject to any
conditions imposed thereon by the Committee. Subject to any other
limitations imposed under this Sec. 46.16, except lot size limitations, uses
permitted in the R-1 District shall be permitted in this district.
(c) Residential (R-1). The uses and definitions set forth in Section
46.03(7)(a) shall apply to the R-1 district in the Extraterritorial Zoning
District. No lands within the Extraterritorial Zoning District shall be
zoned or classified as R-1 unless served by public sewer, a sanitary sewer
district or an approved community wastewater treatment facility.
(4) Use. In the Extraterritorial District, no building or premises shall be used and no
building shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered unless permitted in this §46.16 or
otherwise provided in this Chapter 46.
(a) Existing agricultural uses shall be allowed to continue regardless of
Extraterritorial Zoning. In other words, it shall be within the discretion of
the owner of property used for agricultural purposes whether the
agricultural use of the property terminates. This Extraterritorial Zoning
Ordinance is not intended to work any change with respect to premises
used for agricultural purposes so long as the owner desires to continue
using the premises for an agricultural use.
(b) In the R-1 Zoning District in the Extraterritorial District, farming with
livestock will be allowed on 20 acres or more.
(c) In the Rural Residential and Rural Flexible Zoning District in the
ZONING 46.16(4)(c)
59
Extraterritorial District, livestock and domestic animals are allowed on
lots of the size of 2 ½ acres or more, with the total population of animals
not to exceed one animal unit per full acre. As used herein the term
“livestock” or “domestic animal” includes cows, horses, pigs, poultry,
llamas, ostriches and the like, but excludes household pets such cats and
dogs. The term “animal unit” shall have the same meaning as set forth in
Chp NR 243 Wis. Admin Code and Wisconsin DNR form 3400-25A.
(d) Shelters for animals; barns, corrals, feedlots, etc., shall be located more
than 100 feet from any existing non-farm residence and greater than 50 feet from any lot
line. This does not include licensed kennel and houses for domestic pets.
(5) Lot Sizes. Lots not served by municipal sanitary sewer or a DNR approved
wastewater treatment plant in a single family residence district shall be at least 2 ½ acres in area
inclusive of road right of way.
(6) Setbacks.
(a) Building setback distances from roads or streets in any district in the
Extraterritorial District shall be as follows:
(1) Class D Highway (town road). Buildings shall have a setback of
75 feet from the center line of the highway and no closer than 42
feet to highway right-of-way.
(2) Class C Highway (Pierce County). Buildings shall have a setback
of 100 feet from the center line of the highway and no closer than
67 feet to the highway right-of-way.
(3) Class B Highway (State of Wisconsin). Buildings shall have a
setback of 110 feet from the center of the highway and no closer
than 77 feet to the highway right-of-way.
(4) All other streets and roads (Village streets or private drives). The
setback distance shall be at least 75 feet from the center line of the
road and no closer than 42 feet to the road right-of-way.
(b) The required side yards in the Rural Residential and Rural Flexible
Districts shall be not less than 25 feet and no single side yard shall be less
than 10 feet in width.
(7) Building Permits. Building permits in the Extraterritorial District will be issued
by the Town but the Village Zoning Administrator shall approve such permits as to proper
zoning prior to there issuance.
(8) Enforcement. Enforcement of this Extraterritorial Zoning Ordinance shall be by
the Village Zoning Administrator, identical to that provided for zoning enforcement within the
ZONING 46.16(9)
60
Village, with penalties for violations also being the same, as provided under subdivisions
(7)(e) (f), (8) and (9) of §62.23, Stats.
(9) Conditional Use Permits. Conditional uses provided for in this chapter shall also
apply to the Extraterritorial District. Said conditional uses shall be referred to the Joint
Extraterritorial Zoning Committee for recommendation. Prior to referral of the Conditional Use
Permit to the Joint Extraterritorial Zoning Committee the permit application shall be submitted to
the Town Clerk of the Town in which the premises lie for purpose of obtaining recommendation
of the Town Board. The recommendation of the Town Board shall not be binding upon the
Joint Extraterritorial Zoning Committee but shall be considered in their deliberation. Any
recommendation made by the Town shall be made within 45 days of the date the Town Clerk is
furnished a copy of the application.
(10) Amendments to Districts. The Village Board may amend the districts and
regulations after first submitting the proposed amendment to the Joint Extraterritorial Zoning
Committee for its recommendation and report.
(11) Nonconforming uses. The nonconforming uses provisions in this chapter shall
apply to the Extraterritorial District. Any changes in nonconforming uses shall be subject to the
nonconforming uses provisions in §46.08, which shall apply to the Extraterritorial District;
provided, however, that said matter is referred to the Joint Extraterritorial Zoning Committee
instead of the Village Plan Commission.
(12) Board of Appeals. The provisions relating to the Board of Appeals in this chapter
shall also apply to the Extraterritorial District.
(13) Notice of Meetings. The Chair or Clerk of the Extraterritorial Zoning Committee
shall give notice to all members of all meetings not less than seven (7) days prior to the meeting
date. In addition, any meetings scheduled for the purpose of addressing a use proposed to take
place in one Town only shall nonetheless be given to the Town Clerk of all other Towns subject
to this Ordinance not less than seven (7) days prior to the scheduled meeting date; and, further,
the Town Clerks of all Town members of the Committee shall be given a copy of the decision
made regarding any proposed use brought before the Committee.
(14) Fees. Fees for applications made to amend the zoning district classification in the
Extraterritorial Zoning District, or to obtain a Conditional Use Permit, shall be established from
time to time by the Joint Committee. An applicant seeking a zoning change or Conditional Use
Permit shall complete an application form and file it with the Village Clerk of the Village Of
Ellsworth together with the fee established from time to time by the Joint Committee. The fee so
established shall be intended to cover the cost of publication, ministerial duties of the Clerk and
per diem expenses of the Committee members.
(15) Quorum. The quorum necessary for a meeting of the Joint Committee shall be all
six (6) members. Alternates may attend in place of members unable to attend. An affirmative
vote of four (4) or more votes shall be necessary to make any recommendation or take any
measure. [Ord. 561 10/2006]
ZONING 46.16(16)
61
(16) Small Wind Energy System
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to:
(1) Oversee the permitting of small wind energy systems
(2) Preserve and protect public health and safety without significantly
increasing the cost or decreasing the efficiency of a small wind
energy system (per Wis. Stat. §66.0401).
(b) Definitions. In this Ordinance:
(1) “Administrator” means the Village of Ellsworth Land Use
Administrator or Planning and Zoning Administrator.
(2) “Board” means the Village Board of the Village Of Ellsworth.
(3) “Meteorological tower” (met tower) is defined to include the
tower, base plate, anchors, gut cables and hardware, anemometers
(wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold
equipment anemometers and vanes, data logger, instrument wiring,
and any telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit
wind speed and wind flow characteristics over a period of time for
either instantaneous wind information or to characterize the wind
resource at a given location.
(4) “Owner” shall mean the individual or entity that intends to own
and operate the small wind energy system in accordance with this
ordinance.
(5) “Rotor diameter” means the cross sectional dimension of the circle
swept by the rotating blades.
(6) “Small wind energy system” means a wind energy system that
(a) is used to generate electricity;
(b) has a nameable capacity of 100 kilowatts or less; and
(c) has a total height of 170 feet or less.
(7) “Total height” means the vertical distance from ground level to the
tip of a wind generator blade when the tip is at its highest point.
(8) “Tower” means the monopole, freestanding, or guyed structure that
supports a wind generator.
ZONING 46.16(16)(b)(a)
62
(9) “Wind energy system” means equipment that converts and then
(10) stores or transfers energy from the wind into usable forms of
energy (as defined by Wis. Stat. § 66.0403(1)(m). This equipment
includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor,
tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries or other
component used in the system.
(11) “Wind generator” means blades and associated mechanical and
electrical conversion components mounted on top of the tower.
(c) Standards.
(1) Setbacks. A wind tower for a small wind system shall be set back
a distance equal to its total height plus 50 feet from:
(a) any public road right of way, unless written permission is
granted by the governmental entity with jurisdiction over
the road;
(b) any overhead utility lines, unless written permission is
granted by the affected utility;
(c) all property lines, unless written permission is granted from
the affected land owner or neighboring property owners
whose boundaries are located within a distance of the tower
height plus fifty (50) feet.
(2) Access.
(a) All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall
be labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(b) The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not
provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the
public for a minimum height of 8 feet above the ground.
(3) Electrical Wires. All electrical wires associated with a small wind
energy system, other than wires necessary to connect the wind
generator to the tower wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect
junction box, and the grounding wires shall be located
underground.
(4) Lighting. A wind tower and generator shall not be artificially
lighted unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation
Administration.
ZONING 46.16(16)(c)(5)
63
(5) Appearance, Color & Finish. The wind generator and tower shall
remain painted or finished the color or finish that was originally
applied by the manufacturer, as approved in the building permit.
(6) Signs. All signs, other than the manufacturer’s or installer’s
identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification
on a wind generator, tower, building, or other structure associated
with a small wind energy system visible from any public road shall
be prohibited.
(7) Code Compliance. A small wind energy system including tower
shall comply with all applicable state construction and applicable
codes, and the National Electrical Code.
(8) Utility notification and interconnection. Small wind energy
systems that connect to the electric utility shall comply with the
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin’s Rule 119, “Rules for
Interconnection Distributed Generation Facilities” and in
compliance with the respective Utility Policy.
(9) Met towers shall be permitted under the same standards, permit
requirements, restoration requirements, and permit procedures as a
small wind energy system.
(10) Noise. The noise level of the small wind system shall not exceed
3(d) BA above ambient sound when measured at the nearest
property line.
(d) Permit Requirements.
(1) Building Permit. A building permit shall be required for the
installation of a small wind energy system.
(2) Documents: The building permit application shall be accompanied
by a plot plan which includes the following:
(a) Property lines and physical dimensions of the property
(b) Location, dimensions, and types of existing major
structures on the property
(c) Location of the proposed wind system tower
(d) The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with
the property;
ZONING 46.16(16)(d)(2)(e)
64
(e) Any overhead utility lines;
(f) Wind system specifications, including manufacturer and
model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type
(freestanding or guyed)
(g) Tower foundation blueprints or drawings
(h) Tower blueprint or drawing
(3) Fees. The application for a building permit for a small wind
energy system must be accompanied by the fee required for a
building permit for a Permitted Accessory Use.
(4) Expiration. A permit issued pursuant to this ordinance shall expire
if:
(a) The small wind energy system is not installed and
functioning within 24-months from date the permit is
issued; or,
(b) The small wind energy system is out of service or
otherwise unused for a continuous 12-month period.
(e) Abandonment.
(1) A small wind energy system that is out-of-service for a continuous
12-month period will be deemed to have been abandoned. The
Administrator may issue a Notice of Abandonment to the owner of
a small wind energy system that is deemed to have been
abandoned. The Owner shall have the right to respond to the
Notice of Abandonment within 30 days from Notice receipt date.
The Administrator shall withdraw the Notice of Abandonment and
notify the owner that the Notice has been withdrawn if the owner
provides information that demonstrates the small wind energy
system has not been abandoned.
(2) If the small wind energy system is determined to be abandoned, the
owner of a small wind energy system shall remove the wind
generator and the generator tower at the Owner’s sole expense
within 3 months of receipt of Notice of Abandonment. If the
owner fails to remove the wind generator from the tower, the
Administrator may pursue a legal action to have the wind generator
removed at the Owner’s expense.
(f) Building Permit Procedure.
ZONING 46.16 (F)(1)
65
(1) An Owner shall submit an application to the Administrator for a
building permit for a small wind energy system. The application
must be on a form approved by the Administrator and must be
accompanied by two copies of the plot plan identified in 00.06(2)
above.
(2) The Administrator shall issue a permit or deny the application
within one month of the date on which the application is received.
(3) The Administrator shall issue a building permit for a small wind
energy system if the application materials show that the proposed
small wind energy system meets the requirements of this
ordinance.
(4) If the application is approved, the Administrator will return one
signed copy of the application with the permit and retain the other
copy with the application.
(5) If the application is rejected, the Administrator will notify the
applicant in writing and provide a written statement of the reason
why the application was rejected. The applicant may appeal the
Administrator’s decision pursuant to Chapter 68 Wis. Statutes.
The applicant may reapply if the deficiencies specified by the
Administrator are resolved.
(6) The Owner shall conspicuously post the building permit on the
premises so as to be visible to the public at all times until
construction or installation of the small wind energy system is
complete.
(g) Violations. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a
small wind energy system that is not in compliance with this ordinance or
with any condition contained in a building permit issued pursuant to this
ordinance. Small wind energy systems installed prior to the adoption of
this ordinance are exempt
(h) Severability. The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and in the
invalidity of any section, subdivision, paragraph, or other part of this
ordinance shall not affect the validity or effectiveness or the remainder of
the ordinance. [Ord. 581 01/2008, Ord 599 12/2009]
CHAPTER 49
FLOODPLAIN ZONING
49.01 Statutory Authorization, Finding of Fact, Statement of
Purpose, Title and General Provisions
49.02 General Standards Applicable to All Floodplain
49.03 Floodway District (FW)
49.04 Floodfringe District (FF)
49.05 General Floodplain District (GFP)
49.06 Nonconforming Uses
49.07 Administration
49.08 Amendments
49.09 Enforcement and Penalties
49.10 Definitions
TABLE OF CONTENTS
49.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDING OF FACT, STATEMENT
OF PURPOSE, TITLE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 2
(1) Statutory Authorization 2
(2 ) Finding of Fact 2
(3 ) Statement of Purpose 2
(4) Title 2
(5 ) General Provisions 2
(1) Areas to be Regulated
(2) Official Maps and Revisions
(3) Establishment of Districts
(4) Locating Floodplain Boundaries
(5) Removal of Lands from Floodplain
(6) Compliance
(7) Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated
(8) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
(9) Interpretation
(10) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
(11) Severability
(12) Annexed Areas for Cities/Villages
(13) General Development Standards
49.02 GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN 6
(1) Hydraulic and Hydrologic Analyses 6
(2) Watercourse Alterations 6
(3) Chapter 30, 31, Wis. Stats., Development 7
(4) Public or Private Campgrounds 7
49.03 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW) 8
(1) Applicability 8
(2) Permitted Uses 8
(3) Standards for Development 8
(4) Prohibited Uses 10
49.04 FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF) 10
(1) Applicability 10
(2) Permitted Uses 10
(3) Standards for Development 10
49.05 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP) 13
(1) Applicability 13
(2) Permitted Uses 13
(3) Standards for Development 13
(4) Determining Floodway/Floodfringe Limits 13
49.06 NONCONFORMING USES 14
(1) General 14
(2) Floodway Areas 15
(3) Floodfringe Areas 16
49.07 ADMINISTRATION 17
(1) Zoning Administrator 17
(2) Zoning Agency 20
(3) Board of Adjustment/Appeals 20
(4) To Review Appeals of Permit Denials 23
(5) Floodproofing 23
(6) Public Information 24
49.08 AMENDMENTS 24
(1) General 24
(2) Procedures 25
49.09 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 25
49.10 DEFINITIONS 25
FLOODPLAIN 49.01
-2
49.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDING OF FACT, STATEMENT OF PURPOSE, TITLE
AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization in ss. 61.35 and 62.23, for villages and cities;
59.69, 59.692, and 59.694 for counties; and the requirements ins. 87.30, Stats.
(2) FINDING OF FACT
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality would impair the
public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base.
(3) STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
This ordinance is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
(I) Protect life, health and property;
(2) Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
(3) Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers;
(4) Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
(6) Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
(7) Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers;
(8) Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts
between property owners; and
(9) Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the
activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain.
(4 ) TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for Village of Ellsworth,
Wisconsin.
(5 ) GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) AREAS TO BE REGULATED
This ordinance regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base flood. Note: Base
flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study. Regional flood
elevations may be derived from other studies. Areas covered by the base flood are identified as AZones
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(2) OFFICIAL MAPS & REVISIONS
FLOODPLAIN 49.01(5)(2)(a)
-3
The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as floodplains or A-Zones on the maps listed
below and the revisions in the Village of Ellsworth Floodplain Appendix. Any change to the base flood
elevations (BFE) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be
reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA before it is effective. No changes to regional flood
elevations (RFE's) on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and
revisions are on file in the office of the Village Clerk, Village of Ellsworth. If more than one map or
revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
(a) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel number 55093C0165E, 55093C0301E,
55093C0302E, 55093C0305E, dated November 16, 2011;with corresponding profiles that are based
on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated November 16, 2011, 55093CVOOOA
(3) ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
The regional floodplain areas are divided into three districts as follows:
(a) The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters.
(b) The Floodfringe District (FF) is that portion of the floodplain between the regional flood limits
and the floodway.
(c) The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that have been or may be covered by
floodwater during the regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN 49.01(5)(4)
-4
(4) LOCATING FLOODPLAIN BOUNDARIES
Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions
shall be resolved using the criteria in paragraphs (a) or (b) below. If a significant difference exists, the
map shall be amended according to s. 8.0. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived
from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is
required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field
conditions and the basis upon which the
district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section.
Disputes between the zoning administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be
settled according to s. 7.3(3) and the criteria in (a) and (b) below.
(a) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district
boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
(b) Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the
map scale, visual on-site inspection and any information provided by the Department.
Note: Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA
must also approve any map amendment pursuant to s. 8.1 (6).
(5) REMOVAL OF LANDS FROM FLOODPLAIN
Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall not be grounds for removing land from the
floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is
contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to s. 8.0.
Note: This procedure does not remove the requirements for the mandatory purchase of flood
insurance. The property owner must contact FEMA to request a Letter of Map Change (LOMC).
(6) COMPLIANCE
Any development or use within the areas regulated by this ordinance shall be in compliance with the
terms of this ordinance, and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
(7) MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply
with this ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply ifs.
13.48(13), Stats., applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways
and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt when s. 30.2022, Stats., applies.
-5
FLOODPLAIN 49.01(5)(8)
(8) ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS
(a) This ordinance supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under
ss. 59.69, 59.692 or 59.694 for counties; s. 62.23 for cities; s. 61.35 for villages; or s.
87.30, Stats., which relate to floodplains. If another ordinance is more restrictive than this
ordinance, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater
restrictions, but not otherwise.
(b) This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions,
covenants or easements. If this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
ordinance shall prevail.
(9) INTERPRETATION
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance are the minimum requirements
liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other
powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this ordinance, required by ch. NR I 16, Wis.
Adm. Code, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of
the adoption of this ordinance or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this
ordinance.
(10) WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
The flood protection standards in this ordinance are based on engineering experience and scientific
research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This ordinance does not imply or guarantee that nonfloodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be
free from flooding and flood damages. Nor does this ordinance create liability on the part of, or a cause of
action against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result
from reliance on this ordinance.
(11) SEVERABILITY
Should any portion of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected.
(12) ANNEXED AREAS FOR CITIES AND VILLAGES
The Pierce County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect
and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces
an ordinance which meets the requirements of ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code and the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map.
County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this
section and are on file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation
shall show the regional flood elevation and the location of the floodway,
(13) GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be
reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone
-6
FLOODPLAIN 49.02
area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damages; and be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision
proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data
for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this ordinance.
49.02 GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
(1) HYDRAULIC AND HYDROLOGIC ANALYSES
(1) Except as allowed in par. (3) below, no floodplain development shall:
(a) Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by
itself or with other development, increasing regional flood height; or
(b) Increase regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost, which equals or exceeds
0.01 foot.
(2) The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will
obstruct flow or increase regional flood heights 0.01 foot or more, based on the officially adopted
FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of sub. (3) are met.
(3) Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be permitted if amendments
are made to this ordinance, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface
profiles, in accordance with s. 8.0.
Note: This section refers to obstructions or increases in base flood elevations as shown on the
officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved
by FEMA and the DNR.
(2) WATERCOURSE ALTERATIONS
No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local
official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional offices
and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The flood carrying capacity
of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. As soon as is practicable, but not later than
six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation, the zoning administrator shall notify
FEMA of the changes by submitting appropriate technical or scientific data in accordance with NFIP
guidelines that shall be used to revise the FIRM, risk premium rates and floodplain management
regulations as required.
(3 ) CHAPTER 30, 31, WIS. STATS., DEVELOPMENT
Development which requires a permit from the Department, under chs. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., such as docks,
piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are
obtained and amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles,
-7
FLOODPLAIN 49.02(4)
BFE's established in the FIS, or other data from the officially adopted FIRM, or other floodplain zoning
maps or the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to s. 8.0.
(4) PUBLIC OR PRIVATE CAMPGROUNDS
Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the
following provisions: '
(1) The campground is approved by the Department of Health Services.
(2) A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator.
(3) The character of the river system and the elevation of the campground is such that a 72-hour warning
of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants.
(4) There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice
required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written
agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and
the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall
occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used
and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for
conducting the evacuation.
· (5) This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be
reviewed and updated- by the officials identified in sub. (4) to remain in compliance with all
applicable regulations, including those of the state Department of Health Services and all other
applicable regulations.
(6) Only camping units are allowed.
(7) The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days,
at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours.
(8) All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited
authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground.
Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and
shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section.
(9) The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator
to assure compliance with the terms of this section.
(10) All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the
applicable requirements in either s. 3.0 or s. 4.0 for the floodplain district in which the structure
is located.
(11) The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard
and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued.
(12) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection, electrical service, natural gas
lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
49.03 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW)
(1) APPLICABILITY
This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant
to s. 5.4.
(2) PERMITTED USES
-8
FLOODPLAIN 49.03(2)(1)
The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the floodway areas of the general
floodplain district, if
- they are not prohibited by any other ordinance;
- they meet the standards ins. 3.3 and 3.4; and
- all permits or certificates have been issued according to s. 7.1:
(1) Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild crop
harvesting.
(2) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and airport
landing strips.
(3) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap
and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill
limitations of s. 3.3(4).
(4) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that comply with
ss. 3.3 and 3.4.
(5) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with s. 3.3(4).
(6) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts,
navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with chs. 30 and
31, Stats.
(7) Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with s. 3.3(3).
(3) STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENTS IN FLOODWAY AREAS
(1) GENERAL
(a) Any development in floodway areas shall comply with s. 2.0 and have a low flood damage
potential.
(b) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to
s. 2.1:
1. A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse,
showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or
2. An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height.
(c) The zoning administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will increase flood
elevations upstream or downstream 0.01 foot or more, based on the data submitted for par. (b)
above.
(2) STRUCTURES
Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on a
-9
FLOODPLAIN 49.04(3)(2)(a)
waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria:
(a) The structure is not designed for human habitation and does not have a high flood damage
potential.
(b) It must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
(c) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or flood proofed to or above the flood
protection elevation; and
(d) It must not obstruct flow of flood waters or cause any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the regional flood.
(3) PUBLIC UTILITIES, STREETS AND BRIDGES
Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, if:
(a) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and
(b) Construction meets the development standards of s. 2.1. (4)
FILLS OR DEPOSITION OF MATERIALS
Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if: (a) The
requirements of s. 2.1 are met;
(b) No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit is issued by the Department
pursuant to ch. 30, Stats., and a permit pursuant to s. 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and the other
requirements of this section are met;
(c) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet
piling or bulkheading; and
(d) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
(4) PROHIBITED USES
All uses not listed as permitted uses ins. 3.2 are prohibited, including the following uses:
(1) Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with
permanent open-space uses;
(2) Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality, or
human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life;
(3) Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts;
(4) Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to
-10
FLOODPLAIN 49.03(4)(5)
flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and Department-approved campgrounds that
meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and ch. COMM 83, Wis. Adm. Code;
(5) Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas
that meet the requirements of local ordinances and chs. NR 811 and NR
812, Wis. Adm. Code;
(6) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(7) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under s. NR
110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code;
(8) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development
located outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
49.04 FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF)
(1 ) APPLICABILITY
This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified
pursuant to s. 5.4.
(2) PERMITTED USES
Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the floodfringe district if the standards in s.
4.3 are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates
specified in s. 7.1 have been issued.
(3) STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODFRINGE AREAS
S. 2.1 shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the use requested.
(1) RESIDENTIAL USES.
Any habitable structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, or moved into the floodfringe area, shall meet or exceed the following standards;
(a) The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement or crawlway, shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation on fill. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood
elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. The Department may
authorize other floodproofing measures if the elevations of existing streets or sewer lines makes
compliance with the fill standards impractical;
(b) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is floodproofed
to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional
flood elevation;
-11
FLOODPLAIN 49.04(3)(1)(c)
(c) Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain,
except as provided in par. (d).
(d) In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with par. (c)
impractical, the municipality may permit new development and substantial improvements where
access roads are at or below the regional flood elevation, if:
1. The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue
and relief will be provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood
event; or
2. The municipality has a natural disaster plan approved by Wisconsin
Emergency Management and the Department.
(2) ACCESSORY STRUCTURES OR USES
(a) Except as provided in par.(b), an accessory structure which is not connected to a principal structure
may be constructed with its lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation.
(b) An accessory structure which is not connected to the principal structure and which is less than 600
square feet in size and valued at less than $10,000 may be constructed with its lowest floor no more
than two feet below the regional flood elevation if it is subject to flood velocities of no more than two
feet per second and it meets all of the provisions of Sections 3.3 (2) (a),(b),(c) and (d) and 4.3 (5)
below.
(3) COMMERCIAL USES
Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall meet the
requirements of s. 4.3(1). Subject to the requirements of s. 4.3(5), storage yards, surface parking lots and
other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and
property.
(4) MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL USES
Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area
shall be protected to the flood protection elevation using fill, levees, floodwalls, or other flood proofing
measures ins. 7.5. Subject to the requirements of s.4.3(5), storage yards, surface parking lots and other
such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and
property.
(5) STORAGE OF MATERIALS
Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal,
plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in
compliance with s. 7.5. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the
water body during flooding.
(6) PUBLIC UTILITIES, STREETS AND BRIDGES
All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive
-12
FLOODPLAIN 49.04(3)(6)(a)
floodplain development plans; and
(a) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where
such facilities are deemed essential, construction of and substantial improvements to such facilities
may only be permitted if they are floodproofed in compliance with s. 7.5 to the flood protection
elevation;
(b) Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to
withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation.
(7) SEWAGE SYSTEMS
All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be floodproofed, pursuant to s. 7.5, to the flood protection elevation
and shall meet the provisions of all local ordinances and ch. COMM 83, Wis. Adm. Code.
(8) WELLS
All wells shall be floodproofed, pursuant to s. 7.5, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the
provisions of chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(9) SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITES
Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas. (10)
DEPOSITION OF MATERIALS
Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this ordinance. (11)
MANUFACTURED HOMES
(a) Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide adequate surface
drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation plan,
indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities.
(b) In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and
substantially improved homes shall:
1. have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and
2. be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood
(c) Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all
single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved
manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe ins.
4.3(1).
(12) MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed
and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements ins. 4.3 (11)(b) and (c). A
mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway
-13
FLOODPLAIN 49.05
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and
security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
49.05 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP)
(1) APPLICABILITY
The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains for which flood profiles are not available or where
flood profiles are available but floodways have not been delineated. Floodway and floodfringe districts shall be
delineated when adequate data is available.
(2) PERMITTED USES
Pursuant to s. 5.4, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or floodfringe
area.
Those uses permitted in floodway (s. 3.2) and floodfringe areas (s. 4.2) are allowed within the general
floodplain district, according to the standards of s. 5.3, provided that all permits or certificates required
under s. 7.1 have been issued.
(3 ) STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
S. 3.0 applies to floodway areas, s. 4.0 applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this ordinance applies to
either district.
(4) DETERMINING FLOODWAY AND FLOODFRINGE LIMITS
Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator
shall:
(1) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which shows the proposed
development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing
floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations,
building floor elevations and flood proofing measures;
(2) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the Department
to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to
determine floodway boundaries:
(a) A typical valley cross-section showing the stream channel, the floodplain adjoining each side of
the channel, the cross-sectional area to be occupied by the proposed development, and all historic
high water information;
(b) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage
elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and
elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent
information;
(c) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream;
(d) Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling,
-14
FLOODPLAIN 49.05(4)(3)
dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities.
(3) Transmit one copy of the information described in pars. (1) and (2) to the Department Regional
office along with a written request for technical assistance to establish regional flood elevations and,
where applicable, floodway data. Where the provisions of s. 7.1(2)(c) apply, the applicant shall
provide all required information and computations to delineate floodway boundaries and the effects
of the project on flood elevations.
49.06 NONCONFORMING USES
(1) GENERAL
(1) APPLICABILITY
If these standards conform with s. 59.69(10), Stats., for counties or s. 62.23(7)(h), Stats., for cities
and villages, they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure
and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of this ordinance or
any amendment thereto.
(2) The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance may continue subject to the following conditions:
(a) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted unless
they comply with this ordinance. The words "modification" and "addition" include, but are not
limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of
any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Ordinary maintenance repairs
are not considered an extension, modification or addition; these include painting, decorating,
paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components and the
maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or
connections to public utilities. Ordinary maintenance repairs do not include any costs
associated with the repair of a damaged structure.
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the
exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of
the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress
to the principal structure.
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for
12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any
structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this ordinance;
(c) The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all
modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the
structure's total current value those modifications represent;
(d) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed 50% of its
present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is
-15
FLOODPLAIN 49.06(1)(2)(e)
permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the
applicable requirements of this ordinance. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for
residential and commercial uses in compliance with s. 4.3(1). The costs of elevating a
nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation
are excluded from the 50% provisions of this paragraph;
(e) 1. Except as provided in subd. 2., if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed
or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current ordinance requirements. A structure is
considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged
condition equals or exceeds 50% of the structure's present equalized assessed value.
2. For nonconforming buildings that are damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or
reconstruction of any such nonconforming building may be permitted in order to restore it after the
nonflood disaster, provided that the nonconforming building will meet all of the minimum
requirements under applicable FEMA regulations (44 CFR Part 60), or the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
(f) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structures
continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with s. 3.3 (1), flood
resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with
s. 7.5 are used.
(2) FLOODWAY AREAS
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with
a nonconforming use in a floodway area, unless such modification or addition:
(a) Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance requirements;
(b) Meets the requirements of s. 6.1;
(c) Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height;
(d) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to s. 7.5, by means other
than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation;
(e) If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following
standards shall apply:
1. The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the
efficient entry and exit of flood waters without human intervention. A minimum of two
openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every
one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than
12 inches above the adjacent grade;
2. The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection
-16
FLOODPLAIN 49.06(2)(1)(e)(3)
elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
3. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the
flood protection elevation; and
4. The use must be limited to parking or limited storage.
(2) No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except
where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be
allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage
disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and
ch. COMM 83, Wis. Adm. Code.
(3) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be
allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in a floodway
area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis.
Adm. Code.
(3) FLOODFRINGE AREAS
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the
municipality, and the modification or addition shall be placed on fill or floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation in compliance with the standards for that particular use in s. 4.3, except where s.
6.3(2) is applicable.
(2) Where compliance with the provisions of par. (1) would result in unnecessary hardship and only where
the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential,
the Board of Adjustment/Appeals, using the procedures established ins. 7.3, may grant a variance from
those provisions of par. (1) for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications
or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted
if:
(a) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures;
(b) Human lives are not endangered;
(c) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed;
(d) Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
(e) Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
(f) The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described ins. 4.3(5).
(3) If neither the provisions of par. (1) or (2) above can be met, one addition to an existing room in a
nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use may be allowed in the floodfringe, if the
addition:
(a) Meets all other regulations and will be granted by permit or variance;
-17
FLOODPLAIN 49.06(3)(3)(b)
(b) Does not exceed 60 square feet in area; and
(c) In combination with other previous modifications or additions to the building, does not equal or
exceed 50% of the present equalized assessed value of the building.
(4) All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private
sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances and ch. COMM 83,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(5) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable
provisions of this ordinance and ch. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
49.07 ADMINISTRATION
Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/appeals has already been appointed to
administer a zoning ordinance adopted under ss. 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7), Stats., these officials shall also
administer this ordinance.
(1) ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
(1) The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this ordinance and shall have the following
duties and powers:
(a) Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals,
and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit
applications.
(b) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this ordinance, and issue
certificates of compliance where appropriate.
(bm) Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a substantial damage assessment to
determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred.
(c) Keep records of all official actions such as:
1. All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
2. Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations for floodplain
development;
3. Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming
uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
4. All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures.
(d) Submit copies of the following items to the Department Regional office:
1. Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or
text interpretations, and map or text amendments;
-18
FLOODPLAIN 49.07(1)(1)(d)(2)
2. Copies of any case-by-case analyses, and any other information required by the
Department including an annual summary of the number and types of floodplain zoning
actions taken.
3. Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related
correspondence concerning the assessments.
(e) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this ordinance to the municipal zoning agency
and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the Department Regional
office.
(f) Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial reports to the FEMA Regional
office.
(2) LAND USE PERMIT
A land use permit shall be obtained before any new development or any structural repair or change in the
use of a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the
zoning administrator shall include:
(a) GENERAL INFORMATION
1. Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor;
2. Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a modification;
(b) SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN
A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
1. Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
2. Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable waterways;
3. Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and street center
lines;
4. Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply
systems;
5. Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
6. Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official floodplain
zoning maps;
7. The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using the vertical datum
from the adopted study - either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD);
-19
FLOODPLAIN 49.07(1)(2)(b)(8)
8. Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NOVO or NAVD at the
location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of s. 3.0 or
4.0 are met; and
9. Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an
increase in regional flood height or discharge according to s. 2.1. This may include any
of the information noted ins. 3.3(1).
(c) DATA REQUIREMENTS TO ANALYZE DEVELOPMENTS
1. The applicant shall provide all survey data and computations required to show the effects
of the project on flood heights, velocities and floodplain storage, for all subdivision
proposals, as "subdivision" is defined in s. 236, Stats., and other proposed developments
exceeding 5 acres in area or where the estimated cost exceeds $125,000. The applicant
shall provide:
a. An analysis of the effect of the development on the regional flood profile,
velocity of flow and floodplain storage capacity;
b. A map showing location and details of vehicular access to lands outside the
floodplain; and
c. A surface drainage plan showing how flood damage will be minimized.
The estimated cost of the proposal shall include all structural developmentlandscaping,
access and road development, utilities, and other pertinent items, butneed not include land
costs.
(d) EXPIRATION
All permits issued under the authority of this ordinance shall expire 365 days after
issuance.
(3) CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to,
modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the
zoning administrator, except where no permit is required, subject to the following provisions:
(a) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the
proposed use, conform to the provisions of this ordinance;
(b) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit;
(c) If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within 10
days after written notification that the permitted work is completed
(d) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer,
architect. or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing
-20
FLOODPLAIN 49.07(1)(4)
elevations are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification
by a registered professional engineer or architect that floodproofing measures meet the requirements of
s. 7.5.
(4) OTHER PERMITS
The applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including
those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under s. 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, Amendments of 1972,33 U.S.c. 1344.
(2 ) ZONING AGENCY
(1) The Village of Ellsworth Plan Commission shall:
(a) oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; and
(b) review and advise the Governing body on all proposed amendments to this
ordinance, maps and text.
(2) This zoning agency shall not:
(a) grant variances to the terms of the ordinance in place of action by the Board of
Adjustment/Appeals; or
(b) amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the Governing body
(3) BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT/APPEALS
The Board of Adjustment/Appeals, created under s. 59.694, Stats., for counties or s. 62.23(7)(e), Stats., for
cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this ordinance. The
Board shall exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business.
The zoning administrator may not be the secretary of the Board.
(1) POWERS AND DUTIES
The Board of Adjustment/Appeals shall:
(a) Appeals- Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
(b) Boundary Disputes - Hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries
shown on the official floodplain zoning map.
(c) Variances - Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the ordinance standards.
(2) APPEALS TO THE BOARD
(a) Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or department
of the municipality affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or other
administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless
-21
FLOODPLAIN 49.07(3)(2)(b)
otherwise provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the official whose decision is in
question, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official
whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all records regarding the matter appealed.
(b) NOTICE AND HEARING FOR APPEALS INCLUDING VARIANCES
1. Notice - The board shall:
a. Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
b. Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes, specifying the date, time,
place and subject of the hearing;
c. Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the
Department Regional office at least I 0 days in advance of the hearing.
2. Hearing- Any party may appear in person or by agent. The board shall:
a. Resolve boundary disputes according to s. 7.3(3).
b. Decide variance applications according to s. 7.3(4).
c. Decide appeals of permit denials according to s. 7.4.
(c) DECISION: The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall:
1. Be made within a reasonable time;
2. Be sent to the Department Regional office within 10 days of the decision;
3. Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary of the Board;
4. State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board's decision;
5. Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny
the variance application;
6. Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the
applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the Board
proceedings.
(3) BOUNDARY DISPUTES
The following procedure shall be used by the Board in hearing disputes concerning floodplain
district boundaries:
(a) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the flood
elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be
examined.
-22
FLOODPLAIN 49.07(3)(3)(b)
(b) In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
present arguments and technical evidence to the Board.
(c) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform the zoning committee or the person
contesting the boundary location to petition the governing body for a map amendment according to s.
8.0.
(4) VARIANCE
(a) The Board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this ordinance if an applicant
convincingly demonstrates that:
1. Literal enforcement of the ordinance provisions will cause unnecessary hardship;
2. The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique property conditions,
not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such case the ordinance or map must be amended;
3. The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
4. The variance is consistent with the purpose of this ordinance ins. 1.3.
(b) In addition to the criteria in par. (a), to qualify for a variance under FEMA
regulations, the following criteria must be met:
1. The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation;
2. Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to
existing structures constructed below the RFE;
3. Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the
minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall
not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the
ordinance.
(c) A variance shall not:
1. Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district.
2. Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss.
3. Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
4. Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area.
5. Allow actions without the amendments to this ordinance or map(s) required in s. 8.1.
6. Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its
continued designation as an historic structure.
-23
FLOODPLAIN 49.07(3)(4)(d)
(d) When a floodplain variance is granted the Board shall notify the applicant in writing that it may
increase flood insurance premiums and risks to life and property. A copy shall be maintained with
the variance record.
(4) TO REVIEW APPEALS OF PERMIT DENIALS
(1) The Zoning Agency (s. 7.2) or Board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include:
(a) Permit application data listed ins. 7.1(2).
(b) Floodway/floodfringe determination data ins. 5.4.
(c) Data listed ins. 3.3(1)(b) where the applicant has not submitted this information to the zoning
administrator.
(d) Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the Board with the appeal.
(2) For appeals of all denied permits the Board shall:
(a) Follow the procedures of s. 7.3;
(b) Consider zoning agency recommendations; and
(c) Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
(3) For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the Board shall:
(a) Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation.
Increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed after amending the flood profile
and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property
owners.
(b) Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does
not cause an increase equal to or greater than 0.01 foot provided no other reasons for denial exist.
(5) FLOODPROOFING
(1) No permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or
development to the flood protection elevation.
(2) Floodproofing measures shall be designed to:
(a) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other regional
flood factors;
(b) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
(c) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; and
-24
FLOODPLAIN 49.07(5)(2)(d)
(d) Insure that structural walls and floors are watertight to the flood protection elevation, and the
interior remains completely dry during flooding without human intervention.
(3) Floodproofing measures could include:
(a) Reinforcing walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or
(b) Adding mass or weight to prevent flotation
(c) Placing essential utilities above the flood protection elevation.
(d) Installing surface or subsurface drainage systems to relieve foundation wall and
basement floor pressures.
(e) Constructing water supply wells and waste treatment systems to prevent the entry of flood
waters.
(f) Putting cutoff valves on sewer lines or eliminating gravity flow basement drains.
(6) PUBLIC INFORMATION
(1) Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood.
(2) All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely distributed.
(3) All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any real property is in.
49.08 AMENDMENTS
(1) GENERAL
The governing body may change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and this
ordinance in the manner provided by law. Actions which require an amendment include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(1) Any change to the official floodplain zoning map, including the floodway line or boundary of
any floodplain area.
(2) Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain zoning maps.
(3) Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the
flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain.
(4) Any fill or floodplain encroachment that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood height
0.01 foot or more.
(5) Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by s. NR 116.05, Wis. Adm.
Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the municipality.
(6) All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an are
FLOODPLAIN 49.08(2)
from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM
requires prior approval by FEMA.
Note: Consult the FEMA web site- www.fema.gov - for the map change fee schedule.
(2 ) PROCEDURES
Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any interested party according to the provisions of s.
62.23, Stats., for cities and villages, or 59.69, Stats., for counties. Such petitions shall include all necessary
data required by ss. 5.4 and 7.1 (2).
(I) The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a public hearing and
recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be
submitted to the Department Regional office for review prior to the hearing. The amendment
procedure shall comply with the provisions of s. 62.23, Stats., for cities and villages or s. 59.69, Stats.,
for counties.
(2) No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the Department.
(3) All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood height 0.01
foot or more, shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all
adversely affected property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be
approved by the governing body.
(4) For amendments in areas with no water surface profiles, the zoning agency or board shall consider
data submitted by the Department, the zoning administrator's visual on-site inspections and other
available information. (Sees. 1.5(4).)
49.09 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to
the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon
conviction, forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not less than $25.00 and not more than $50.00 (fifty
dollars), together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a
separate offense. Every violation of this ordinance is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and
the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant
to s. 87.30, Stats.
49.10 DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this ordinance shall have their common law meaning and
shall be applied in accordance with their common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future,
the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is
permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not discretionary.
I) "A ZONES" - Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map which would be inundated by the
regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones mayor may not be
reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area.
2) "ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE"- A facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental
to the principal use of a property, structure or building.
-25
FLOODPLAIN 49.10(3)
-26
3) "BASE FLOOD"- Means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM.
4) "BASEMENT" -Any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level,
on all sides.
5) "BUILDING" - See STRUCTURE.
6) "BULKHEAD LINE" - A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by
a municipal ordinance and approved by the Department pursuant to s. 30.11, Stats., and which allows
limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary highwater mark, except where
such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this ordinance.
7) "CAMPGROUND" - Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the
purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by 4 or more camping units, or which is
advertised or represented as a camping area.
8) "CAMPING UNIT" - Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary
shelter, including but not limited to a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, tent or
other mobile recreational vehicle.
9) "CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE" -A certification that the construction and the use of land or a
building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the
provisions of this ordinance.
10) "CHANNEL"- A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct
normal flow of water.
11) "CRAWLWAYS" OR "CRAWL SPACE"- An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a
building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities.
12) "DECK" An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which
allows the infiltration of precipitation.
13) "DEPARTMENT"- The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
14) "DEVELOPMENT"- Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of
additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged
structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or
improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation;
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or
extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private
sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
15) "DRYLAND ACCESS"- A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and
which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its
surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
16) "ENCROACHMENT"- Any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or development in the floodway.
--
27
FLOODPLAIN 49.10(17)
-27
17) "EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION"- A parcel of land, divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots is completed before the effective date of this ordinance. At a minimum, this would
include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads
18) "EXPANSION TO EXISTING MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK"- The preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final
site grading, or the pouring if concrete pads.
19) "FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA)"- The federal agency that
administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
20) "FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP" (FIRM) - A map of a community on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
21) "FLOOD" or "FLOODING"- A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions:
../ The overflow or rise of inland waters,
../ The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source,
../ The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the
shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior, or
../ The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
22) "FLOOD FREQUENCY" - The probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical
analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average
once in a specified number of years or as a percent(%) chance of occurring in any given year.
23) "FLOODFRINGE"- That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by flood
waters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water.
24) "FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP"- A map designating approximate flood hazard areas.
Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A-Zones and do not contain floodway lines or
regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood Insurance Study and a
Flood Insurance Rate Map.
25) "FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY" - A technical engineering examination, evaluation, and
determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by
the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may
provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered
--
27
FLOODPLAIN 49.10(26)
-28
A-Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps, that accompany the Flood Insurance Study, form the basis for
both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
26) "FLOODPLAIN" - Land which has been or may be covered by flood water during the regional flood.
It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for
regulatory purposes.
27) "FLOODPLAIN ISLAND" - A natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is
surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood.
28) "FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT" - Policy and procedures to insure wise use of floodplains,
including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of
floodplain regulations.
29) "FLOOD PROFILE"- A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water
surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river.
30) "FLOODPROOFING" - Any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to
properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding,
for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage.
31) "FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION"- An elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water
surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. (Also see: FREEBOARD.)
32) "FLOOD STORAGE" - Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into
account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge.
33) "FLOODWAY" - The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the
channel required to carry the regional flood discharge.
34) "FREEBOARD" -A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated
flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those
calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and
floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and
aggregation of the river or stream bed.
35) "HABITABLE STRUCTURE" - Any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human
habitation.
36) "HEARING NOTICE" -Publication or posting meeting the requirements of Ch. 985, Stats. For
appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week (7 days) before the hearing, is required.
For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each week
consecutively, the last at least a week (7 days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may
require additional notice, exceeding these minimums.
37) "HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL"- Damage that could result from flooding that includes
any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
38) "HISTORIC STRUCTURE" -Any structure that is either:
../ Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the
--
27
FLOODPLAIN 49.10(39)
-29
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register,
./ Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district,
./ Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior, or
./ Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
39) "INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT" -A calculated upward rise in the regional flood
elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and
proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not
attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and
contraction coefficients and discharge.
40) "LAND USE"- Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see
DEVELOPMENT.)
41) "MANUFACTURED HOME"- A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a
"mobile recreational vehicle."
42) "MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE" -A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square
feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried
or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is
required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or
carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park
model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles."
43) "MUNICIPALITY" or "MUNICIPAL"- The county, city or village governmental units enacting,
administering and enforcing this zoning ordinance.
44) "NAVD" or "NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM"- Elevations referenced to mean sea
level datum, 1988 adjustment.
45) "NGVD" or "NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM" -Elevations referenced to mean sea
level datum, 1929 adjustment.
46) "NEW CONSTRUCTION" - For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain
zoning regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which
the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
--
27
FLOODPLAIN 49.10(47)
-30
47) "NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE" -An existing lawful structure or building which is not in
conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this ordinance for the area of the
floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district
is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the
structure is nonconforming.)
48) "NONCONFORMING USE" - An existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building
which is not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance for the area of the floodplain which it
occupies. (Such as a residence in the floodway.)
49) "OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW" - Any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such
that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in
regional flood height.
50) "OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP"- That map, adopted and made part of this ordinance, as
described in s. 1.5(2), which has been approved by the Department and FEMA.
51) "OPEN SPACE USE"- Those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving
structures.
52) "ORDINARY HIGHWATER MARK" - The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and
action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction
or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized
characteristic.
53) "PERSON" - An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association,
municipality or state agency.
54) "PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM"- A sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure
with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means
an alternative sewage system approved by the Department of Commerce, including a substitute for
the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a
system located on a different parcel than the structure.
55) "PUBLIC UTILITIES"- Those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as
electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary
sewer and storm sewer.
56) "REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING" - Means base flood waters will not inundate the land
or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters
related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
57) "REGIONAL FLOOD" - A flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have
occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
58) "START OF CONSTRUCTION"- The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured
--
27
FLOODPLAIN 49.10(59)
-31
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
59) "STRUCTURE"- Any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or
temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not
limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
60) "SUBDIVISION"- Has the meaning given ins. 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
61) "SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE" - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized
assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred.
62) "UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP"- Where special conditions affecting a particular property, which
were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks,
frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the
ordinance.
63) "VARIANCE" -An authorization by the board of adjustment or appeals for the construction or
maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards
(not uses) contained in the floodplain zoning ordinance.
64) "VIOLATION" -The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
floodplain zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor
elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
65) "WATERSHED" - The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of
water.
66) "WATER SURFACE PROFILE" - A graphical representation showing the elevation of the water
surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A
water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
67) "WELL"- means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or
other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use. [Ord. 615 08/2011]