Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adoption 12-11-2000]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to § 66.035, Wis. Stats., the ordinances of the Village of Elm Grove
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Village Board of the
Village of Elm Grove, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 335, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Village of Elm Grove," hereinafter
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk and has remained there for use and examination by the public
for at least two weeks, in accordance with § 66.035, Wis. Stats., and until
final action is taken on this ordinance. Upon adoption, such copy of this
ordinance shall be certified to by the Village Clerk, and such certified copy
shall remain on file in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available
to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is
in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Village Board
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the "Code of the Village of Elm Grove" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
reproduced and inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Village Clerk, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published, in the
manner required by law, a copy of this Adoption Ordinance. Sufficient
copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for
inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and publication of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of
a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Village Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are reproduced as
supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Village Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment
of a fee to be set by the Village Board. The Clerk may also arrange for
procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village of
Elm Grove to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not
more than $500, in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adoption Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to October 1, 2000.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the village's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. The Zoning Ordinance and Land Division Ordinance and all
amendments thereto.
O. Any Charter Ordinance adopted at any time and remaining unrepealed
as of the adoption of this Code.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Village of Elm Grove, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except where indicated by histories or
footnotes in the text of the chapters and as provided for in Subsection
B. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Village Board that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. The following changes are made throughout the Code:
(1) References to specific chapters and sections of the Wisconsin
Statutes are revised to reflect the numbering of the statutes as of
the publication of this Code.
(2) References to the "Department of Health and Social Services" are
amended to read "Department of Health and Family Services."
(3) References to the "Zoning Board of Appeals" are amended to read
"Board of Appeals."
(4) References to the "Planning Commission" are amended to read
"Plan Commission."
(5) References to the "Department of Industry, Labor and Human
Relations" are amended to read "Department of Commerce."
(6) References to the "License Committee" are amended to read
"Finance and Licensing Committee."
(7) References to the "Department of Public Works Supervisor" and
"Superintendent of Public Works" are amended to read "Public
Works Director."
§ 1-13 ELM GROVE CODE § 1-15
1:6
§ 1-15. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as in
accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.035.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7

ARTICLE II
General Penalty and Citations
[Adopted 1-10-1977; as amended through 10-9-1995]
§ 1-16. General penalty. [Added 12-11-2000; amended 7-26-2005]
§ 1-17. Citations.
A. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Code, any person who
shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of
such violation, be subject to a penalty which shall be as follows:
(1) First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Code subject to a penalty shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not
less than $50 nor more than $1,000 together with the costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs
of prosecution, shall be subject to the alternate penalties provided
for in § 800.095, Wis. Stats.
(2) Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance
or part of an ordinance of this Code who shall previously have been
convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall,
upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $150 nor more than
$2,000 for each such offense together with the costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be
subject to the alternate penalties provided for in § 800.095, Wis.
Stats.
B. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
C. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the village from maintaining any
action to abate, prevent, or remove a violation of any provision of this
Code.
D. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of
prosecution as ordered by a court, such person shall be subject to the
alternate penalties provided for in § 800.095, Wis. Stats. from time-totime.
A. Authority. Pursuant to the authority of § 66.119(1), Wis. Stats., the
Village Board hereby authorizes the use of a citation to be issued for
violations of ordinances, including ordinances for which a statutory
counterpart exists.
B. Citation. The citation shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the alleged violator.
(2) Factual allegations describing the alleged violation.
(3) The time and place of the offense.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:9
(4) The section of the ordinance violated.
(5) A designation of the offense in such manner as can readily be
understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so.
(6) The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court.
(7) A statement which in essence informs the alleged violator that:
(a) A cash deposit based on the schedule established by this
section may be made which shall be delivered or mailed to the
Clerk of the Municipal Court prior to the time of the scheduled
court appearance.
(b) If a cash deposit is made, no appearance in court is necessary
unless subsequently summoned.
(c) If a cash deposit is made and the alleged violator does not
appear in court, the nonappearance will be deemed a plea of no
contest for which a forfeiture not to exceed the amount of the
deposit is submitted or, if the court does not accept the plea of
no contest, a summons will be issued ordering the alleged
violator to appear in court to answer the complaint.
(d) If no cash deposit is made and the alleged violator does not
appear in court at the time specified, an action may be
commenced to collect the forfeiture up to the maximum
permitted by law.
(e) If the court finds that the violation involves an ordinance that
prohibits conduct that is the same as or similar to conduct
prohibited by state statute punishable by fine or imprisonment,
or both, and that the violation resulted in damage to the
property of or physical injury to a person other than the alleged
violator, the court may summon the alleged violator into court
to determine if restitution shall be ordered under § 800.093,
Wis. Stats. [Added 12-11-2000]
(8) A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit,
the statement which accompanies the citation shall be signed to
indicate that the statement required under Subsection B(7) above
has been read. Such statement shall be sent or brought with the
cash deposit.
(9) Such other information as the village deems necessary.
C. Schedule of deposits.
(1) The schedule of citation deposits as modified by resolution of the
Village Board of Trustees from time-to-time, is established for use
with citations issued under this section. Said schedule is on file in
the Village Clerk's office. [Amended 7-26-2005; 2-26-2008]
§ 1-17 ELM GROVE CODE § 1-17
1:10
(2) Deposits shall be made in cash, money order or certified check to
the Clerk of the Municipal Court, who shall provide a receipt
therefor.
D. Issuance of citations.
(1) Any law enforcement officer may issue citations for enforcement of
any ordinances authorized under this section.
(2) The Village Attorney is hereby authorized to issue citations for
enforcement of all ordinances for which use of a citation is
authorized under this section. [Added 12-11-2000]
(3) The Weed Commissioner and the Village Manager are hereby
authorized to issue citations for enforcement of Chapter 266, Trees
and Vegetation, of the Code of the Village of Elm Grove.
E. Procedure. The provisions of § 66.119(3), Wis. Stats., relating to the
violator's options and procedure on default are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference.
F. Nonexclusivity. Adoption of this section in no way precluded the
adoption of any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any
other law or ordinance relating to the same or any other matter.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:11
Chapter 7
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 25.
Financial procedures — See Ch. 30.
Records — See Ch. 65.
Village Board — See Ch. 80.
§ 1-17 ELM GROVE CODE § 1-17
7:12
ARTICLE I
Building Board
[Adopted 3-22-1995; amended 12-11-2000]
§ 7-1. Building permit approval.1 [Amended 12-21-2004]
§ 7-2. Membership; terms of office.
A. No building permit required under this Code of Ordinances for any
structure shall be issued unless the Building Board has first issued an
explanatory decision consisting of a determination that, when erected,
the proposed exterior architectural appeal and functional plan shall not
be either:
(1) So at variance with, nor so similar to the exterior architectural
appeal and functional plan of structures under construction or
existing in the immediate neighborhood, as to tend to pose an
adverse impact on aesthetic values of the immediate neighborhood
within the applicable zoning district; or
(2) So at variance with the intended character of the applicable district
established by Chapter 335, Zoning, as may be amended or
supplemented, as to tend to pose an adverse impact on the
aesthetic values of the immediate neighborhood within the
applicable zoning district.
B. The determination required in § 7-1A shall require no less than a
majority vote.
C. Before the determination required in § 7-1A can be rendered, the
following shall first occur:
(1) The Building Board must view the site of the proposed structure;
and
(2) The Building Board shall have examined the application papers for
a building permit which shall include an exterior elevation of the
proposed structure.
A. Members. The Building Board shall consist of nine residents of the
Village appointed by the Village President for staggered terms of three
years each, subject to approval by a majority of the full Village Board. At
least one of its members shall be a Trustee of the Village Board, and the
term of office of such Trustee member shall be for a period of one year
commencing upon the occurrence of the latter of the date upon which
said Trustee's term of office as Trustee commenced pursuant to
§ 61.23(2), Wis. Stats., or the date upon which said Trustee was duly
appointed a member of the Building Board pursuant to this section.
1. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 106, Building Construction.
§ 7-1 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 7-2
7:13
§ 7-3. Hearings.
The Zoning Administrator of the Village shall submit to the Board for
consideration all applications for building permits which he or she has
found comply in all respects with all other ordinances of the Village. The
Board may, if it desires, hear the applicant for the building permit in
question and/or the owner of the lot on which it is proposed to erect
the structure in question, together with any other persons desiring to be
heard, whether residents or property owners, giving such notice of hearing
consistent with state open meeting laws.2 Such hearing may be adjourned
from time to time, not to exceed 30 days.
§ 7-4. Filing of decisions. [Amended 12-21-2004]
B. Nonofficial member. The President shall appoint the Chairperson. The
Chairperson of such Building Board may appoint, with approval of such
Building Board, one nonofficial member to such Board who is a person
engaged in business in the Village and not a citizen thereof. Such
nonofficial member may participate in all discussions of such Building
Board and shall be a nonvoting member thereof. The term of office of
such nonofficial member shall be one year or until his/her successor
shall have been appointed and qualified.
A. The Building Board shall file a written decision in the office of the
Zoning Administrator no later than 10 business days after the close of a
hearing.
B. Following the filing of a written explanatory decision consisting of a
determination, the Zoning Administrator shall send a copy to the
Building Inspector and the Building Inspector shall send a copy to the
applicant with the building permit.
C. In all instances the decision of the Building Board must contain
explanatory findings with respect to these two questions:
(1) Will the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the
proposed structure be so at variance with or so similar to the
exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of structures
under construction or existing in the immediate neighborhood, as
to tend to pose an adverse impact on aesthetic values in the
immediate neighborhood within the applicable zoning district?
(2) Will the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the
proposed structure be so at variance with the intended character of
the applicable district as stated in Chapter 335, Zoning, as may be
amended or supplemented, as to tend to pose an adverse impact on
the aesthetic values in the immediate neighborhood within the
applicable zoning district?
2. Editor's Note: See §§ 19.81 to 19.98, Wis. Stats.
§ 7-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 7-5
7:14
§ 7-5. Appeals.
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Building Board may file an
appeal to the Board of Appeals within 30 days from the filing of the
Building Board's decision with the Zoning Administrator.
B. On appeal, factual findings by the Building Board may be overturned
only when, upon examination of the entire record, the evidence,
including the inferences therefrom, is such that a reasonable person
could not have reached the same decision from the evidence and its
inferences. An interpretation of Chapter 335, Zoning, by the Building
Board shall be upheld on appeal if it is reasonable and if it is not
contrary to the clear meaning of the chapter.
§ 7-5 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 7-5
7:15

ARTICLE II
Board of Police and Fire Commissioners
[Adopted 4-12-1971; as amended through 2-8-1982]
§ 7-6. Creation; membership; terms of office.
The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners is hereby created. The Board of
Police and Fire Commissioners shall consist of five citizens appointed by the
Village President, subject to confirmation by the Village Board, and serving
such terms of office as required by Wisconsin statutes.
§ 7-7. Powers and duties.
The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall:
§ 7-8. References to statutes.
The above references to the Wisconsin statutes are to §§ 61.65, 62.13(1),
(3), (4), (5), (7), (7n), (8) and (12) and 101.14(2)(a).
A. Have the authority to appoint and remove the Police and/or Fire Chief
in accordance with Wisconsin statutes.
B. Administer examinations and prepare eligible lists for the appointment
and promotion of uniformed personnel of the Police and Fire
Departments, in accordance with Wisconsin statutes.
C. Serve as an appeals board in cases of dismissals and suspensions of
Police and Fire Department uniformed personnel.
D. Have such other authority and duties as prescribed by Wisconsin
statutes.
§ 7-6 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 7-8
7:17

ARTICLE III
Plan Commission
[Adopted 12-6-1982; as amended through 5-27-2003]
§ 7-9. Establishment; membership.
The Village Plan Commission is hereby established. The Commission shall
consist of the Village President, who shall be its presiding officer, a Village
Trustee and five Village residents of recognized experience and
qualification. Additionally, the Village President may appoint, with the
approval of the Plan Commission, one person engaged in business in the
Village but not a resident thereof as a nonofficial member of the
Commission who may participate in all discussions of the Commission but
who shall be a nonvoting member thereof.
§ 7-10. Terms of office.
§ 7-11. Reports.
The Village Trustee who is elected to the Plan Commission shall submit a
report of each Plan Commission meeting at the first regularly scheduled
Village Board meeting thereafter.
§ 7-12. Meetings and hearings.
A. The Trustee member of the Commission shall serve for a term of one
year and be elected by a 2/3 vote of the Village Board each April. The
term of the Trustee member shall commence on the occurrence of the
latter of the date upon which said Trustee's term as Trustee
commenced pursuant to § 61.23(2), Wis. Stats., and the date upon
which said Trustee was duly appointed a member of the Plan
Commission pursuant to this section.
B. Citizen members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Village
President and be approved by the Village Board. Citizen members shall
serve for a period of three years, and their terms shall expire on the
first day of May of the final year of their term.
C. The term of office of any nonofficial member shall be one year or until
his or her successor shall have been appointed and qualified.
A. All meetings of the Commission shall be held at the Village Hall unless
otherwise announced in the public notice of the meeting and shall be
open to the public. Meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call
of the Chairperson or at such other times as the Village Board may
request.
B. Public hearings may be held before the Plan Commission alone, as a
body, and its recommendation subsequently submitted to the Village
Board for approval and action.
§ 7-9 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 7-13
7:19
§ 7-13. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Commission shall be to:
A. Keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and
determinations, which record shall be a public record.
B. Perform such duties as are delegated to the Commission by any
ordinances of the village.
C. Recommend to the Village President or Village Board programs for
public improvements and the financing thereof.
D. Parks and playgrounds.
(1) When requested by the Village Board, the Plan Commission may
delegate to the Recreation and Park Committee jurisdiction to
recommend updates to the master plan for the Village Center for
final approval by the Village Board.
(2) Recommendations to the Village Board with respect to any
updating recommendations made pursuant to Subsection D(1)
above shall be reviewed and submitted by the Plan Commission.
E. Advise regarding the planning and protection of trees and other
improvements along highways and on public property.
F. Report on matters referred to it by the Village Board or other public
bodies or officers.
G. Approve any proposed subdivision and inspect and recommend as to
the zoning thereof before acceptance by the Village Board.
H. Recommend to the Village Board with respect to amendment and
addition to Chapter 106, Building Construction, and Chapter 335,
Zoning.
I. Define the limits of zoning districts upon the request of the Board of
Appeals when a request for interpretation of the Zoning Map is made
due to district boundaries being undeterminable from the Zoning Map.
J. Review and recommend any amendment to the Official Map of the
village.
K. Make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the
village in accordance with the provisions of § 62.23(2), Wis. Stats.
L. Review and recommend to the Village Board of Trustees the adoption
and amendment of design guidelines pursuant to § 62.23, Wis. Stats.
M. In performance of its function, enter upon any land and make
examination thereof.
N. At its discretion, make such recommendations to the Village Board as it
deems advisable.
§ 7-13 ELM GROVE CODE § 7-13
7:20
§ 7-14. Appeals.
Unless it is specified that the appeal of a Plan Commission decision is
to be taken to the Board of Appeals, appeals from any order of the Plan
Commission denying any application presented to it for approval may be
taken up by any person aggrieved thereby to the Village Board. Such
appeals shall be taken within a period of 10 days after the making of such
order by filing with the Village Clerk a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof, together with a filing fee as may from time to time be
determined by the Village Board. The Village Clerk shall forthwith set a
date for hearing of such appeal and prepare an appeal file containing all
the papers in such matter. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof and decide the same within
a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by an
agent or attorney.
O. With regard to floodplain zoning under Chapter 335, Zoning:
(1) Review and act upon all proposed amendments to the floodplain
zoning ordinance.
(2) Maintain a complete public record of all proceedings.
(3) Advise the Board of Appeals and the Village Board concerning
floodplain zoning both upon request and upon its own initiative.
§ 7-13 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 7-14
7:21

ARTICLE IV
Library Board
[Adopted 10-9-1995]
§ 7-15. Membership.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 43.54, Wis. Stats., the Library Board for
the Village of Elm Grove shall consist of seven members appointed by the
Village President subject to approval by the Board of Trustees. One member
of the Library Board shall be a school district administrator of the Elmbrook
School District or the administrator's representative. Not more than one
member of the Library Board may also have concurrent membership on the
Village Board of Trustees.
§ 7-16. Liaison to Village Board.
The Village President, subject to approval by the Board of Trustees, may
also designate a member of the Board of Trustees to serve in the capacity of
liaison on behalf of the Village Board of Trustees to the Library Board who
does not possess any voting rights on the Library Board in that capacity. A
Village Board Trustee appointed as a Library Board member under § 7-15
above may also concurrently serve in the capacity of Village Board of
Trustees liaison.
§ 7-17. Residency requirement; terms of office; vacancies.
Members of the Library Board, other than the school district representative,
shall be residents of the Village and shall be appointed for a three-year term
commencing on May 1 of the first year of their term. Vacancies shall be
filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as regular appointments are
made.
§ 7-18. Quorum.
A majority of the membership of the Library Board shall constitute a
quorum; provided, however, that the Library Board may, by regulation,
provide that three or more members shall constitute a quorum.
§ 7-19. Officers.
Members of the Library Board shall meet prior to the last week in May of
each year to elect from the membership a President and such other officers
as they deem necessary.
§ 7-15 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 7-19
7:23

ARTICLE V
Board of Review
[Adopted 7-14-1958; repealed and recreated 8-14-2000]
§ 7-20. Membership.
The President, the Clerk and all members of the Board of Trustees shall
constitute the Board of Review of the Village of Elm Grove. To properly
constitute the Board of Review, the Clerk, on or before the Board's first
meeting, shall certify to the Village Board of Trustees that the President, or
another member of the Board of Review designated by the President, has
attended a Wisconsin Department of Revenue training session within the
last two years.
§ 7-21. Meetings.
A. Meetings. The Board shall meet at least once annually at a time
designated by resolution of the Village Board. Except as provided in
Subsection B below, the Board shall meet at least two hours during the
first meeting. The Assessor shall be present. The meetings shall be
publicly held and open to all citizens at all times.
B. Adjournments. If the assessment roll is not completed at the time of the
first meeting, the Board shall adjourn for the time necessary to
complete the roll. The Board shall post a written notice on the outer
door of its meeting place stating the time to which its first meeting is
adjourned. After the first meeting, the Board shall reconvene as
necessary to complete its duties under § 70.47, Wis. Stats.
C. Procedures at the first meeting. At its first meeting, the Board shall:
(1) Receive the assessment roll and the Clerk's sworn statements.
(2) Examine, and allow taxpayers to examine, the assessment roll. The
Board shall correct all apparent errors in descriptions or
computations and shall add all omitted property.
(3) Schedule times for hearing written objections received at, or prior
to, the Board's first meeting.
(4) Grant waivers to those objectors who appear in person, file a
written objection and show good cause why they did not file a
written or oral objection with the Clerk 48 hours prior to the
Board's first meeting.
(5) Hear written objections, provided the Board notified the property
owner and the Assessor at least 48 hours prior to the first meeting
that it would hear the objection, unless the Assessor and the
property owner waive the forty-eight-hour notice requirement.
D. Procedures after the first meeting.
§ 7-20 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 7-21
7:25
§ 7-22. Proceedings.
(1) If the Board does not hear an objection of assessment as its first
meeting, the Board shall provide 48 hours' notice of the time it will
hear the objection to the following persons:
(a) The Assessor;
(b) Those persons who filed a written or oral objection with the
Board's Clerk 48 hours prior to the Board's first meeting; or
(c) Those persons who appeared and filed a written objection at
the Board's first meeting and showed good cause why they
could not file an objection 48 hours prior to the Board's first
meeting.
(2) The Board may hear objections without giving 48 hours' notice if
the Assessor and the objector agree to waive the notice
requirement. If an objector fails to provide the Clerk with written
or oral notice of intent to object 48 hours prior to the Board's first
meeting and fails to request a waiver under Subsections C(4) or
D(1)(c) above but appears before the Board at any time up to the
end of the fifth day the Board is in session, or up to the end of the
final day if the session is less than five days, and files a written
objection and provides evidence of exceptional circumstances, the
Board may waive the notice requirements and hear the objection.
A. Assessments. The Board shall not raise or lower the assessment of any
property except after hearing as provided in § 7-23B below.
B. Removal of members.
(1) Board members shall remove themselves from hearing an objection
if any of the following conditions apply:
(a) Whenever a qualified objector requests a member's removal,
provided the objector does not request more than one
member's removal.
(b) Whenever a member has a conflict of interest.
(c) Whenever a member has a bias in regard to the objection or if a
party requests the removal of a member for bias and submits
the party's request for removal with an affidavit stating the
basis for and nature of the bias.
(d) Whenever a member would violate § 19.59, Wis. Stats., Code of
Ethics.
(2) If a member or members are removed under this subsection, the
Board may replace the member(s) or the Board's remaining
members may hear the objection, provided that no fewer than three
members may hear the objection.
§ 7-21 ELM GROVE CODE § 7-22
7:26
§ 7-23. Objections to assessments.
C. Voting. All of the Board's determinations shall be by roll call vote. A
majority of the members of the Board present at the meeting to make
the determination shall constitute a quorum for purposes of making
such determination, and a majority vote of the quorum shall constitute
the determination. A Board member may not be counted in determining
a quorum and may not vote concerning any determination unless,
concerning such determination, such member:
(1) Attended the hearing of the evidence; or
(2) Received the transcript of the hearing no less than five days prior
to the meeting and read the transcript; or
(3) Received a mechanical recording or the evidence no less than five
days prior to the meeting and listened to such recording; or
(4) Received a copy of a summary and all exceptions thereto no less
than five days prior to the meeting and read such summary and
exceptions.
D. Minutes. The Clerk shall keep a record in the minute book of all
proceedings of the Board. After the Board of Review has completed its
determinations, the Clerk shall prepare a summary of the proceedings
and determinations as required by § 70.47(17), Wis. Stats.
A. How taken.
(1) At least 48 hours before the Board's first meeting, persons
contesting the amount of an assessment must provide written or
oral notice to the Clerk of the person's intent to object. Persons
contesting an assessment by this method must also provide the
Clerk with notice whether the person will ask that a member of the
Board be removed for bias, and if so which member, and the
objector's reasonable estimate of the length of time for the
objector's hearing.
(2) No person scheduled to appear before the Board may contact or
provide information to a Board member about that person's
objection except at a session of the Board.
(3) A person contesting an assessment before the Board must specify
in writing the person's estimate of the value of the land and
improvements that are the subject of the person's objection and
specify the information that the person used to arrive at that
estimate.
(4) No person contesting an assessment may appear before the Board
if the valuation was made by the Assessor or the objector using the
income method, unless the person supplies the Assessor all of the
information about income and expenses that the Assessor requests.
§ 7-22 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 7-23
7:27
Whenever the Assessor requests or obtains income and expense
information, the Assessor shall hold the information on a
confidential basis, except that the Assessor may reveal the
information in the discharge of his or her duties or the duties of the
Board. Any income and expense information provided is not subject
to the right of inspection and copying under § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
(5) No person shall be allowed to appear before the Board, to testify to
the Board by telephone or to contest the amount of any assessment
of real or personal property if the person has refused a reasonable
written request by certified mail from the Assessor to view the
person's property.
(6) This Subsection A shall not limit the Board's right to hear
objections pursuant to methods specified elsewhere in this article.
B. Hearings.
(1) The Board shall hear upon oath all persons who appear before it in
relation to the assessment. The Board shall hear upon oath, by
telephone, all ill or disabled persons who present to the Board a
letter from a physician, surgeon or osteopath that confirms their
illness or disability. The Clerk shall swear all persons testifying
before the Board or by telephone.
(2) The objector or the objector's representatives and the objector's
witnesses shall be heard first.
(3) The Board may examine under oath such persons as it believes
have knowledge of the value of the property.
(4) The Board may, and upon request of the Assessor shall, compel the
attendance of witnesses, except for objectors who testify by
telephone. The Board may, and upon request of the Assessor shall,
compel the production of all books, inventories, appraisals,
documents and other data which may throw light upon the value of
property.
(5) The Assessor shall provide the Board with specific information
about the validity of the valuation to which objection is made and
shall provide the Board with information that the Assessor used to
determine the valuation.
(6) All proceedings shall be taken by a recording device. The Clerk
shall keep a list of persons speaking in the order in which they
speak. The Board may order that the recording be transcribed, and
in the case of an appeal or other court proceedings the Board shall
cause it to be transcribed.
§ 7-23 ELM GROVE CODE § 7-24
7:28
§ 7-24. Decisions.
The Board shall presume that the Assessor's valuation is correct. The
objector may rebut that presumption by sufficiently showing that the
valuation is incorrect.
A. Correction of assessments. From the evidence before it, the Board shall
determine whether the Assessor's assessment is correct. If the
assessment is too high or too low, the Board shall raise or lower the
assessment accordingly and shall state on the record the correct
assessment and that the assessment is reasonable in light of all of the
relevant evidence that the Board received. In the event of a tie vote, the
Assessor's assessment shall be sustained.
B. Assessments by the Board. If the Board has reason to believe, upon
examination of the roll and other pertinent information, that other
property, the assessment of which is not complained of, is assessed
above or below the general average of the assessment of the taxation
district or is omitted, the Board shall:
(1) Notify the owner, agent or possessor of such property of its
intention to review such assessment or place it on the assessment
roll and of the time and placed fixed for such hearing in time to be
heard before the Board in relation thereto, provided the residence
of such owner, agent or possessor is known to any member of the
Board or to the Assessor.
(2) Fix the day, hour and place at which such matter will be heard.
(3) Subpoena witnesses, except objectors who may testify by
telephone, as it deems necessary to testify concerning the value of
such property. The expense incurred shall be a charge against the
municipality.
(4) At the time appointed, proceed to review the matter.
C. Notice of decision. Prior to final adjournment, the Board shall provide
the objector, or the appropriate party, notice by personal delivery or by
mail, return receipt required, of the amount of the assessment as
finalized by the Board and an explanation of appeal rights and
procedures under § 70.47(12), Wis. Stats.
§ 7-24 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 7-24
7:29
Chapter 8
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 8-1. Findings.
The Village Board hereby finds, determines and declares that the
undertaking of programs and projects for blight elimination and prevention,
slum clearance and prevention, urban renewal and redevelopment, and
community development and redevelopment (collectively, "qualified
redevelopment projects") will encourage well-planned, integrated, stable,
safe and healthful neighborhoods, the provisions of healthful homes, a
decent living environment, adequate places of employment for the people of
the Village and an increase in the general property tax base of the Village.
§ 8-2. Declaration of need.
The Village Board hereby finds, determines, and declares that there exists
within the Village a need for qualified redevelopment projects, and that
creation of a CDA in the Village will serve the public interest.
§ 8-3. Creation of the Community Development Authority.
A. Pursuant to §§ 66.1339 and 66.1335 of the Wisconsin Statutes, the
Village Board hereby creates a CDA in the Village, which authority shall
be known as the "Community Development Authority of the Village of
Elm Grove, Wisconsin." Said authority (the Authority) shall be a
separate body politic for the purpose of carrying out qualified
redevelopment projects, and shall have all powers, duties and functions
of community development authorities contained in § 66.1335 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, as amended from time to time. The Authority shall
also act as the agent of the Village in planning and carrying out
community development programs and activities approved by the
Village Board and the Village President under the Federal Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974. The Authority is not, however,
authorized to act as agent of the Village to perform the acts which may
otherwise be performed by the Plan Commission pursuant to §§ 66.1301
through 66.1329, Wis. Stats. [Amended 3-27-2012]
B. The Authority is only authorized to undertake projects relating to blight
elimination, slum clearance, urban renewal and redevelopment
programs proceeding under §§ 66.1301 to 66.1329, 66.1331, 66.1333,
66.1337 or 66.1105 Wis. Stats., as expressly provided by a resolution of
the Board of Trustees on a project-by-project basis. [Amended
3-27-2012]
C. The Authority shall have no funding authority except for such funds
allocated on a case-by-case basis by the Board of Trustees or monies
received from borrowings or bond issuances by the Authority that are
first expressly authorized by the Board of Trustees on a case-by-case
§ 7-24 ELM GROVE CODE § 8-3
7:30
§ 8-4. Bylaws to be adopted.
As a means of more clearly setting forth its powers and rules of procedure,
the Community Development Authority shall adopt a set of bylaws which
shall, among other things, establish the general policy duties and provide
for the appointment of the Chairperson, Treasurer, Secretary, Executive
Director. The initial bylaws and subsequent amendments must also be
approved by a majority vote of the Village Board.
§ 8-5. Certification; appointment and terms of commissioners.
The Village Board hereby authorizes and directs the Village Clerk,
immediately upon adoption of this chapter, to certify a copy of this chapter,
and transmit such copy to the Village President. The Village Board hereby
authorizes and directs the Village President, upon receipt of this chapter,
to recommend appointment of seven resident persons as commissioners
of the Authority having the qualifications required under § 66.1335, Wis.
Stats., which appointments shall be subject to approval by a 2/3 majority
vote of the Village Board. Two of said commissioners shall be members of
the Village Board and shall serve on the Authority during their respective
terms of office as Village Board members. The initial appointments of the
five non-Village Board commissioners shall be for the following terms:
two commissioners for one year, and one commissioner each for terms of
two, three and four years. Thereafter, the terms of the non-Village Board
commissioners shall be four years and until their successors are appointed
and qualified. Any vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
basis. Whenever the Authority desires to undertake a project, it shall
submit a written proposal to the Board of Trustees for allocation of
funds to investigate the proposal and implement only such proposals as
are approved by the Board of Trustees.
D. The Village Manager shall serve as the Executive Director of the
Authority.
E. The Executive Director shall identify and estimate the need of the
Authority to engage expertise to assist the Authority or Village staff, the
Plan Commission and the Board of Trustees in reviewing an application
submitted or proposed to the Authority. The Executive Director shall
inform the applicant of the requirement and the expectation that the
applicant will pay for all or part of costs incurred by the Authority or the
Village in considering, evaluating or pursuing a project proposed by an
applicant. The amounts that the applicant will be required to pay by
advance deposit and/or by reimbursement prior to the taking up of the
proposal by the Authority or the Village or their staff or consultants
shall be confirmed by the Executive Director, subject to review by the
commissioners of the Authority at the request of an applicant. These
amounts shall be due and payable by the applicant to the Authority or
Village within the timetable established by the Executive Director.
§ 8-3 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 8-6
7:31
§ 8-6. Budget and fee schedules.
The Authority shall propose an annual budget to the Village Board with
associated professional services fee schedules for review and approval. Any
approved budget and fee schedule may be amended from time to time at the
sole discretion of the Village Board in accordance with § 65.90(5)(a), Wis.
Stats.
§ 8-7. Commissioners' reimbursable expenses.
Commissioners shall be reimbursed their actual and necessary expenses
including local travel expenses, except for meeting attendance at the Village
Hall, incurred in the discharge of their duties as provided under
§ 66.1335(2)(d), Wis. Stats.
§ 8-8. Power and duty of Board of Trustees.
At any time, the Board of Trustees may, by a vote of 2/3 of the members of
the Board, amend this chapter so as to alter or abolish the duties, authority
or existence of the Community Development Authority; provided, however,
that the Board of Trustees first make legally sufficient alternatives available
for the satisfaction of any contractual obligations previously incurred by the
Community Development Authority.
Chapter 12
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 12-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Ch. 755, Wis. Stats., and as hereafter
modified, the Municipal Court for the Village of Elm Grove, Wisconsin is
authorized.
§ 12-2. Municipal Judge. [Amended 10-26-2010]
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 755.01, Wis. Stats., the office of
Judge of the Municipal Court for the Village of Elm Grove, Wisconsin is
authorized.
A. Election term. Pursuant to § 755.02, Wis. Stats., amended June 1. 2010,
the Municipal Judge shall be elected at large at the spring election for a
term of four years commencing on May 1 in the year the Judge is
elected. A permanent vacancy in the office of Municipal Judge shall be
filled as provided in § 8.50(4)(fm), Wis. Stats.
B. Salary. The Municipal Judge shall receive a salary and expense
reimbursement as determined from time to time by the Village Board
which shall be in lieu of fees and costs. The salary may be increased by
the Village Board before the start of the second or subsequent year of
§ 8-6 ELM GROVE CODE § 12-2
7:32
§ 12-3. Jurisdiction.
service of the term of the judge, but shall not be decreased during a
term.
C. Oath and bond. The Municipal Judge shall, prior to acting in the
capacity of judge, execute and file with the Clerk of the Circuit Court for
Waukesha County the oath prescribed by § 757.02(1), Wis. Stats., and a
bond in the penal sum of $1,000.
A. The Municipal Judge shall have such state-wide jurisdiction as provided
by § 755.05, Wis. Stats., and exclusive jurisdiction over actions in which
a forfeiture(s) is sought for violations of municipal ordinances, except
as otherwise provided in § 755.045, Wis. Stats. [Amended
10-26-2010]
B. The Municipal Judge may punish for contempt pursuant to § 800.12,
Wis. Stats. For purposes of this chapter, the term "contempt of court"
shall mean intentional:
(1) Misconduct in the presence of the Court which interferes with a
Court proceeding or with the administration of justice or which
impairs the respect due the Court;
(2) Disobedience, resistance or obstruction of the authority, process or
order of a Court;
(3) Refusal to appear, be sworn or answer a question; or
(4) Refusal to produce a record, document or other object.
C. The Municipal Judge may impose a forfeiture for contempt under
Subsection B in an amount not to exceed $50 or, upon nonpayment of
the forfeiture, penalty assessment under § 165.87, Wis. Stats., jail
assessment under § 302.46, Wis. Stats., crime laboratories and drug
law enforcement assessments under § 165.755, Wis. Stats., and any
applicable domestic abuse assessment under § 973.055(1), Wis. Stats.,
a jail sentence not to exceed seven days. [Amended 12-11-2000]
D. Jurisdiction over juveniles aged 12 or over.
(1) Pursuant to § 938.17(2), Wis. Stats., the Municipal Court shall have
jurisdiction over juveniles aged 12 or over for violations of
municipal ordinances. The citation procedures described in Ch.
800, Wis. Stats., shall be used.
(2) If a citation is issued to a juvenile, the issuing agency shall, within
seven days, notify the juvenile's parent or guardian.
(3) The penalties imposed against such juvenile shall be as provided in
§§ 938.343 and 938.344, Wis. Stats., as modified from time to time.
§ 12-2 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 12-3
7:33
§ 12-4. Warrants.
The Municipal Judge may issue civil warrants to enforce matters which are
under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court. The Municipal Judge is also
authorized to issue inspection warrants under §§ 66.122 and 66.123, Wis.
Stats.
§ 12-5. Restitution.
The Municipal Judge may order the payment of restitution for violations of
ordinances that prohibit conduct that is the same as or similar to conduct
prohibited by state statute punishable by fine or imprisonment or both. The
judge shall use the restitution procedure under § 800.093, Wis. Stats.
§ 12-6. Appointment of guardian ad litem or social worker.
[Amended 10-26-2010]
The Municipal Court shall appoint a guardian ad litem or social worker
certified or licensed under § 457, Wis. Stats., for any defendant that the
court has reason to believe lacks substantial mental capacity to understand
the proceedings or assist in his or her defense. The person appointed
under this paragraph shall assist the court in making a determination
concerning the defendants mental capacity. If the court determines that the
defendant lacks the mental capacity to understand the proceedings or assist
in his or her defense, the court shall suspend the proceedings. The cost of
the guardian ad litem or social worker shall be paid by the municipality
pursuant to § 800.04 (1) (bm), Wis. Stats.
§ 12-7. Procedures.
(4) For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates
a condition of a dispositional order of the Municipal Court entered
under § 938.343 or 938.344, Wis. Stats., the Municipal Court is
authorized to impose any sanction set forth in § 938.355, Wis.
Stats., as modified from time to time, in accordance with the
provisions of that statute.
A. The Municipal Court for the Village of Elm Grove shall be open as
determined by order of the Municipal Judge.
B. The Municipal Judge shall keep his or her office and hold court in the
Village Hall, 13600 Juneau Boulevard.
C. The procedure in Municipal Court for the Village of Elm Grove shall be
as provided by this chapter and state law, including, but not excluding
because of enumeration, Chs. 66, 345, 755, 800 and 938, Wis. Stats.
D. All forfeitures, fees, penalty assessments, domestic abuse assessments
and costs paid to the Municipal Court under a judgment before the
Municipal Judge shall be paid to the Municipal Treasurer within seven
days after receipt of the money by the Municipal Judge or other court
§ 12-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 12-7
7:34
Chapter 19
ELECTIONS
§ 19-1. Method of conduct. [Amended 12-11-2000]
All Village elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chs. 5
through 12, Wis. Stats.
§ 19-2. Poll hours.
Pursuant to § 6.78, Wis. Stats., the poll hours for all elections in the Village
of Elm Grove shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
§ 19-3. Election wards. [Amended 12-11-2000]
personnel. At the time of the payment, the Municipal Judge shall report
to the Municipal Treasurer the title of the action, the offense for which
a forfeiture was imposed and the total amount of the forfeiture, fees,
penalty assessments, domestic abuse assessments and costs, if any. The
Treasurer shall disburse the fees as provided in § 814.65(1), Wis. Stats.
All jail assessments and crime laboratories and drug law enforcement
assessments paid to the Municipal Court under a judgment before
the Municipal Judge shall be paid to the County Treasurer within 31
days after receipt of the money by the Municipal Judge or other court
personnel. [Amended 12-11-2000]
E. The Municipal Judge is hereby granted the authority to order, in his or
her discretion, an extension of the time of payment of any judgment
pursuant to the provisions of § 800.09, Wis. Stats., and, in the event of
nonpayment, to take any action authorized under § 800.095, Wis. Stats.
A. There shall be eight wards in the Village of Elm Grove, each of which is
identified as follows:
(1) Ward 1. Ward 1 shall include the area bounded by the following:
starting at west corner of Gebhardt Road on the south side to
corner of Gebhardt Road and Highland Drive. 1675 to 825
Highland Drive (west side of street). 14800 to 14980 Juneau Blvd.
(north side of street). 1185 to 1105 Lone Tree Road (west side of
road). 15170 Terrace Court. 705 Terrace Drive. 15380 to 15220
Watertown Plank Road (west side of street). 660 to 1680 Pilgrim
Parkway. [Amended 7-11-2001]
(2) Ward 2. Ward 2 shall include the area bounded by the following:
Corner of Gebhardt Road at Pilgrim Parkway to north east corner of
Gebhardt Road at Highland on the north side of Gebhardt Road.
1730 to 1580 Pilgrim Parkway. Southwest corner of North Avenue
to Soo Railroad line. Soo Railroad line from southeast corner of
railroad and North Avenue to corner of Soo Railroad and Juneau
§ 12-7 ELECTIONS § 19-3
19:35
Blvd. Corner of Soo Railroad line and Juneau Blvd west to Juneau
Blvd. and Highland Drive. [Amended 7-11-2001]
(3) Ward 3. Ward 3 shall include the area bounded by 14949 to 13805
Juneau Blvd. (south side of street). 1160 to 1100 Lone Tree (east
side of street). 15175 Terrace Court. 1040 to 740 Terrace Drive
(east side of street). 15180 to 13550 Watertown Plank Road (north
side of street). Elm Grove Road - Juneau to Watertown Plank (west
side of street).
(4) Ward 4. Ward 4 shall include the area bounded by the following:
15285 to 13545 Watertown Plank Road (south side of street). 945 to
545 Elm Grove Road (west side of street). 15350 to 13200 W.
Bluemound Road.
(5) Ward 5. Ward 5 shall include the area bounded by the following:
940 to 500 Elm Grove Road (east side of street). 13040 to 12500 W.
Bluemound Road. 124th Street from W. Bluemound Road to Juneau
Blvd. 13475 Watertown Plank Road to 124th Street (the south side
of street).
(6) Ward 6. Ward 6 shall include the area bounded by the following:
13455 to 12425 Elmhurst Parkway (south side of street). 1500 to
1000 Legion Drive. 13605 to 1300 Juneau Blvd. 13500 to 12400
Watertown Plank Road (north side of street). 124th Street from
Juneau Blvd. north to North Avenue.
(7) Ward 7. Ward 7 shall include the area bounded by the following:
North Avenue from the Soo railroad line to Arrowhead Court. Soo
railroad line on the west side from North Avenue to Juneau Blvd.
Juneau Blvd. and Soo railroad line to Legion Drive. 1605 Legion
Drive on west side of street to 13200 Gremoor. 1835 Arrowhead to
North Avenue on west side of street.
(8) Ward 8. Ward 8 shall include the area bounded by the following:
North Ave. and Arrowhead Court to 124th Street. 2155 to 1625
124th Street. 13450 Elmhurst to 124th Street. 1700 Arrowhead
Court north to North Avenue. 1610 Legion Drive north on west side
of street.
B. Wards in the Village of Elm Grove shall be combined as follows:
(1) Wards 1 and 2.
(2) Wards 3 and 4.
(3) Wards 5 and 6.
(4) Wards 7 and 8.
C. Combined wards shall use common ballots and voting machines, and
separate returns shall not be maintained for the combined wards at any
§ 19-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 19-3
19:36
§ 19-4. Polling place. [Added 7-11-2001]
All elections shall be held at Village Hall, 13600 Juneau Blvd., Elm Grove,
Wisconsin.
Chapter 22
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 33.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 91.
Emergency medical services — See Ch. 137.
§ 22-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — The preparation for and the carrying out
of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military
forces are primarily responsible, to minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile
action or by fire, flood or other natural causes.
§ 22-2. Director of Emergency Management.
The office of the Director of Emergency Management is hereby created. The
Director shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation
by the Village Board, and shall receive such salary as may be authorized by
the Village Board. The Director shall take and file an official oath.
§ 22-3. Deputy and assistant directors.
Deputy and assistant directors may be appointed by the Director, subject to
the approval of the Village Board, as may be deemed necessary, and such
appointees shall receive such compensation as may be determined by the
Village Board.
§ 22-4. Duties of Director.
election, but separate ballots shall be maintained for each separate
ballot required under §§ 5.53 to 5.64, Wis. Stats.
D. Wards are also defined on a ward map on file in the Village Clerk's
office.
A. The Director shall be the executive head of the emergency management
organization and shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
§ 19-3 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 22-4
22:37
§ 22-5. Utilization of village services and facilities.
In preparing and executing the emergency management plan, the Director
shall utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the existing
departments and agencies of the village to the maximum extent practicable.
The officers and personnel of all such departments and agencies are
directed to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the
Director.
§ 22-6. Declaration and regulation of emergencies.
administration and operation of the emergency management
organization subject to the direction and control of the Village
President and the Village Board. The Director shall coordinate all
activities for emergency management within the village and shall
maintain liaison and cooperate with emergency management agencies
and organizations of other political subdivisions and of the state and
federal government and shall participate in county and state
emergency management activities upon request. The Director shall
have such additional authority, duties and responsibilities as are
authorized by this section and as may from time to time be required by
the Village Board.
B. The Director or his or her designee shall prepare a comprehensive
general plan for the emergency management of the village and shall
present such plan to the Village Board for its approval. When the Village
Board has approved the plan by resolution, it shall be the duty of all
municipal agencies and all emergency management forces of the village
to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved.
The plan may be modified in like manner.
A. Whenever necessary to meet an emergency for which adequate
regulations have not been adopted by the Village Board, the Village
President and, in his or her absence, the Director of Emergency
Management may by proclamation promulgate and enforce such
orders, rules and regulations relating to the conduct of persons and the
use of property as shall be necessary to protect the public peace, health
and safety and preserve lives and property and to ensure the
cooperation necessary in emergency management activities. Such
proclamations shall be posted in three public places and may be
rescinded by the Village Board by resolution at any time.
B. Upon the declaration by the Governor, by the Village President or
Director of Emergency Management in the absence of the Village
President or by the Village Board of a state of emergency, the Director
of Emergency Management shall issue all necessary proclamations as
to the existence of such state of emergency and shall issue such
disaster warnings or alerts as shall be required in the emergency
management plan.
§ 22-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 22-6
22:38
§ 22-7. Interference with village officials; penalty. [Amended
7-26-2005]
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any
member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of
any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to this chapter or to do
any act forbidden by any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to
authority contained in this chapter. For a violation of any of the provisions
of this section he or she shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16
of this Code, except that the forfeiture shall not be less than $100.
Chapter 25
ETHICS
§ 25-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this standard of conduct is to enable public officials and
employees to conduct themselves In a manner that will tend to preserve
public confidence in and respect for the government of the Village.
§ 25-2. Definitions.
The terms used in this standard are defined as follows:
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any interest which shall yield, directly or
indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit (other than the duly
authorized salary or compensation for his or her services to the Village) to
the official or employee or to any person employing or retaining the services
of the official or employee.
OFFICIAL OR EMPLOYEE — Any person elected or appointed to, or
employed or retained by, any public office or public body of the Village,
whether paid or unpaid and whether part time or full time.
PERSONAL INTEREST — Any interest arising from blood or marriage
relationships or from close business or political association, whether or not
any financial interest is involved.
PUBLIC BODY — Any agency, board, body, commission, committee,
department or office of the Village.
§ 25-3. Conflict of interest.
C. The emergency management organization shall take action in
accordance with the emergency management plan only after the
declaration of an emergency and the issuance of official disaster
warnings. Such state of emergency shall continue until terminated by
the issuing authority, provided that any such declaration not issued by
the Governor may be terminated at the discretion of the Village Board.
§ 22-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 25-3
22:39
§ 25-4. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-11-2000; amended
7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code, except that the forfeiture shall not be less than $100.
§ 25-5. Background investigations. [Added 8-13-2001]
A. Financial or personal interest. No official or employee, either on his or
her own behalf or on behalf of any other person, shall have any financial
or personal interest in any business or transaction with any public body
in the Village unless he or she shall first make full public disclosure of
the nature and extent of such interest.
B. Disclosure and disqualification. Whenever the performance of his or her
official duties requires any official or employee to deliberate and vote
on any matter involving or appearing to involve his or her financial or
personal interest, he or she shall publicly disclose the nature and extent
of such interest and disqualify himself or herself from voting.
C. Incompatible employment. No official or employee shall engage in
private employment with, or render service for, any private person who
has business transactions with any public body of the Village unless he
or she shall first make full public disclosure of the nature and extent of
such employment or services.
D. Representation of private persons. No official or employee shall use or
attempt to use his or her official position to secure special privileges or
exemptions for himself or herself or others except as may be otherwise
provided by law.
E. Gifts. Except when injured within the scope of employment or afflicted
by a life-threatening illness while holding public office or Village
employment, no official or employee or immediate member of such
person’s family shall accept from anyone any gift, whether in the form
of money, thing, favor, loan or promise, hospitality or entertainment,
that would not be offered or given to him or her if he or she were not an
official or employee. [Amended 6-23-2009
F. No official or employee shall use or permit the use of any privileged or
nonpublic information obtained in the course of his or her official duties
to advance the financial or personal interest of himself or herself or any
other person.
A. The Village Manager shall direct the background investigations,
including criminal history checks, of all candidates for any Village
official or employee positions.
B. Temporary part-time employee candidates shall be subject to
Subsection A at the discretion of the Village Manager.
§ 25-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 25-5
22:40
Chapter 30
FINANCIAL PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Review — See Ch. 7, Art. V.
Retirement fund — See Ch. 68.
Taxation — See Ch. 249.
§ 30-1. Disbursing Village funds.
C. The Village President shall direct the background investigation of any
candidate for the position of Village Manager.
A. Approval of claims.
(1) The Village Manager shall audit and approve each claim or
statement as a proper charge against the treasury and shall
endorse his or her approval thereon, after having determined that
the following conditions have been complied with:
(a) Funds are available therefor pursuant to the budget approved
by the Village Board.
(b) The item or service covered by such claim or statement has
been duly authorized by the proper official, committee or
Village Board.
(c) The item or service has been actually supplied or rendered in
conformity with such authorization.
(d) The claim is just and valid pursuant to law.
(2) The Village Manager may require the submission of such proof in
evidence to support the foregoing as in his or her discretion he or
she may deem necessary.
B. Allowance of accounts. The Manager shall present all claims or
statements to a regular or special meeting of the Village Board for
allowance.
C. Payment of accounts. The Village President and Village Clerk shall,
after allowance pursuant to Subsection B hereof, direct the Village
Treasurer to pay all accounts and demands against the Village. The
order shall list the name of the payee, the purpose and amount thereof.
D. Annual audit. The Village Board shall direct an annual detailed audit of
its financial transactions and accounts by a certified public accountant.
§ 25-5 FINANCIAL PROCEDURES § 30-2
30:41
§ 30-2. Letting of contracts. [Amended 3-8-1999; 9-11-2000;
5-23-2006]
§ 30-3. Charge for Village professionals' contract fees. [Added
12-17-2002]
A. Contracts by Village Manager. All contracts for the performance of any
work or services or the purchase of any materials or equipment for the
Village of Elm Grove of $25,000 or less may be made by the Village
Manager. To the extent such section is applicable, purchases shall be
made in the manner provided in Chapter 54, § 54-3H.
B. Contracts in excess of $25,000.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsection B(2) below, contracts for
the performance of work, services or the purchase of materials or
equipment for the Village of Elm Grove exceeding $25,000 shall be
let to the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the provisions of §
61.55, Wis. Stats. The term "work" or "service" as used in this
subsection shall not refer to any professional services. For
purposes of this section, "professional services" includes but is not
limited to the services of any attorney, architect, artist, public
accountant, computer consultant, consulting engineer, insurance
underwriter, realtor, real estate appraiser or planning consultant.
(2) The Village Board shall have the right to reject all bids for contracts
for any work or services or material. Thereafter, such contracts for
any work, services or materials shall be let as directed by the
Village Board. The Village Board shall also have the right to waive
the requirement for solicitation of bids for specific materials and/or
equipment where the Village Board makes a legislative finding that
the purchase of specific materials or equipment for the
replacement or upgrading of existing Village materials and/or
equipment is necessary to avoid incurring additional costs and/or
expenses or the disruption of Village services.
A. Charges authorized.
(1) Whenever the offices of the Village Attorney, Village Engineer or
any other of the Village's contract professional staff are contacted
for current services regarding a specific person's property,
development or other special matter in the Village of Elm Grove by
the Village President, Village Board member, Village Board
Committee member, or Village Commission member or any
representative, agent or designee of the same, or a property owner
or any person or entity or a respective representative, if said
contact results in a charge to the Village of Elm Grove for that
professional's time and services and said service is not a service
provided to the Village of Elm Grove as a whole, then the Village
Manager shall be authorized to charge said person or entity for the
current service provided and/or pursuant to the provision of
§ 30-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 30-3
30:42
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats., to impose a special charge for that current
service to the benefited property owner for the fees incurred by the
Village.
(2) This section shall be enforced on the basis of the policy as
established by the Village upon a recommendation of the Village
Board Finance and Licensing Committee, by resolution enacted by
the Village Board and revised from time to time that shall include
schedules for cash deposits and other means of securing payment
to the Village.
B. The Village Manager is authorized to invoice each person or entity for
special charges, allowing a period of time, not more than 30 days, to
pay for provided current services. The invoice shall include an itemized
statement of the professional service fees provided.
C. The Village Clerk shall give each property owner, invoiced for current
services, notice that a hearing may be requested before the Village
Board Finance and Licensing Committee regarding the charges against
the property. If a hearing is timely requested in writing within 20
calendar days of the mailing of the invoice for current services, the
matter shall be heard in accordance with the provisions of this § 30-3 on
the issue of the cost of professional fees incurred to benefit a specific
land owner.
D. If any amount remains unpaid after the 30 days allowed for payment
where no hearing has been timely requested, the Village Clerk shall
automatically charge that delinquent amount, plus any applicable
penalty and/or interest, against the current or next tax roll as a
delinquent tax against the property pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
In the event the invoice rendered to a property owner or the time
allowing for payment precludes placement on the current year's tax
roll, any such delinquent charge shall be extended to the following
year's tax roll.
E. Upon receipt of a timely request for a hearing on the invoice for special
charges, the Village Board Finance and Licensing Committee shall hold
a hearing regarding same at its next regular meeting or, at its
discretion, at a special meeting. Such hearing shall be preceded by
posted public notice and written notice to the property owner.
F. When a timely hearing has been requested, no current charges for
special services shall be placed on the tax roll until a hearing has been
held and a decision has been rendered and reduced to writing. A copy
shall be sent via first class mail, postage prepaid, to the property owner.
Only that part of the charges for special services approved by the
Village Board Finance and Licensing Committee may be placed on the
tax roll after the property owner has been given 30 days to pay from the
date of the Village Board Finance and Licensing Committee decision.
G. The Village, in addition or instead of the above, may follow any other
legal means to collect the amounts due.
§ 30-3 FINANCIAL PROCEDURES § 30-3
30:43
Chapter 33
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 22.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 91.
Emergency medical services — See Ch. 137.
Fire Prevention — See Ch. 150.
Fire Department bylaws — See Ch. A340.
§ 33-1. Recognition of Volunteer Fire Department.
The Elm Grove Volunteer Fire Department is hereby officially recognized
as the Fire Department of the Village of Elm Grove. The duty of fire
fighting and prevention in the village is delegated to such Department. The
provisions of the Wisconsin statutes, the Wisconsin Administrative Code,
this chapter and such bylaws as are approved by the Village Board of
Trustees from time to time shall govern the organization and regulation of
the Department.
§ 33-2. Financing.
The Village Board shall appropriate such funds for the use of the Fire
Department as the Village Board may deem expedient and necessary to
maintain efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire.
§ 33-3. Members.
Qualification for membership, classification of members and procedures for
application, resignation and expulsion shall be as provided in the bylaws.
§ 33-4. Officers.
The officers of the Fire Department shall consist of a Chief and such other
officers as are provided in the bylaws. The terms of officers, the method of
appointment and their respective duties shall be as provided in the bylaws.
§ 33-5. Fire equipment.
A. The Fire Department shall be responsible for the proper maintenance of
all of its equipment.
B. No Fire Department equipment shall be used for any purpose except for
fire fighting within the village limits or in training therefor, except
pursuant to an agreement approved by the Village Board. With the
approval of the Village Manager, such equipment may be used within
the village for purposes other than fire fighting.
§ 30-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 33-5
33:44
§ 33-6. Authority at fires.
C. All Fire Department equipment, whether new or of a replacement
nature, shall be of a uniform size and type, as required by the Wisconsin
statutes and the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
A. The Fire Department, through its duly authorized officers, is hereby
vested, in conjunction with the Police Department and other authorized
officials, with full and complete police authority at fires.
B. Any officer of the Fire Department may arrest any person failing to give
the right-of-way to the Fire Department responding to a fire.
C. No person shall willfully injure in any manner any hose, hydrant or Fire
Department equipment, and no vehicle shall be driven over any
unprotected fire hose when laid down on any street, private driveway or
other place for use at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the
Fire Department official in command.
D. The Chief, or other officer in charge, may prescribe certain limits in the
vicinity of any fire within which no persons, excepting fire fighters and
police officers and those admitted by order of any officer of the Fire or
Police Department, shall be permitted to come.
E. The Chief, or other officer in charge, shall have the power to cause the
removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the
preservation of such property from fire or to prevent the spreading of
fire or to protect the adjoining property, and during the progress of any
fire he or she shall have the power to order the removal or destruction
of any property necessary to prevent the further spread of the fire. He
or she shall also have the power to cause the removal of all wires or
other facilities and the turning off of all electricity, gas or other services
where the same impedes the work of the Fire Department during the
progress of a fire. No person shall hinder, resist or obstruct the Chief or
other officer in charge in the performance of his or her duties
hereunder.
F. It shall be lawful for any fire fighter while acting under the direction of
the Chief or other officer in charge to enter upon the premises adjacent
to or in the vicinity of any building or other property then on fire for the
purpose of extinguishing or controlling the spread of such fire. No
person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any fire fighter in the
performance of his or her duties hereunder.
G. No person shall give a false fire alarm in any manner whatsoever, nor
shall any person interfere with the proper functioning of a fire alarm
system,3 nor shall any person interfere with the lawful efforts of fire
fighters to extinguish or control a fire.
3. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 91, Alarm Systems.
§ 33-5 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 33-6
33:45
§ 33-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 33-8. Compensation and liability.
Chapter 54
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections — See Ch. 19.
Ethics — See Ch. 25.
Records — See Ch. 65.
Retirement fund — See Ch. 68.
H. No person shall interfere with the accessibility to a fire hydrant within
the Village of Elm Grove by piling or dumping any material near it.
A. All members of the Village of Elm Grove Volunteer Fire Department
who are injured, disabled or killed in the line of duty shall be entitled to
workers' compensation and/or death benefits as provided for in Ch.
102, Wis. Stats., which chapter is expressly incorporated by reference
as though fully set forth herein.
B. In no event shall the Village of Elm Grove's liability exceed that
provided for in Ch. 102, Wis. Stats., nor, as to third parties, shall the
Village of Elm Grove's liability for the acts or omissions of its volunteer
fire fighters or officers exceed that provided for in § 893.80, Wis. Stats.
§ 33-6 ELM GROVE CODE § 33-8
54:46
ARTICLE I
Appointed Officers
[Adopted 1-8-1962; amended 12-11-2000]
§ 54-1. Enumeration of officers appointed by Village Board.
The following Village officers shall be appointed by the Village Board upon
nomination or recommendation by either the Village Manager or the Village
President. They shall serve for a term of two years and shall be appointed
in odd-numbered years as of the first day of May of such years and shall not
be required to be residents of such Village.
A. Village Clerk. The powers and duties of the Village Clerk shall be as
prescribed by § 61.25, Wis. Stats.
B. Village Treasurer. The powers and duties of the Village Treasurer shall
be as set out in § 61.26, Wis. Stats.
C. Deputy Clerks and Deputy Treasurers. The Village Board shall have the
power to appoint Deputy Clerks and Deputy Treasurers upon
nomination or recommendation of either the Village Manager or the
Village President and by a majority vote of the Village Board. The
Deputy Clerk and/or Deputy Treasurer shall have the power of the Clerk
or Treasurer, respectively, in his or her absence or disability.
D. Village Manager.
E. Village Attorney.
F. Weed Commissioner.
G. Civil Defense Director.
H. Public Works Director.
I. Zoning Administrator.
J. Village Engineer.
K. Village Forester.
§ 54-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 54-1
54:47

ARTICLE II
Village Manager
[Adopted 3-12-1962; amended 10-9-1967 and 9-11-1978; repealed
and recreated 8-9-1993 by Charter Ordinance]
§ 54-2. Appointment; term of office; compensation.
§ 54-3. Powers and duties. [Amended 5-23-2006]
The Village Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Village.
The Village Manager shall have authority, within statutory, ordinance or
policy limits, to assure the efficient and effective organization and operation
of all Village departments and services. The Village Manager shall be
responsible for the proper administration of the affairs of the Village,
pursuant to statute, ordinances and resolutions of the Village Board, with
powers and duties as follows. The Village Manager shall:
A. There is hereby established the office of Village Manager of the Village
of Elm Grove, Wisconsin. The Village Manager shall be appointed by the
Board of Trustees and shall be solely responsible to the Village Board.
The Village Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his/her
executive and administrative qualifications.
B. The Village Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by the
Board of Trustees and shall have his/her compensation fixed by the
Board. The Village Manager may, at any time, be removed from office by
a majority vote of the entire Board of Trustees.
A. See that all laws, ordinances or resolutions of the Village Board subject
to enforcement by him/her or by officers subject to his/her direction and
supervision are faithfully executed.
B. Develop Village personnel policies and procedures, including a plan of
administrative organization, and be responsible for all Village
personnel functions, including appointment for merit, counseling,
motivation, development, discipline and suspension or discharge of
employees; provided however, that the Village Manager may designate
a department head to handle any of these duties within his/her
respective department.
C. Have the duty to make recommendations to the President and Board of
Trustees for the appointment of administrative officers appointed by
the Board of Trustees.
D. Supervise and coordinate the functions and duties of all administrative
officers and, when he/she deems it necessary, discipline, suspend or
remove any administrative officer of the Village, except the Village
Attorney, Fire Chief and Police Chief; provided, however, that any
appointed personnel who are so discharged shall have the right to
request that the Administrative Committee review their discharge.
§ 54-2 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 54-3
54:49
E. Attend all Board of Trustees meetings and such other meetings as
directed by the President or Board. The Village Manager shall have the
right to take part in discussions, except those personally related to him/
her, but shall have no vote.
F. Have authority to review all records, routines and working hours of all
employees, administer fringe benefit plans and recommend to the
Board of Trustees administrative control routines that will best promote
efficiency and economy.
G. Recommend to the Board of Trustees for adoption such measures as the
Village Manager may deem necessary or expedient to carry out the
terms and conditions of any contracts in which the Village is interested
or in which it is a party.
H. Be the purchasing agent for the Village and, in the ordinary course of
business, make or authorize all purchases of materials and supplies
necessary for the Village, as provided for in the annual budget,
following the procedures set forth in Chapter 30 of this Code and §§
66.0901 and 66.0131, Wis. Stats.
I. Coordinate the work of all offices, institutions and departments of the
Village, administrative and appointive, and devise and put into
operation ways and means whereby efficiency and economy may be
secured in their operation.
J. Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital improvement
program to the Board of Trustees.
K. Keep the Board fully advised as to the financial condition of the Village
through submission of periodic reports as requested by the Village
Board.
L. Be in charge of obtaining all outside financial assistance requested by
the Board of Trustees or Finance Committee.
M. Keep the Board of Trustees advised concerning the needs of the Village,
its administration, business and affairs, including such matters as
pertain to its future growth and development.
N. Have the responsibility for the operation and maintenance of all Villageowned
property, lands, public buildings, improvements and equipment.
O. Have the general responsibility for the construction of such public
works and improvements as are approved by the Board of Trustees.
P. Prepare the agenda and order of business for all Board of Trustees
meetings, subject to specific requests by any two Trustees and approval
by the Board of Trustees at the commencement of meetings and subject
to § 19.83, Wis. Stats.
Q. Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this article or any
other ordinance or resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 54-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 54-3
54:50
Chapter 57
OFFICIAL MAP
§ 57-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to §§ 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats., there is hereby established an
Official Map of the Village of Elm Grove showing the streets, highways,
historic districts, parkways, parks and playgrounds laid out, adopted and
established by law. The village may, from time to time, include the location
of railroad rights-of-way, waterways and public transit facilities on its
Official Map. The Official Map is to be deemed final and conclusive with
respect to the location and width of streets, highways and parkways and the
location and extent of parks shown thereon.
§ 57-2. Purpose; filing.
The Official Map is declared to be established to conserve and promote the
public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. The original of the
Official Map shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk, and a
certificate of said map's enactment shall be filed by the Village Clerk with
the Register of Deeds.
§ 57-3. Amendments.
The Village Board may, from time to time, amend the Official Map in the
manner set forth in § 62.23, Wis. Stats.
Chapter 65
RECORDS
§ 54-3 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 57-3
54:51

ARTICLE I
Public Access to Records
[Adopted 2-14-1983; as amended through 6-9-1986 (subsequent
amendments noted where applicable)]
§ 65-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPUTY LEGAL CUSTODIAN — The chief administrative officer of a
department or operational unit within the Village and shall include without
limitation the Village Clerk, the Police Chief and the Fire Chief. A deputy
legal custodian ordinarily has direct control and custody of records
pertaining to his/her respective area of responsibility and expertise.
LEGAL CUSTODIAN — The Village Manager.
RECORD — Any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual
or electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of
physical form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept
by a department or operational unit within the Village. "Record" includes,
but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts,
photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), computer
printouts and optical disks. "Record" does not include drafts, notes,
preliminary computations and like materials prepared for an originator's
personal use or prepared by an originator in the name of a person for whom
the originator is working; materials which are purely the personal property
of the custodian and have no relation to the position held by a person;
materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and
published materials in the possession of a department or operational unit
within the Village which are available for sale or which are available for
inspection at a public library.[Amended 12-11-2000]
§ 65-2. Legal custodians.
A. The Village Manager or, in his/her absence, disability or in case of
vacancy, the appropriate deputy legal custodian acting in place of the
Village Manager under circumstances described in Subsection E(4)
hereafter is hereby designated the legal custodian of Village records.
B. Unless otherwise prohibited or restricted by law, the Village Manager
shall act as legal custodian for the Village Board and for any
committees, commissions, boards or other authorities created by
ordinance or resolution of the Village Board.
C. The legal custodian, or the deputy legal custodian substituting for the
legal custodian in accordance with Subsection E(4) hereafter, shall
have full legal power to render decisions and to carry out the duties of
an authority under §§ 19.31 to 19.39, Wis. Stats., and this article.
§ 65-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 65-2
54:53
§ 65-3. Procedure for accessing records.
D. The designation of a legal custodian does not withdraw, lessen or
diminish the powers and duties of any administrative officer of a
department or operational unit within the Village, except that the final
authority to withhold access to any public records from any member of
the public must be exercised by the legal custodian, except as provided
in Subsection E(4) below.
E. The chief administrative officer of every Village department or
operational unit, including, but without limitation, the Village Clerk, the
Police Chief and the Fire Chief, is hereby designated to be a deputy
legal custodian who shall make determinations with respect to requests
for access to records as follows:
(1) Each deputy legal custodian may, without prior consent of the legal
custodian, permit access to public records within his/her control,
custody and expertise provided he/she determines that such
records can be accessed by the public.
(2) Each deputy legal custodian who determines that access to a
particular public record should not be granted shall make a
recommendation to the legal custodian communicating the
demonstrative reasons for the need to restrict access. Thereafter, it
shall be the responsibility of the legal custodian to accept or reject
such advice. Upon making a final determination, the legal
custodian shall communicate his/her determination to the
requester in accordance with § 19.35(4), Wis. Stats.
(3) In making the final determination, the legal custodian may inspect
the records being sought and shall receive all assistance and advice
as may be required from any Village employee or agent in the
process of formulating a determination as to a request for access to
records.
(4) In the event that the Village Manager is unavailable as provided in
Subsection A above, the deputy legal custodian shall perform the
duties of the legal custodian as required by this article, except that
no internal recommendation to another party is required as
provided in Subsection E(2) since in such cases the deputy legal
custodian makes the determination as to access.
A. Records will be available for inspection and copying during all Village
Hall business hours (9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.).
B. The legal custodian may, in his/her discretion, require supervision
during inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions on the
manner of access to records.
C. A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of copying records
as follows:
§ 65-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 65-3
54:54
§ 65-4. Requests for records.
(1) The cost of copying shall be as follows:
(a) Public records: $0.25 per page. [Amended 12-18-2007]
(b) Photographs: actual full cost, plus cost of delivery and pickup if
commercially reproduced. [Amended 12-11-2000]
(2) If the form of a record does not permit copying, the actual and
necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing shall
be charged.
(3) The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in
printed form on paper, such us films, computer printouts and audio
or video tapes, shall be charged.
(4) If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also
be charged.
(5) There shall be no charge for locating requested records unless the
actual cost therefor exceeds $50, in which case the cost shall be
estimated by the legal custodian and collected in advance from the
requester. The legal custodian shall have discretion to construe to a
series, scheme or pattern of requests for records made in the form
of individual requests as if only one request for records had been
made for purposes of calculating the locating costs. Multiple
requests for records may be treated as a singular request, provided
the legal custodian can reasonably demonstrate a substantial
degree of similarity among the requests with respect to subject
matter, timing of the requests, continuity of the requests, source of
the request and focus of the requests.
(6) The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and
may require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if such
estimate exceeds $5. No charges will be assessed for any request
under $3. [Amended 12-18-2007]
D. There shall be posted in the lobby of the Village Hall a notice which
shall list:
(1) The name of the legal custodian.
(2) The names of the deputy legal custodians and general description
of records under their control.
(3) A listing of inspection hours.
(4) A fee schedule for copies of records.
A. A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal
custodian or deputy legal custodian. A request for a record without a
reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented
§ 65-3 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 65-4
54:55
§ 65-5. Limitations on right to access.
by the record does not constitute a sufficient request. A requester
may be required to show acceptable identification whenever security
reasons or federal law or regulations so require.
B. The legal custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as
practicable, either fill the request or notify the requester of the
determination by the legal custodian to deny the request in whole or in
part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian determines that a
written request is so general as to be unduly time-consuming, the party
making the request may first be required to itemize his or her request
in a manner which would permit reasonable compliance.
C. A request for a record may be denied as provided in § 65-5. Every
written denial of a request shall inform the requester that if the request
for the record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to
review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under § 19.37(1), Wis.
Stats., or upon application to the Attorney General or the District
Attorney.
A. As provided by § 19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records are exempt
from inspection under this section:
(1) Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal
law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law;
(2) Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law
enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require
exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a
condition to receipt of aids by the State of Wisconsin;
(3) Computer programs, although the material used as input for a
computer program or the material produced as a product of the
computer program is subject to inspection; and
(4) A record or any portion of a record containing information
qualifying as a common law trade secret.
(5) Access to or copies of plans and/or construction documents of any
Village-owned or-leased structure, including fixtures and
structures relating to municipal water, storm surface water,
sanitary sewer facilities, public utilities, including gas pipelines,
petroleum lines, transformer box substations, communication
fixtures and facilities, and all buildings over 40,000 square feet are
not subject to open record in order to protect public safety. [Added
12-18-2007]
B. As provided by § 43.30, Wis. Stats., Village public library circulation
records are exempt from inspection under this section.
§ 65-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 65-5
54:56
C. In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is
not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after
consultation with the deputy legal custodian as provided in § 65-2E(2)
above and with the Village Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or
in part, only if he or she determines that the harm to the public interest
resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full
access to the requested record. Examples of matters for which
disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which
were necessary and given in order to obtain the information
contained in them.
(2) Records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing.
(3) Records of current deliberations concerning employment,
dismissal, promotion, demotion, compensation, performance or
discipline of any Village officer or employee or the investigation of
charges against a Village officer or employee.
(4) Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or
prevention.
(5) Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of
Village property, investing of Village funds or other Village business
whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require
nondisclosure.
(6) Financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data
of specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a
substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person
referred to in such history or data.
(7) Communications between legal counsel for the Village and any
officer, agent or employee of the Village when advice is being
rendered concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in
which the Village or any of its officers, agents or employees is, or is
likely to become, involved or communications which are privileged
under § 905.03, Wis. Stats.
D. If a record contains information that may be made public and
information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record
shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the
information that may not be made public from the record for release. If
in the judgment of the custodian there is no feasible way to separate the
exempt material from the nonexempt material without unreasonably
jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record
shall be withheld from disclosure.
§ 65-5 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 65-6
54:57
§ 65-6. Records retention.
Unless otherwise provided by law, the provisions of Article II of this chapter
shall control maintenance and the destruction of public records.
§ 65-6 ELM GROVE CODE § 65-6
54:58
ARTICLE II
Retention and Destruction
[Adopted 2-12-1996]
§ 65-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a Village records retention
schedule and authorize destruction of Village records pursuant to the
schedule on an annual basis. Records custodians do not have the authority
to destroy records prior to the established retention period unless such
records have been photographically reproduced as original records
pursuant to § 16.61(7), Wis. Stats., and under this article.
§ 65-8. Historical records.
The State Historical Society of Wisconsin (SHSW) has waived the required
sixty-day statutory notice under § 19.21(5)(d), Wis. Stats., for the records
in § 65-12 of this article marked "W" which designates "waived notice."
The SHSW must be notified prior to destruction of records marked "N"
designating nonwaiver. "N/A" indicates "not applicable" and applies to all
records designated for permanent retention. Notice to the SHSW is also
required for any other record not specifically listed in this article.
§ 65-9. Microfilming or optical disk storage.
Village records may be kept and preserved on microfilm or optical disk
provided the applicable standards established in § 16.61(7), Wis. Stats., are
met. Factors such as retention periods and estimated costs and benefits
of converting records between different medias should be considered in
deciding whether or not to preserve on microfilm or optical disk. The
retention periods identified in this article apply to records in any media.
§ 65-10. Destruction after request for inspection.
Where a request for inspection of public records has been made under
Wisconsin's Public Records Law (§§ 19.31 to 19.37, Wis. Stats.), no
requested record may be destroyed until after the request is granted or
for 60 days after the request is denied. If an action is commenced under
§ 19.37, Wis. Stats., the requested record may not be destroyed until a court
order is issued and all appeals have been completed.
§ 65-11. Destruction during litigation.
No record known to be the subject of litigation shall be destroyed until the
litigation has been resolved.
§ 65-12. Retention schedule. [Amended 12-18-2007]
A. The following records shall be maintained for the periods indicated.
[Amended 4-22-2008; 2-22-2016]
§ 65-7 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 65-12
54:59
Legend:
"CR" means time is counted from creation or receipt of the record.
"EVT" means an event such as closing of a contract, termination of an
employee, filing a lawsuit or writing a ticket. Time is counted from the
date of this significant event.
"FIS" means current fiscal year and the additional amount of time
indicated.
"W" means the notice requirement has been waived.
Record
Retention
Period
Notice
Requirement
General Government Records
Village Board records
Minute book Permanent N/A
Ordinances Permanent N/A
Resolutions Permanent N/A
Ordinance book Permanent N/A
Affidavits of publication or
posting (ordinances)
Permanent N/A
Affidavits of publication or
posting (other)
EVT + 3 years W
License and Permit Records
License applications (liquor
and beer)
EVT + 4 years W
License applications (all
other)
EVT + 3 years W
Receipts EVT + 7 years W
License stubs (liquor and
beer)
EVT + 4 years W
License stubs (other) EVT + 3 years W
Monthly report of dog
licenses to County Clerk
EVT + 3 years W
Election Records
Contents of a blank ballot
box, unused ballots and
materials
EVT + 3 business
days after the
canvas is
completed
W
Voter serial number slips EVT + 3 business
days after the
canvas is
completed
W
§ 65-12 ELM GROVE CODE § 65-12
54:60
Record
Retention
Period
Notice
Requirement
Voting machine recorders EVT + 14 days
after a primary (21
days after an
election)1
W
Detachable recording units
on electronic voting
equipment
EVT + 14 days
after a primary (21
days after an
election)2
W
Ballots (state, county, local) EVT + 30 days
after the election
W
Ballots (federal offices)3 EVT + 22 months
after election
W
Applications for absentee
ballots (for federal election
ballots)
EVT + 90 days
after the election
(22 months after
the election for
federal offices)
W
Forms associated with
election such as tally sheets,
inspector's statements and
nomination papers
EVT + 90 days
after the election
(22 months after
the election for
federal offices)
W
Official canvas statements EVT + 10 years
after the election
W
Registration and poll lists,
nonpartisan primaries and
elections
EVT + 2 years
after the election
for which they
were created
W
Registration and poll lists,
partisan primaries and
general elections
EVT + 4 years
after the election
for which they
were created
W
Canceled registration cards EVT + 4 years
(after cancellation)
W
Election notices EVT + 1 year after
the election (22
months for federal
election)
W
Proofs of publication and
posting and correspondence
relative to publications and
posting
EVT + 1 year after
the election (22
months for federal
election)
W
§ 65-12 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 65-12
54:61
Record
Retention
Period
Notice
Requirement
Campaign registration
statements
EVT + 6 years
after termination
by the registrant
W
Campaign finance reports EVT + 6 years
after date of
receipt
W
Finance Records
Receipt journal FIS + 15 years W
General journal FIS + 15 years W
Journal voucher FIS + 15 years W
Appropriation journal FIS + 15 years W
Appropriation journal
voucher
FIS + 15 years W
General ledger FIS + 15 years N
Trial balances Until audited W
Cash book EVT + 15 years W
Daily cash drawer
reconciliations
EVT + 1 year
Duplicate deposit tickets EVT + audit + 1
year
W
Bank credit/debit notices EVT + audit + 1
year
W
Bank reconciliations FIS + 7 years W
Bank statements FIS + 7 years W
Investment records FIS + 7 years W
Check register FIS + 7 years W
Payroll Records
Payroll support records EVT + audit + 2
years
W
Employee's withholding
allowance certificate
EVT + 5 years
after being
superseded
W
Employee's Wisconsin
withholding exemption
certificate
EVT + 5 years
after being
superseded
W
§ 65-12 ELM GROVE CODE § 65-12
54:62
Record
Retention
Period
Notice
Requirement
Employee enrollment and
waiver cards for insurance
plans and other elective
programs
Termination/
superseded + 2
years
W
Employee earning records EVT + 5 years W
Payroll check register Annual audit + 5
years or 7 years if
no audit
W
Payroll distribution record Annual audit + 5
years or 7 years if
no audit
W
Payroll voucher EVT + 5 years (if
audited) (7 years if
no audit)
W
Canceled payroll checks EVT + 5 years (if
audited) (7 years if
no audit)
W
Wage and tax statement EVT + 5 years (if
audited) (7 years if
no audit)
W
Report of Wisconsin income
tax withheld
EVT + 5 years (if
audited) (7 years if
no audit)
W
Employer's annual
reconciliation of Wisconsin
income tax withheld from
wages
EVT + 5 years (if
audited) (7 years if
no audit)
W
Federal deposit tax stubs EVT + 5 years (if
audited) (7 years if
no audit)
W
Quarterly report of federal
income tax withheld
EVT + 5 years (if
audited) (7 years if
no audit)
W
Annual report of federal
income tax withheld
EVT + 5 years (if
audited) (7 years if
no audit)
W
State's quarterly report of
wages paid
EVT + 5 years (if
audited) (7 years if
no audit)
W
§ 65-12 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 65-12
54:63
Record
Retention
Period
Notice
Requirement
Monthly memorandum report EVT + 5 years (if
audited) (7 years if
no audit)
W
Quarterly report, payroll
summary
EVT + 5 years (if
audited) (7 years if
no audit)
W
Premium-due notices EVT + 5 years (if
audited) (7 years if
no audit)
W
Change in employee status EVT + 5 years W
All receipts of current
billings
FIS + 2 W
Purchasing Records
Purchase requisitions EVT + 1 year W
Bids, unsuccessful EVT + 1 year after
purchase order
issued
W
Bids, successful Contract
termination + 7
years
W
Inventory of property Until superseded W
Budget and Audit Records
Budget worksheets FIS + 3 years W
Final budget Permanent N/A
Audit reports Permanent N/A
Property Assessment Records
Master property record
folders
Life of structure +
5 years
N
Index to owners Until superseded W
Building permit applications Transfer to master
property record +
1 year
W
Plats Permanent N/A
Certified survey maps Permanent N/A
Assessor's plats Permanent N/A
Aerial photographs Until superseded W
Tax exemption reports EVT + 10 years W
§ 65-12 ELM GROVE CODE § 65-12
54:64
Record
Retention
Period
Notice
Requirement
Notice of increased
assessment (no appeal)
EVT + 5 years W
Notice of increased
assessment (appealed)
Completion of
appeal process + 7
years
W
Assessor's final report
supplement
EVT + 5 years W
Assessor's final report EVT + 5 years W
Statement of assessment Life of assessment
roll
W
Final statement of
assessment
Permanent N
Final real property
assessment roll
EVT + 15 years W
Occupational tax returns EVT + 5 years W
Merchants' professions'
statement of property
EVT + 5 years W
Personal property
worksheets/ farmers and
personal property not used
for the production of income
EVT + 5 years W
Report of inventory location EVT + 5 years W
Assessor's personal property
summary worksheet
EVT + 5 years W
Assessor's final report EVT + 5 years W
Final personal property
assessment roll
EVT + 15 years N
Board of Review Records
Objection to property
assessment and supporting
documentation
Final action by
Board or
completion of
appeal + 7 years
W
Minute book EVT + 7 years N
Proceedings of Board of
Review on audio tape or
stenographic notes including
transcriptions
Final action/
completion of
appeal + 7 years
W
Notice of determinations EVT + 7 years W
Special Assessment Records
§ 65-12 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 65-12
54:65
Record
Retention
Period
Notice
Requirement
Preliminary resolution CR + 2 years W
Special assessments final
resolution
Permanent N/A
Certified special assessment
roll
Until fully
collected or 7
years, whichever
is longer
W
Waiver of special assessment
notice and hearing
Final resolution +
1 year
W
Statement of new special
assessments
EVT + 5 years W
Special assessment payment
register
EVT + time for
collection of all
assessments
W
Public Works Contract Records
Notice to contractors
(successful bidders)
EVT + 7 years W
Notice to contractors
(unsuccessful bidders)
EVT + 2 years W
Bid bond (successful bidders) Project completion
+ 7 years
W
Bid bond (unsuccessful
bidders)
EVT + 2 years W
Bidder's proof of financial
responsibility (successful
bidders)
Project completion
+ 7 years
W
Bidder's proof of financial
responsibility (unsuccessful
bidders)
EVT + 2 years W
Bids (successful bidders) Contract life + 7
years
W
Bids (unsuccessful bidders) EVT + 2 years W
Master project files 20 years N
Blueprints Until superseded W
As-built tracings Life of project N
Street and Highway Records
Street operations file EVT + 2 years W
§ 65-12 ELM GROVE CODE § 65-12
54:66
Record
Retention
Period
Notice
Requirement
Street and sidewalk
maintenance and repair
records
EVT + 25 years W
Stock control records Audit + 2 years W
Fuel usage reports EVT + 2 years W
Heavy equipment and vehicle
inventory ledger
Life of equipment
and/or vehicle or
until inventory
ledger is
superseded
W
Vehicle maintenance history Life of vehicle W
Vehicle expense reports Life of vehicle W
Vehicle usage reports Audit + 2 years W
Building Permit and Inspection
Records
Applications and permits Permanent N/A
Code compliance inspection
reports
Permanent N/A
Inspection address file Permanent N/A
Certificates of occupancy Until superseded W
State-approved commercial
building plans
EVT + 4 years N
Permit fee receipts EVT + 7 years W
Permit ledger EVT + 7 years W
Village Attorney's case file,
copies
Case closure + 1
year
W
Quarter section maps, copies Until superseded W
Records of Board of Appeals
and Plan Commission
Permanent N/A
Contracts, leases, agreements,
notices of taking bids
EVT + 7 W
Insurance contracts Permanent N/A
Police Department Records
Radio recordings CR + 120 days W
Video of patrol activities CR + 120 days W
Security video CR + 7 days W
Security photos CR + 1 year W
§ 65-12 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 65-12
54:67
Record
Retention
Period
Notice
Requirement
Overnight parking permissions CR + 120 days W
Personnel files EVT + 8 years W
Incidents and complaints CR + 10 years W
Arrest records, including
support documents
EVT + 8 years W
Traffic and parking ordinance
violation citations (police files
only)
EVT + 1 year
(after case closed)
W
Municipal ordinance violation
citations (non-traffic) (police
files only)
EVT + 2 years
(after case closed)
W
Traffic accident reports EVT + 4 years W
Juvenile violation reports EVT + 7 years W
Municipal Court dockets EVT + 180 days
(final decision)
W
Fine and fee collection records CR + 3 years W
E-mails CR + 60 days W
Correspondence CR + 7 years W
Bicycle licenses EVT + 3 years W
Administrative reports and
statistics
CR + 7 years W
Property inventory reports EVT + 8 years W
Calls for service logs CR + 3 years W
Vacant property check requests CR + 2 years W
Vehicle maintenance records Life of vehicle W
Radio logbooks CR + 3 years W
Informational teletype
messages
CR + 30 days W
Personnel records EVT + 8 years W
Citizen complaints against
police officers
EVT + 8 years W
Municipal Court Records
Municipal Court case files EVT + 6 years
after entry of final
judgment
W
Audio tapes of trials and
juvenile matters
Term of appeal
period
W
§ 65-12 ELM GROVE CODE § 65-12
54:68
§ 65-13. Approval.
This article has been reviewed and approved by the Public Records and
Forms Board of the State of Wisconsin on November 15, 1995.
Record
Retention
Period
Notice
Requirement
Village Attorney file copies Term of appeal
period + 6 months
W
Municipal Court money docket EVT + 20 years W
Municipal Court minutes
records
EVT + 5 years
after entry of final
judgment
W
1The Governor may by order permit the clearing of voting machine
recorders before this date if a special election is called.
2Before units can be cleared or erased, the information must be
transferred to a disk or other recording medium and retained for 22
months.
3Federal offices are President of the United States, United States
Senator and Congress.
B. General retention period for records. Any record not specifically
regulated by this article or any other regulation or law shall be retained
for seven years unless a shorter retention period has been approved by
the State Public Records and Forms Board.
C. Audio recordings of meetings. Notwithstanding any provision in this
article to the contrary, pursuant to § 19.21(7), Wis. Stats., any tape
recording of any meeting may be destroyed no sooner than 90 days
after the minutes have been approved (and published or posted where
required by the Wisconsin statutes) if the purpose of the recording was
to make minutes of the meeting. [Amended 4-22-2008]
§ 65-12 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 65-13
54:69
Chapter 68
RETIREMENT FUND
§ 68-1. Election to include eligible personnel.
Pursuant to § 40.20, Wis. Stats., the Village of Elm Grove hereby elects
to include eligible village personnel under provisions of the Wisconsin
Retirement Fund in accordance with the terms thereof, as authorized by
§ 40.22, Wis. Stats.
Chapter 80
VILLAGE BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 25. Records — See Ch. 65.
§ 80-1. Membership; powers and duties; terms of office.
A. The Village Board of the Village of Elm Grove shall consist of the
President and six Trustees, in whom shall be vested all the powers of
the Village not specifically given some other officer or statutory
commissions or boards, and their duties and responsibilities are set out
as follows, but without limitation by reason of the recitation of such
duties in these rules:
(1) President. The Village President shall have such powers as are set
out in § 61.24, Wis. Stats., except that the President shall not be
required to countersign drafts, orders, or transfers of funds.
[Amended 10-27-2009]
(2) Trustees. The Trustees, together with the President, shall be vested
with all the powers of the Village not specifically granted by
ordinance or otherwise to specified Village officers or statutory
commissions or boards, and the Village Board as such shall have
and exercise all the powers granted pursuant to § 61.34, Wis. Stats.
B. Election and terms of office. The terms of office of the President and
Trustees shall be for two years. The President and three of such
Trustees shall be elected in odd-numbered years, and three of such
Trustees shall be elected in even-numbered years. The terms of office of
the President and Trustees shall commence on the day provided
pursuant to § 61.23(2), Wis. Stats.
C. Vacancies. A vacancy in the office of President or Trustee shall be filled
by appointment pursuant to § 17.24(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 65-13 ELM GROVE CODE § 80-1
54:70
§ 80-2. Conduct of meetings.
D. Removal. Any member of the Village Board may be removed by a
majority vote of all members of such Board because of continuing
physical inability to perform the duties of office or gross neglect of duty.
A. Regular meetings. All regular meetings of the Village Board of the
Village of Elm Grove shall be held in the Village Hall in said Village at
the hour of 7:30 in the evening on the fourth Monday of each and every
month, except when the day so designated shall fall on a legal holiday,
and in that event such meetings shall be held on the preceding Monday.
[Amended 2-26-2002; 1-28-2014]
B. Special meetings. All special meetings of the Board shall be held in the
Village Hall. Special meetings of the Board may be called by the
President or any two Trustees in writing, filed with the Village Clerk,
who shall notify each member of the Board of the time and purpose of
such special meeting by causing 48 hours' notice thereof to be given to
each member of the Board personally or left at his or her residence.
Special meetings may be held without the notice specified in this
subsection when all members of the Board are present in person or
consent in writing to the holding of said meeting.
C. Presiding officer. The President shall, by virtue of his/her office, preside
at all meetings of the Board. In the absence of the President, the
meetings shall be opened by the Village Clerk and a temporary
Chairperson shall then be selected by a majority of the Board members
present.
D. Preservation of order. If any member transgresses the rules of the
Village Board, the presiding officer shall call him or her to order, in
which case the member called to order shall immediately be silent,
unless permitted by the Board to explain. Such member may appeal to
the full Board to decide the matter, if he or she so desires.
E. Recognition. When a member is about to speak, he or she shall address
himself or herself to the presiding officer, who shall recognize him or
her as entitled to speak. When more than one member shall claim the
right to speak at the same time, the presiding officer shall decide which
member is entitled to speak. A member shall confine his or her remarks
to the question under discussion and avoid all personalities.
F. Quorum. Four Trustees shall constitute a quorum in order to transact
business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time. A
majority of all the members of the Board present at the meeting in favor
of any proposed ordinance, resolution or appointment shall be
necessary for passage or approval, unless a greater number of the full
Board is required by statute or Village ordinance.
G. Question of order. The deliberations of the Board while in session shall
be governed by the manual of parliamentary practice commonly known
§ 80-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 80-2
54:71
as "Robert's Rules of Order," except as otherwise limited or modified by
these rules.
H. Committees. Each of the standing advisory committees shall consist of
not fewer than three Trustee members. The Chairperson and members
of such committee shall be nominated by the President and approved by
the Board of Trustees. Resident members of such committees may be
appointed in the manner provided in § 80-3B of these rules.
I. Conduct of standing advisory committees. Every paper, writing and
every manner of proceeding submitted to the Board for the first time for
action thereon may be referred by the President to the appropriate
committee for attention and report. Each such committee shall hold
whatever meetings are necessary to consider the matters referred to it
for study and investigation. In no event shall any committee be
permitted more than three months within which to report on any matter
assigned to it, unless a longer time is permitted such committee by
Board action. Minority reports may be submitted. Any committee may
require any Village officer to confer with it and supply information
needed in connection with any matter pending before such committee.
J. Order of business. The business of the Board shall be conducted in the
following manner:
(1) Roll call.
(2) Joint public hearings with committees or commissions.
(3) Opening of meeting to public requests and discussions. During
such discussions, no member of the public shall be entitled to speak
unless recognized by the presiding officer.
(4) Consideration of minutes of previous meetings and approval of
submitted agenda.
(5) Report of the Village President.
(6) Report of Village officers.
(7) Reports of committees.
(8) Approval of vouchers.
(9) Unfinished and miscellaneous business.
(10) New business.
K. Submission of questions. Every motion or proposition submitted to the
Board for consideration shall be reduced to writing if the President or a
majority of the members of the Board so require. Any ordinance
submitted to the Board shall be in writing.
L. Action on questions. When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be
deemed to be before the Board and shall be stated by the President or, if
§ 80-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 80-2
54:72
in writing, read by the Clerk previous to debate. Any proposed
ordinance, order or resolution, after reference to a committee and a
report had thereon, may be recommitted to such committee by the
Board at any time previous to its final passage. It shall be in order for
any member voting with the majority to move for reconsideration of the
vote on any question no later than the next succeeding regular meeting.
A motion to reconsider being made and lost shall not be renewed.
M. Participation of public in debate. After preliminary discussion by any of
the members of the Board on any question before it for consideration,
any member of the public present at a meeting of the Board may rise
and request recognition from the presiding officer to make a statement
with regard to the matter under discussion. The presiding officer may,
in his or her discretion, recognize such member of the public and, upon
recognition, he or she shall be permitted to make a statement with
regard to the question before the Board. Such statement shall be
limited specifically to the matter at issue.
N. Debate of questions. Any member desirous of terminating the debate
may call for the question, and the question announced by the presiding
officer shall then be "Shall we close debate?" If 2/3 of the members
present vote in the affirmative, debate shall terminate and the Board
shall then vote, first upon pending amendments and then upon the main
question.
(1) When a question is under debate, no action shall be in order except
the following, and these several motions shall have precedence in
the order in which they stand herein:
(a) To adjourn.
(b) To lay on the table.
(c) To close debate.
(d) To postpone to a certain date.
(e) To refer to a standing or other committee.
(f) To amend.
(g) To postpone indefinitely.
(2) A motion to adjourn, to lay on the table or to close debate shall be
decided without debate.
O. Voting. The president votes as a member of the Board. All questions
shall be decided by roll call of the members, if a demand for such roll
call is made. A Trustee may not change his or her vote on any question
after the result has been announced.
§ 80-2 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 80-2
54:73
P. Suspension of rules. Any of the provisions of these rules, except quorum
and voting requirements, may be suspended temporarily by a
unanimous vote of the Board members in attendance.
Q. Amendments. These rules of procedure may be amended at any
meeting of the Village Board, in which action a majority of the full
Village Board shall concur.
R. Organizational meeting. In each calendar year during which a regular
spring election is held for the election of Trustees and/or President of
the Board of Trustees, the Board of Trustees shall, on or about the third
Tuesday in April of said year, hold an organizational meeting for the
purpose of creating committees and/or filling vacancies in such other
offices and boards as are then appropriate.
S. Audio and/or video conferencing devices. [Added 4-22-2003]
(1) Legislative findings. The Village Board hereby finds that:
(a) Modern communication technology enables people to interact
without restrictions of geography or distance; and
(b) Local elected officials, who are part-time and not compensated,
often have commitments outside of government, or other
government commitments, that prevent them from being
physically present at all official meetings; and
(c) The use of communication technology has the potential to
increase the efficiency of government by allowing participation
by those unable to be physically present.
(2) Village Board meeting.
(a) Any Village Board member who, for good cause, is unable to be
physically present at a meeting of the Board may request, prior
to the meeting, the consent of the Village President to
participate in the meeting by audio and/or video conferencing
devices. Upon a showing of good cause, as determined by the
President at his/her sole discretion, such a request may be
granted subject to authorization at the time of participation. If
the requesting member is unable to contact the President, the
next most senior member of the Board may consent to the
request in his/her place. When a member participates by audio
and/or video conferencing devices, the device(s) shall be
placed in the meeting room so that the member not physically
present can hear and be heard by all those who are physically
present, including all members of the public in attendance.
(b) A Board member who is not physically present at a Village
Board meeting, but participates by audio and/or video
conferencing devices, shall be counted towards a quorum and
shall be entitled to fully participate at the meeting. However,
§ 80-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 80-2
54:74
§ 80-3. Standing advisory committees.
such Board member shall abstain from voting on matters that
require the visual assessment of a witness' demeanor, or
matters that require the visual assessment of physical evidence
or exhibits that have not been directly observed or reviewed by
the member.
(3) Village Board committee meeting.
(a) Any member of any committee of the Board who, for good
cause, is unable to be physically present at a meeting of the
committee may request, prior to the meeting, the consent of
the committee chairperson to participate in the meeting by
audio and/or video conferencing devices. Upon a showing of
good cause, as determined by the chairperson at his/her sole
discretion, such a request may be granted. If the requesting
member is unable to contact the chairperson, the next most
senior member of the committee may consent to the request in
his/her place. When a committee member is allowed to
participate by audio and/or video conferencing devices, the
devices shall be placed in the meeting room in a way that the
committee member not physically present can hear and be
heard by all those who are physically present, including all
individuals of the public in attendance.
(b) A committee member who is not physically present at a
committee meeting, but participates by audio and/or video
conferencing devices, shall be counted towards a quorum and
shall be entitled to fully participate at the meeting. However,
such committee member shall abstain from voting on matters
that require the visual assessment of a witness' demeanor, or
matters that require the visual assessment of physical evidence
or exhibits that have not been directly observed or reviewed by
the committee member.
A. The following shall constitute the standing advisory committees of the
Village Board to which there shall be referred, when deemed advisable,
questions pertaining to the subject matter appearing under the
designation of such committees, as follows, and such other subjects as
may be referred to such committees by action of the Village Board. The
terms of such committees shall be for a period of one year and shall
extend to the third Tuesday of April of each year.
(1) Administrative and Personnel Committee.
(a) Administration and personnel matters.
(b) Labor and wage negotiations.
(c) Claims and litigation.
§ 80-2 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 80-3
54:75
(2) Finance and Licensing Committee.
(a) Review of expenditures.
(b) Budget.
(c) Village financial policy and control.
(d) Bond issues and other indebtedness.
(e) Insurance matters.
(f) Licensing.
(g) Elm Grove Sewer District budget. [Added 3-23-2004]
(3) Public Safety Committee. [Amended 12-11-2000]
(a) Promote health, safety and welfare.
(b) Traffic signals and signs.
(4) Legislative Committee.
(a) Preparation of ordinances and resolutions.
(b) Consideration of legislation affecting the Village.
(5) Public Works/Utilities Committee. [Amended
12-11-2000;3-23-2004]
(a) Public Works Department policy.
(b) Public buildings and grounds.
(c) Surface drainage and flood control.
(d) Public works equipment and materials.
(e) Road improvements and weight signs.
(f) Duties and responsibilities concerning sanitary sewers set
forth in Chapter 232, Sewers.
(6) Recreation and Park Committee.
(a) Recreational program policy.
(b) Formulation and maintenance of a master plan for the Village
center.
(c) Designation of uses within the Village center.
B. Nontrustee members. [Amended 3-8-1999; 6-14-1999]
(1) The Chairperson of any standing advisory committee of the Village
Board may recommend to the Board of Trustees for approval the
§ 80-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 80-3
54:76
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 87
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dance halls — See Ch. 123.
Drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 128.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 171.
Massage parlors — See Ch. 185.
Minors — See Ch. 190.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 208.
Tobacco products — See Ch. 255.
Zoning — See Ch. 335.
§ 87-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following definitions:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial portion
of its stock-in-trade for sale, rent, lease, inspection or viewing books, films,
videocassettes, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating
to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below,
and in conjunction therewith having facilities for the presentation of adult
entertainment, as defined below, including adult-oriented films, movies or
live performances, for observation by patrons therein.
appointment of nontrustee members to such committee, whether
residents or persons engaged in business in the Village, not to
exceed two in number per committee except as follows:
(a) The Finance and Licensing Committee may, upon
recommendation of its Chairperson, include not more than
three nontrustee members; and
(b) The Public Safety Committee, Public Works/Utilities
Committee, and Recreation and Park Committee may each,
upon recommendation of their respective Chairpersons,
include not more than five non-trustee members. [Amended
3-23-2004]
(2) Nontrustee members shall participate in all discussions of such
committees and shall be voting members thereof.
(3) The number of nontrustee members not residents of the Village
shall not exceed one in number per committee.
§ 80-3 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 87-1
87:77
ADULT CABARET — A cabaret which features topless dancers, go-go
dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar
entertainers.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any motion pictures, live
performance, display or dance of any type which has as a significant or
substantial portion of such performance, or is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on, any actual or simulated performance of
specified sexual activities or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, appearing unclothed or the removal of articles of
clothing to reveal specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MINI MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of fewer than 50 persons used for presenting material having
as its dominant theme, or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on, matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material having as
its dominant theme, or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on,
matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Includes, but is not limited to,
adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini motion picture
theaters or adult cabarets and further means any premises to which public
patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically
arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls
separate from the common area of the premises for the purposes of viewing
adult-oriented motion pictures or wherein an entertainer provides adult
entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, whether or
not such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for
a profit, direct or indirect. "Adult-oriented establishment" further includes,
without being limited to, any adult entertainment studio or any premises
that is physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or
represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance
studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other
term of like import.
BOARD — The Village Board of Trustees for the Village of Elm Grove,
Wisconsin.
BOOTH, ROOM OR CUBICLE — Such enclosures as are specifically offered
to the public or members of an adult-oriented establishment for hire or for a
fee as part of a business operated on the premises which offers as part of its
business the entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure, which shall
include, without limitation, such enclosures wherein the entertainment is
dispensed for a fee but a fee is not charged for mere access to the enclosure.
However, "booth," "room" or "cubicle" does not mean such enclosures that
are private offices used by the owners, managers or persons employed
§ 87-1 ELM GROVE CODE § 87-1
87:78
on the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, which
enclosures are not held out to the public or members of the establishment
for hire or for a fee or for the purpose of viewing entertainment for a fee and
are not open to any persons other than employees, nor shall this definition
apply to hotels, motels or other similar establishments licensed by the State
of Wisconsin pursuant to Ch. 50, Wis. Stats.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an
adult-oriented establishment.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides entertainment within an adultoriented
establishment as defined in this chapter, whether or not a fee is
charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is
provided as an employee or independent contractor.
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership or corporation operating,
conducting, maintaining or owning any adult-oriented establishment.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Simulated or actual:
§ 87-2. Permit required.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks and female breasts below the point immediately above
the top of the areola.
A.
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if opaquely
covered.
B.
A. Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus.
B.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or female breasts.
C.
A. Except as provided in Subsection E below, from and after the effective
date of this chapter, no adult-oriented establishment shall be operated
or maintained in the Village of Elm Grove without first obtaining a
permit to operate issued by the Village of Elm Grove.
B. A permit may be issued for only one adult-oriented establishment
located at a fixed and certain place per application filed. Any person,
partnership or corporation who or which desires to operate more than
one adult-oriented establishment must have a permit for each.
C. No permit or interest in a permit may be transferred to any person,
partnership or corporation.
D. It shall be unlawful for any entertainer, employee or operator to
knowingly work in or about or to knowingly perform any service directly
§ 87-1 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 87-2
87:79
§ 87-3. Application for permit.
related to the operation of any adult-oriented establishment which does
not have a valid permit pursuant to this chapter.
E. All adult-oriented establishments existing at the time of the passage of
this chapter must submit an application for a permit within 90 days of
the passage of this chapter. If an application is not received within said
ninety-day period, then such existing adult-oriented establishment shall
cease operations.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a permit shall
make application to the Village Clerk. The application shall be filed in
triplicate with, and dated by, the Village Clerk. A copy of the application
shall be distributed promptly by the Village Clerk to the Elm Grove
Police Department and to the applicant.
B. The application for a permit shall be upon a form provided by the
Village Clerk. An applicant for a permit shall furnish the following
information under oath:
(1) The names (including all aliases), addresses and dates of birth of
the applicant and any partner or limited partner in a partnership
applicant and any officer, director and shareholder holding more
than 10% of the stock of a corporate applicant.
(2) Written proof that any person required to be named under
Subsection B(1) of this chapter is at least 18 years of age.
(3) The exact nature of the adult use to be conducted and the proposed
address of the adult-oriented establishment to be operated.
(4) Whether any person required to be named under Subsection B(1) of
this chapter is currently operating, or has previously operated, in
this or any other county, city or state under an adult-oriented
establishment permit or similar business permit or license and
whether the applicant has ever had such a permit revoked or
suspended, the reason therefor and the business entity or trade
name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the
suspension or revocation.
(5) If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also specify
the name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation
and the name and address of the registered agent.
C. Within 30 days of receiving an application for a permit the Village Clerk
shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted, denied or
held for further investigation. Such additional investigation shall not
exceed an additional 30 days unless otherwise agreed to by the
applicant. Upon the conclusion of such additional investigation, the
Village Clerk shall advise the applicant in writing whether the
application is granted or denied.
§ 87-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 87-3
87:80
§ 87-4. Standards for issuance of permit.
To receive a permit to operate an adult-oriented establishment, an applicant
must meet the following standards:
D. Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation, the
Village Clerk shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for
such action and that the applicant has the right to request that the
Village Clerk review said determination pursuant to § 68.08, Wis. Stats.
E. Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to
the investigation of the application or his or her refusal or failure to
appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath
regarding said application or his or her refusal to submit to or
cooperate with any investigation required by this chapter shall
constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for
such permit and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the Village Clerk.
A. If the applicant is an individual:
(1) The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age.
(2) The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated
this chapter within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
(3) Subject to §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, Wis. Stats., the
applicant shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo
contendere to any offense involving moral turpitude, prostitution,
obscenity or other offense of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction
within the five years immediately preceding the date of the
application unless the applicant has been duly pardoned.
B. If the applicant is a corporation:
(1) All officers, directors, shareholders and agents required to be
named under § 87-3B(1) of this chapter shall be at least 18 years of
age.
(2) No officer, director or shareholder required to be named under
§ 87-3B(1) of this chapter shall have been found to have previously
violated this chapter within five years immediately preceding the
date of the application.
(3) Subject to §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, Wis. Stats., no officer,
director, shareholder or agent required to be named under
§ 87-3B(1) of this chapter shall have been convicted of or pleaded
nolo contendere to any offense involving moral turpitude,
prostitution, obscenity or other offense of a sexual nature in any
jurisdiction within the five years immediately preceding the date of
the application unless he or she has been duly pardoned.
§ 87-3 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 87-4
87:81
§ 87-5. License required for employees and entertainers.
In addition to the permit requirements previously set forth for owners and
operators of adult-oriented establishments, no person shall be an employee
or entertainer in an adult-oriented establishment without first obtaining a
valid license issued by the Village Clerk.
§ 87-6. Application for license.
C. If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of
organization where two or more persons have a financial interest:
(1) All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall be at least 18 years of
age.
(2) No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall have been found to have
violated any provision of this chapter within five years immediately
preceding the date of the application.
(3) Subject to §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, Wis. Stats., no person
having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other
type of organization shall have been convicted of or pleaded nolo
contendere to any offense involving moral turpitude, prostitution,
obscenity or other offense of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction
within the five years immediately preceding the date of the
application unless he or she has been duly pardoned.
A. Any person desiring to secure a license shall make application to the
Village Clerk. The application shall be filed in triplicate with and dated
by the Village Clerk. A copy of the application shall be distributed to the
Elm Grove Police Department and to the applicant.
B. The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the
Village Clerk. An applicant shall furnish the following information
under oath:
(1) Name, age and address, including all aliases.
(2) Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
(3) Whether the applicant, while previously operating in this or any
other municipality or state under an adult-oriented establishment
license or similar business license or permit, has ever had such a
license or permit revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and
the business entity or trade name for which the applicant was
employed or associated at the time of such suspension or
revocation.
C. Within 30 days of receiving an application for a license the Village Clerk
shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted, denied or
§ 87-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 87-6
87:82
§ 87-7. Standards for issuance of license.
To receive a license as an employee for an adult-oriented establishment, an
applicant must meet the following standards:
§ 87-8. Fees.
§ 87-9. Display of permit or license.
held for further investigation. Such additional investigation shall not
exceed an additional 30 days unless otherwise agreed to by the
applicant. Upon the conclusion of such additional investigation, the
Village Clerk shall advise the applicant in writing whether the
application is granted or denied.
D. Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation, the
Village Clerk shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for
such action and that the applicant has the right to request that the
Village Clerk review said determination pursuant to § 68.08, Wis. Stats.
E. Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to
the investigation of the application or his or her refusal or failure to
appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath
regarding said application or his or her refusal to submit to or
cooperate with any investigation required by this chapter shall
constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for
such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the Village
Clerk.
A. The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age.
B. The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated this
chapter within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
C. Subject to §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, Wis. Stats., the applicant
shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to any
offense involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other
offense of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within the five years
immediately preceding the date of the application unless the applicant
has been duly pardoned.
A. A permit fee of $500 shall be submitted with the application for a
permit. If the application is denied, 1/2 of the fee shall be returned.
B. A license fee of $100 shall be submitted with the application for a
license. If the application is denied, 1/2 of the fee shall be returned.
A. The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adultoriented
establishment.
§ 87-6 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 87-9
87:83
§ 87-10. Renewal of permit or license.
B. The license shall be carried by an employee upon his or her person and
shall be displayed upon request of any member of the Elm Grove Police
Department or any person designated by the Board.
A. Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked,
and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year.
Any operator desiring to renew a permit shall make application to the
Village Clerk. The application for renewal must be filed not later than
60 days before the permit expires. The application for renewal shall be
filed in triplicate with and dated by the Village Clerk. A copy of the
application for renewal shall be distributed promptly by the Village
Clerk to the Elm Grove Police Department and to the operator. The
application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the Village
Clerk and shall contain such information and data, given under oath or
affirmation, as is required for an application for a new permit.
B. A permit renewal fee of $500 shall be submitted with the application for
renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty of $125 shall be
assessed against any applicant who files for a renewal less than 60 days
before the permit expires. If the application is denied, 1/2 of the total
permit renewal fees collected shall be returned.
C. If the Elm Grove Police Department is aware of any information bearing
on the operator's qualifications, that information shall be filed in
writing with the Village Clerk.
D. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of issuance unless sooner revoked
and must be renewed before an employee is allowed to continue
employment in an adult-oriented establishment. Any employee desiring
to renew a license shall make application to the Village Clerk. The
application for renewal must be filed not later than 60 days before the
license expires. The application for renewal shall be filed in triplicate
with and dated by the Village Clerk. A copy of the application shall be
distributed promptly by the Village Clerk to the Elm Grove Police
Department and to the employee. The application shall be upon a form
provided by the Village Clerk and shall contain such information and
data given under oath or affirmation as is required for a new license.
E. A license renewal fee of $100 shall be submitted with the application for
renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty of $50 shall be
assessed against any applicant who files for a renewal less than 60 days
before the license expires. If the application is denied, 1/2 of the total
license renewal fees collected shall be returned.
F. If the Elm Grove Police Department is aware of any information bearing
on the employee's qualifications, that information shall be filed in
writing with the Village Clerk.
§ 87-9 ELM GROVE CODE § 87-11
87:84
§ 87-11. Revocation of permit or license.
A. A permit or license issued under this chapter shall be revoked for any of
the following reasons:
(1) Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on
any application or material facts were omitted from any
application.
(2) The operator, entertainer or any employee of the operator violates
any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted by
the Board pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, that in the
case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely
that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30
days if the Board shall find that the operator had no actual or
constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the
exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive
knowledge.
(3) The operator or employee becomes ineligible to obtain a permit.
(4) An operator employs an employee who does not have a license or
provides space on the premises, whether by lease or otherwise, to
an independent contractor who performs or works as an
entertainer without a license.
(5) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this chapter is not paid.
(6) Any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage, narcotic or
controlled substance is served or consumed on the premises of the
adult-oriented establishment.
(7) Any operator, employee or entertainer sells, furnishes, gives or
displays, or causes to be sold, furnished, given or displayed, to any
minor any adult-oriented entertainment or adult-oriented material.
B. Notice of violation.
(1) The Village Manager, upon making an initial determination that a
violation of this chapter has occurred, shall serve written notice of
said violation(s) on the operator or employee. Said written notice
shall include specific charges and shall provide the operator or
employee with notice that revocation or suspension of the permit or
license will occur unless a written request for a review of the
Village Manager's decision is made to the Board of Trustees within
30 days after service of said notice to the operator or employee.
Unless otherwise extended by an agreement with the aggrieved
party, within 15 days of receipt of a request for review the Village
Board shall conduct a hearing pursuant to § 68.11, Wis. Stats., at
which time the operator or employee may present evidence bearing
upon the question. The appellant shall be provided with written
notice of such hearing by mail or personal service at least 10 days
§ 87-11 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 87-11
87:85
§ 87-12. Location.
§ 87-13. Hours of operation.
§ 87-14. Physical layout.
Any adult-oriented establishment having available for customers, patrons or
members any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult
entertainment must comply with the following requirements:
before such hearing. A final determination shall be made by the
Board of Trustees pursuant to § 68.12, Wis. Stats.
(2) The provisions of Subsection B(1) of this chapter shall not be
construed to abridge the authority or responsibilities of the Elm
Grove Police Department to enforce this chapter or to issue any
citation(s) or complaints for violations of this chapter or any other
ordinance or county, state or federal law.
C. The transfer of a permit or license or any interest in a permit or license
shall automatically and immediately revoke the permit or license.
D. Any operator or employee whose permit or license is revoked and who
seeks to obtain a permit or license under this chapter must apply for a
permit or license according to the application provisions set forth in
this chapter and must meet the standards for the issuance of a permit
or license as set forth in this chapter. No location or premises for which
a permit has been revoked shall be used as an adult-oriented
establishment for six months from the date of revocation of the permit.
A. No adult-oriented establishment shall be located:
(1) Within 500 feet of an existing adult-oriented establishment;
(2) Within 350 feet of any residential dwelling; or
(3) Within 500 feet of any pre-existing school or place of worship or an
establishment that in any manner sells or dispenses alcohol.
B. For purposes of this chapter, distances are to be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
property line of the adult-oriented establishment to the nearest
property line of another adult-oriented establishment, school, place of
worship or residential dwelling.
A. No adult-oriented establishment shall be open between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays or between the hours of 3:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon on Sundays.
B. All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by the Elm Grove Police Department and the Building
Inspector.
§ 87-11 ELM GROVE CODE § 87-14
87:86
§ 87-15. Responsibilities of operator.
A. Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and
from aisles and public areas of the adult-oriented establishment and
shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type devices.
B. Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following
construction requirements:
(1) Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent
booths, rooms or cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall.
(2) Each booth, room or cubicle shall have at least one side totally open
to a public, lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all
times of anyone occupying the same.
(3) All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the
floor to a height of not less than six feet, and be light colored,
nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable.
(4) The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and
easily cleanable.
(5) The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use
shall be a minimum of 10 footcandles at all times, as measured
from the floor.
C. Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at
any time. No occupant of the same shall engage in any type of sexual
activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No
individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth.
D. View from street. No adult-oriented establishment shall be situated in
such manner as to allow public view of either its stock-in-trade or adult
entertainment from outside of the establishment.
A. The operator shall maintain a register of all employees, showing the
name and aliases used by the employee, home address, age, birth date,
sex, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, telephone numbers, date of
employment and termination and duties of each employee and such
other information as may be required by the Board. The above
information on each employee shall be maintained in the register on the
premises for a period of one year following termination of the employee
and shall be made immediately available for inspection upon demand of
a member of the Elm Grove Police Department at all reasonable times.
B. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator
§ 87-14 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 87-15
87:87
§ 87-16. Administrative procedure and review.
Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes concerning municipal administrative
procedure shall govern the administrative procedure and review concerning
the granting, denial, renewal or nonrenewal of a permit or license. A
request for an initial determination made by an aggrieved person pursuant
to the provisions contained in § 68.08, Wis. Stats., shall be made to the
Village Clerk. An administrative appeal pursuant to the provisions contained
in § 68.10, Wis. Stats., may be made by an aggrieved person to the Board
of Appeals and a hearing shall be held by the Board of Appeals pursuant
to § 68.11, Wis. Stats. Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final
determination may seek judicial review pursuant to the provisions
contained in § 68.13, Wis. Stats.
§ 87-17. Exemptions.
All private schools and public schools, as defined in Ch. 115, Wis. Stats.,
located within the Village of Elm Grove are exempt from obtaining a permit
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
C. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's permit
shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
D. There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed in the common areas
of each adult-oriented establishment a list of any and all entertainment
provided on the premises. Said list shall further indicate the specific fee
or charge in dollar amounts for each entertainment listed. Viewing
adult-oriented motion pictures shall be considered as entertainment.
The operator shall make the list available immediately upon demand of
the Elm Grove Police Department at all reasonable times.
E. No employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow any minor
to loiter around or frequent an adult-oriented establishment or allow
any minor to view adult entertainment as defined herein.
F. The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary
manner at all times.
G. The operator shall maintain at least 10 footcandles of light in the public
portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if
a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a
patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle
adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in
such aisles; provided, however, that at no time shall there be less than
one footcandle of illumination in said aisles, as measured from the floor.
H. The operator shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its
patrons with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 87-15 ELM GROVE CODE § 87-17
87:88
hereunder when instructing pupils in sex education as part of their
curriculum.
§ 87-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which is found to have
violated this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of
this Code, except that the forfeiture shall not be less than $250. In addition
to the monetary penalty imposed, violation of this chapter shall further
result in the revocation of any permit issued under this chapter.
Chapter 91
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 22.
Fire Department — See Ch. 33.
Emergency medical services — See Ch. 137.
§ 91-1. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to regulate alarm systems as defined in this
chapter in the Village of Elm Grove and to prevent carelessness, improper
maintenance or any other cause which results in false police and/or fire
and/or emergency medical services (EMS) alarms from privately owned,
commercially owned, leased or contracted alarm systems. Such false alarms
initiate police, EMS and/or fire personnel and apparatus responses which
result in unnecessary expenses to the village, increase the risk of damage
to property or injury to persons and dilute the level of police and fire
protection available to other areas of the village.
§ 91-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following words will have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM PERMIT — A permit which must be applied for by any person
having control over any property within the Village of Elm Grove at which
there is installed any alarm system. A new permit must be applied for
whenever such system is upgraded or modified in any way with respect to
its operation.
ALARM SYSTEM — An intrusion, fire, burglar, robbery, elevator, or medical
emergency alarm system that is designed or utilized to summon a single or
combined response by the Elm Grove emergency medical services, Police or
Fire Department.[Amended 12-18-2007]
§ 87-17 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 91-2
87:89
APPLICANT — Any party having an interest in or property at the premises
where an alarm system is installed and who submits the data required by
§ 91-3 for an alarm permit.
DEPARTMENT — One or all of the following: Fire or Police Department or
emergency medical services of the Village of Elm Grove.
FALSE ALARM — A signal from an alarm system resulting in a response
by one or more of the Elm Grove Police or Fire Department or emergency
medical services when an emergency situation does not exist, regardless of
the manner in which the village is alerted to respond.
§ 91-3. Application for alarm permit.
§ 91-4. Prohibited alarm systems.
A. Any person having control over any property within the Village of Elm
Grove at which there is installed or exists any alarm system shall make
an application for an alarm permit as required by the definition of
"alarm permit" in § 91-2 by providing information as follows. Such
permit shall be issued by the Village Clerk.
(1) Name, address and telephone number of party who can be
contacted in the event of an emergency or false alarm and who is
available upon request of the village within 1/2 hour to provide a
key to the premises for which an alarm has been activated for the
purposes of inspecting such premises or resetting such alarm
system.
(2) Identification of party installing the alarm system.
(3) Identification of person or firm that can be contacted by the village
to report any apparent malfunction in the alarm system.
(4) Any other information deemed necessary by the Village Police or
Fire Chief for the purpose of providing an appropriate response.
B. No information required for an application for alarm permits shall be
deemed public information under § 19.31, Wis. Stats., and instead
constitutes information whose disclosure would result in a compromise
of public safety which is not outweighed by the benefit to the public in
disclosure of the same. All information so required shall be maintained
in a secured manner by village personnel upon receipt from the Village
Clerk.
C. There shall be no fee for any application for alarm permit made.
D. Each alarm permit application shall provide notice to the applicant that
the Village of Elm Grove warrants no higher standard of care in
providing any police or fire protection or emergency medical services
than is available to persons not having such alarm system.
§ 91-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 91-4
87:90
§ 91-5. False alarms; violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005;
12-18-2007]
A. Audible alarms. No person, firm or corporation shall use or install an
alarm system which upon activation shall emit an audible outside alarm
unless such system shall automatically shut off within five minutes after
being activated.
B. Automatically activated phone dialer. No person or entity shall use, or
cause to be used, any telephone or electronic device or attachment that
automatically selects either the 911 or other telephone line of the Police
Department, Fire Department or any other department of the Village of
Elm Grove and then utilizes a prerecorded message to report the
burglary, fire or other emergency.
C. Non-UL-approved alarms. Any alarm system or major components
thereof that are not approved by Underwriters Laboratories (UL) shall
not be installed within the Village of Elm Grove after the effective date
of this chapter. No application for an alarm permit shall by issued under
§ 91-3 for any non-UL-approved alarm system.
D. Each violation of Subsection A or B shall be subject to the penalty
provided in § 91-5.
A. Each false alarm that results in the emergency dispatch of any Fire
Department personnel, Police Department personnel, or emergency
medical services personnel shall be charged a fee per the Village of Elm
Grove Fee Schedule, as amended from time to time by the Village Board
of Trustees. If the possessor of the alarm can show to the satisfaction of
the Police Chief that the false alarm was not the result of negligence, or
improper maintenance, such fee may be waived. [Amended
2-24-2009]
B. Violation of § 91-4A, Audible alarms, and § 91-4B, Automatically
activated phone dialer, shall result in a fine as listed on the Village of
Elm Grove Fee Schedule, as amended from time to time by the Village
of Elm Grove Board of Trustees.
C. Installation of an alarm system without obtaining a permit shall be
punishable according to the fee schedule for alarm violations. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each six-month period
which elapses without the procurement of a permit.
D. This section shall not be applicable to any publicly owned structure
within the Village.
§ 91-4 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 91-5
87:91
Chapter 95
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals in parks — See Ch. 204. Peace and good order — See Ch. 208.
§ 91-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 91-5
87:92
ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 2-16-1955; as amended through 2-13-1989]
§ 95-1. Licenses.
§ 95-2. Nuisances. [Amended 12-11-2000; 2-12-2001; 2-26-2002;
11-22-2005; 2-22-2016]
A. License required. A license shall be necessary for any dog over five
months of age. [Amended 12-11-2000]
B. License fee. The license fee shall be at least the minimum required by
§ 174.05(2), Wis. Stats., and shall by resolution be established by the
Village Board. [Amended 12-11-2000]
C. Per § 174.065(1) of the Wisconsin Statutes, the Collecting Official for
the issuance of dog licenses are the Village of Elm Grove and the Elm
Brook Humane Society. The fees collected will be turned over to the
Village of Elm Grove. [Added 6-22-2004 4]
D. Term. Upon the payment of the required license fee, the Village or the
Elm Brook Humane Society shall issue a license to the owner or keeper
of such dog for the current license year which expires on the 31st day of
December; provided, however, that the applicant for a license shall first
display to the designated Village agent a current certificate of rabies
vaccination as required by § 95.21, Wis. Stats., enacted as Chapter 289,
Laws of 1979. [Amended 6-22-2004]
E. Attachment to collar. The licensee, upon procuring the license, shall
securely attach the tag to a collar. This collar, with tag, shall at all times
be kept on the dog for which the license is issued.
F. For any official police canine, when it is deemed by the handler that
wearing of the tag and collar is likely to create an unsafe working
condition for the canine or handler, the license tag and collar is not
required to be attached to the canine while performing official duties
but shall remain in possession of the handler. [Added 2-12-2001]
A. Running at large.
(1) Except for any police canine, while performing a law enforcement
function, it shall be unlawful for a dog to run at large on any public
property or on private land without the landowner's permission. A
dog shall not be deemed to be at large if:
(a) It is accompanied by its owner or a member of the owner's
household or designated handler and is under the control or
4. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections C,
D and E as Subsections D, E and F, respectively.
§ 95-1 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 95-2
87:93
command of such a person and is not threatening or disturbing
any other persons or animals; or
(b) On a Village pathway or sidewalk, except in Village parks as
described under § 204-3, if attached to a leash of sufficient
length to restrain the dog. The leash must be of such a length
to restrict the dog from contacting other people or animals.
(2) No owner of or person harboring or keeping a fierce or vicious dog
or female dog in season shall permit the same to run at large at any
time within the Village.
B. Dog residue. It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog to fail to
immediately remove the solid waste matter of the dog from any public
or private property except that property owned by the dog owner.
C. Frequent and habitual howling. It shall be unlawful for any person to
own, keep, have in his or her possession or harbor any dog which by
frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking or otherwise shall cause
serious annoyance or disturbance to persons or to the neighborhood.
No persons shall be convicted under the provisions of this subsection
except upon the evidence of two persons from separate households.
D. Fierce or vicious animal.
(1) Any humane officer or law enforcement officer having reasonable
grounds to believe that any animal, except for any police canine
while performing a law enforcement function, has caused injury to
persons or animals within the Village may take such animal into
custody pursuant to § 173.13, Wis. Stats., where such humane
officer or law enforcement officer has reasonable grounds to
believe that the animal poses a significant threat to public health,
safety, or welfare.
(a) If a humane officer or law enforcement officer takes custody of
an animal with the knowledge of the owner, the humane officer
or law enforcement officer shall explain the procedure by
which the owner can recover the animal, including the
procedure under § 173.22, Wis. Stats., and the procedure to be
followed if the animal is not returned to the owner.
(b) If a humane officer or law enforcement officer takes custody of
an animal without the knowledge of the owner, the humane
officer or law enforcement officer shall promptly notify the
owner, in writing, if he or she can be identified and located
with reasonable effort. The notice shall explain the procedure
by which the owner can recover the animal, including the
procedure under § 173.22, Wis. Stats., and the procedure to be
followed if the animal is not returned to the owner. The notice
shall also inform the owner that the owner must notify any
person with a lien on the animal that the animal has been taken
into custody.
§ 95-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 95-2
87:94
§ 95-3. Impoundment.
It shall be the duty of the Humane Officer to apprehend any dog running at
large on any public land or on private land other than that of its owner and
to confine such dog when apprehended.
§ 95-4. Reclaiming impounded dogs. [Amended 12-11-2000]
Any owner of a dog so confined by the Humane Officer may reclaim the dog
upon payment of all costs and charges incurred in impounding and keeping
such dog. It is hereby made the duty of the Humane Officer to keep all said
dogs so apprehended for a period of seven days to afford the owner of the
dog an opportunity to reclaim it.
§ 95-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any rule or
regulation made under this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
(c) If the owner informs the humane officer or law enforcement
officer in writing that he or she will not claim the animal, it may
be treated as an unclaimed animal under § 173.23(1m), Wis.
Stats.
§ 95-2 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 95-5
87:95

ARTICLE II
Cruelty to Animals or Birds
[Adopted 6-14-1971; amended 1-13-1975]
§ 95-6. Bird sanctuary.
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the Village of Elm
Grove, Wisconsin, is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.
§ 95-7. Prohibited acts.
§ 95-8. Exceptions.
§ 95-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any rule or
regulation made under this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
A. No person except a peace officer, health or humane officer, or the
Village Manager’s designee in the pursuit of his or her duties shall,
within such Village, trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest any
bird, wild fowl or animal or disturb any bird’s nest or bird’s eggs, except
for hunting with a bow and arrow or crossbow as permitted in § 147-1 of
this Code. [Amended 2-24-2014]
B. No person shall commit an act of cruelty to any animal or bird.
A. Trapping of animals with noninjurious box traps shall be permitted, as
well as trapping of rodents, on an owner's premises.
B. Canada Goose depredation activities undertaken pursuant to and
authorized by a federal permit are exempt from this article. [Added
12-11-2000]
§ 95-6 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 95-9
87:97

ARTICLE III
Humane Officers
[Adopted 8-13-2001]
§ 95-10. Appointment of humane officers.
A. The Village Board may appoint one or more humane officer(s) pursuant
to § 173.03, Wis. Stats.
B. All humane officers shall be certified as required by § 173.05, Wis.
Stats.
C. All humane officers shall have the powers and duties as defined in
§ 173.07(4), Wis. Stats., and at all times perform in conformance with
§§ 173.09 through 173.27, Wis. Stats.
D. No humane officers shall issue citations as authorized under
§ 173.07(4), Wis. Stats., but shall request prosecution pursuant to
§ 173.07(4m), Wis. Stats.
E. As required by § 173.03(2), Wis. Stat., the Village Zoning Administrator
shall be designated to conduct requested abatement order hearings
consistent with § 173.11(2) and (3), Wis. Stats.
§ 95-10 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 95-10
87:99
Chapter 101
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 275.
§ 101-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals and
having wheels, any two of which are not less than 14 inches in diameter.
BICYCLE LANE — That portion of a roadway set aside by the Village Board
for the exclusive use of bicycles or other modes of travel where permitted
under § 349.23(2), Wis. Stats., and designated by appropriate signs and
markings.
BICYCLE LICENSE — A license with numbers issued by the Village of
Elm Grove indicating that the bicycle displaying it is registered.[Amended
12-11-2000]
BICYCLE WAY — Any path or sidewalk or portion thereof designated for the
use of bicycles by the Village Board.
BIKE ROUTE — Any bicycle lane, bicycle way or highway which has been
duly designated by the Village Board and which is identified by appropriate
signs and markings.
BRAKE — A device operated by hand or foot adequate to control the
movement and stopping of the bicycle whenever necessary.
HIGHWAY — All public ways and thoroughfares and bridges on the same. It
includes the entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to
the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular travel.
OPERATOR — A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY — A paved walkway within the Village that is
not a concrete sidewalk, including those found in public parks.[Added
2-26-2002]
REFLECTOR — A device designed to warn an approaching driver by
reflective light from the headlamps of the approaching vehicle. It may be
constructed of metal, glass or plastic with a diameter of no less than two
inches of surface area which is visible from all distances between 50 to 500
feet when traveling directly in front of any motor vehicle at night displaying
lawfully lighted headlamps. Such device is to be so constructed as to show
a red color when illuminated by motor vehicle headlights. Such device shall
§ 95-10 ELM GROVE CODE § 101-1
101:100
be affixed to the rear of a bicycle at any point on the frame fender at a
height between an axis of the wheel and the bottom of the rider's seat.
§ 101-2. Special rules applicable to bicycle operation.
Whenever a bicycle is operated upon a highway, bicycle lane or bicycle way,
the following rules apply:
§ 101-3. Equipment.
A. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
B. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
C. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the operator's placement of one hand on the handlebars
at all times.
D. No person riding a bicycle shall attach his or her person or bicycle to
any other vehicle while on a roadway.
E. No person may ride a motor-driven vehicle on a bicycle way.
F. Any person riding or operating a bicycle on any street within the limits
of the Village of Elm Grove shall observe all applicable ordinances,
statutes and traffic rules and regulations.
G. Bicycles shall be permitted on all pedestrian pathways and sidewalks
within the Village pursuant to § 346.94(1), Wis. Stats., and in
conformity with § 346.804, Wis. Stats. Every person operating a bicycle
upon a Village pedestrian pathway or sidewalk shall yield right-of-way
to any pedestrian and shall exercise due care and give an audible signal
when passing a bicycle rider or pedestrian proceeding in the same
direction. [Amended 2-26-2002]
H. Every bicycle shall be operated as close to the extreme right-hand side
of the highway as possible.
I. Every person shall operate a bicycle in single file only. No bicycles may
be operated two or more abreast.
J. No person riding upon a bicycle shall participate in any race or speed or
endurance contest with any other vehicle.
K. No person riding a bicycle shall remove either both hands from the
handlebars or feet from the pedals or engage in acrobatic riding
maneuvers while on any street within the Village of Elm Grove which
may endanger the safety of the rider or distract operators of other
vehicles.
§ 101-1 BICYCLES § 101-3
101:101
§ 101-4. Registration required.
It is unlawful for anyone to ride a bicycle in the Village of Elm Grove
unless it is registered with a municipality or unless it is owned by a person
domiciled in a place not having a provision for registration of bicycles.
§ 101-5. Licenses.
A. No person may operate a bicycle upon a highway, bicycle lane or bicycle
way during the hours of darkness unless such bicycle is equipped with,
or the operator is wearing, a lamp emitting a white light visible from a
distance of at least 500 feet from the front of such bicycle. Such bicycle
shall also be equipped with a red reflector as stated in this chapter. A
lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear
may be used in addition to, but not in lieu of, the red reflector.
B. No person may operate a bicycle upon a highway, bicycle lane or bicycle
way unless it is equipped with a brake in good working condition
adequate to control the movement of and to stop the bicycle whenever
necessary.
C. No bicycle may be equipped with nor may any person riding upon a
bicycle use any siren or compression whistles.
A. The one-time fee for each bicycle licensed shall be as established by the
Village through adoption of a resolution and shall be paid in advance at
the time of the issuance of the license. This fee shall be paid one time
and shall not be required again, provided ownership of the bicycle
remains unchanged.
B. Application for licenses shall be made to the Police Department on
forms provided and shall be signed by the applicant. The application
shall contain the name, date of birth and address of the owner together
with a complete description of the bicycle.
C. The Village shall retain a record of the date of issuance of each license,
to whom it is issued and the number thereof. Registrations shall be
serially numbered and kept on file at the Village Hall.
D. After payment of the fee, the Village shall issue a license which shall be
affixed to the bicycle in a prescribed manner set forth by the Village and
shall remain on the bicycle until ownership changes or upon removal by
the Police Department for cause.
E. A license may not be transferred when the ownership of the bicycle is
transferred.
F. A replacement license shall be issued by the Village when the original is
lost, destroyed, mutilated beyond recognition or stolen, and a fee
comparable to the original fee shall be paid for the same.
§ 101-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 101-5
101:102
§ 101-6. Denial of registration.
No bicycle shall be registered unless it is in a safe mechanical condition.
The Police Department may inspect bicycles and deny registration for any
bicycles found to be mechanically unsafe.
§ 101-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code. In addition, the Municipal Court may prohibit such
person from riding a bicycle for a period not to exceed six months and may
order such person's license plate confiscated.5
§ 101-8. Parental responsibility.
No parent or guardian of any child shall authorize or knowingly permit such
child to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 101-9. Missing serial numbers.
Bicycles without serial numbers stamped on the frame may be brought to
the police station to be stamped by hand.
Chapter 106
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Board — See Ch. 7, Art. I.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 134.
Fair housing — See Ch. 143.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
Plumbing — See Ch. 212.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 220.
Sewers — See Ch. 232.
Land division — See Ch. 305.
Water control — See Ch. 325.
Zoning — See Ch. 335.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle license issued
pursuant to this chapter.
5. Editor's Note: Former § 9.08(a), Bicycle clinics for violators, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted 12-11-2000.
§ 101-5 BICYCLES § 101-9
101:103

ARTICLE I
Building Code
[Adopted 3-17-1956; as amended through 11-11-1992]
§ 106-1. General provisions.
§ 106-2. Building Inspector.
A. Purpose. This code establishes uniform standards regulating the
construction and alteration of buildings and structures in order to
promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
Village of Elm Grove. It includes standards for moving and razing
buildings, establishing grade elevations, filling and excavating land and
regulating the areas of yards, courts and other open spaces. The code
also creates the office of Building Inspector and outlines his or her
duties.
B. Scope. This code shall apply to new buildings or structures and
additions or alterations hereafter erected or undertaken in the Village
of Elm Grove.
C. Interpretation. The provisions of this code shall supplement any laws
and regulations of the State of Wisconsin and orders, rules and
regulations of the Department of Commerce relating to buildings.
Where the requirements of the state code, the orders, rules and
regulations of the Department and the provisions of the code conflict,
the stricter requirements shall govern.
D. Legal responsibility. The Village of Elm Grove shall not assume legal
responsibility for the design, construction or modification of any
building or structure.
A. Office created. There is hereby created the office of Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector and Deputy Inspector, if any, shall be appointed
by the Village Manager pursuant to Chapter 54, Article II, the Village
Manager Charter Ordinance.
B. Powers and duties. The Building Inspector shall enforce all ordinance
provisions relating to buildings and structures and shall inspect all
buildings or structures being erected or altered.
(1) The Building Inspector shall have the power to order all work
stopped during construction, alteration or repair involving any
building or structure when such work is being done in violation of
any provision of the code. The work shall not be resumed except
upon written permission of the Building Inspector.
(2) Right of entry.
(a) The Building Inspector shall have the power to make or cause
to be made any entry into any building or premises where the
work of altering, repairing or constructing any building or
§ 106-1 BICYCLES § 106-2
101:105
§ 106-3. Building permit.
structure is occurring to make an inspection at any reasonable
hour.
(b) The Building Inspector is deemed a peace officer for the
purposes of applying for, obtaining and executing special
inspection warrants under §§ 66.122 and 66.123, Wis. Stats.
(3) A duly issued occupancy permit shall be required for any building
or premises which constitutes entirely new construction or for any
commercial building or premises to which alterations or additions
have been made. The Building Inspector shall have exclusive
authority to issue occupancy permits.
C. Compensation. The Building Inspector shall be compensated from a
portion of the fees provided for in § 106-8 of this article. The portion
shall be established by the Village Board. The fees shall be deposited
with the Village Treasurer, who shall pay the Building Inspector the
established portion. All supplies necessary for the Building Inspector to
perform his or her duties shall be provided by the Village.
D. Qualifications. The Building Inspector shall be certified for the
purposes of administering and enforcing this code pursuant to
Wisconsin Administrative Code Section IND 20.10.6
A. Applications. No person shall erect, construct or alter any building or
structure, or move or raze any building or structure, or cause the same
to be erected, constructed or altered, without first having obtained a
building permit from the Building Inspector. A permit shall be required
for changes involving electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, airconditioning,
fire alarm system and sprinkler/suppression system work,
although repair work resulting in no structural or exterior alterations is
exempt from this permit requirement. [Amended 12-18-2007]
(1) The application shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector's
office on an appropriate form provided by that office. Except as
otherwise provided in this section, every application shall include a
description of the land upon which the proposed building is to be
constructed or altered and a plot plan.
(2) The description of the land may be by lot, block, tract or similar
description that will readily identify and indicate the location of the
proposed building or work.
(3) The plot plan shall consist of a certified survey of the parcel on
which the building or structure is to be located, showing the
location of the proposed building and every existing building, the
setbacks of the building to be constructed or altered, the setbacks
6. Editor's Note: Former § 3.02(e), Removal, which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 12-11-2000.
§ 106-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 106-3
101:106
of any buildings or structures on adjoining parcels, the existing
grade elevations before construction at the corners of the parcel
and the general plan for landscaping and the proposed ground
grade, including such grade at the front door and at the
intersection of all exterior walls of all structures. The plot plan shall
also indicate the location of all trees which are greater than six
inches in diameter on Village property between the edge of the
parcel and the traveled portion of any adjoining highway and the
location and depth of any ditches or culverts along with the route
of any permanent or intermittent drainage course.
(4) Every application shall show the use or occupancy of all parts of the
building.
(5) Plans and plot plans shall be drawn to scale on substantial paper or
cloth. The essential parts shall be drawn to a scale of not less than
1/8 inch to one foot. The drawing shall clearly indicate the nature
and character of the work proposed. Computations, strain sheets,
stress diagrams and other data necessary to show the correctness
of the plans shall accompany the plans and specifications when
requested by the Building Inspector.
(6) Any specifications that "work shall be done in accordance with the
Building Code" or that "work shall be done to the satisfaction of the
Building Inspector" shall be considered incomplete. Every
reference to this code shall be to the section or subsection
applicable to the material to be used or to the method of
construction proposed.
(7) Exceptions. In the case of additions or alterations to existing
buildings, the requirement for a certified survey may be waived by
the Building Inspector if he or she determines that a sketch of the
plot plan is sufficient to indicate the setbacks of the additions or
alterations. The Building Inspector may also authorize the issuance
of a permit without plans and specifications for work costing less
than $1,000 if the work is sufficiently described in the application.
These exceptions do not affect the requirement for approval of the
Building Board under Chapter 7, Article I.
B. Owner's privilege. A property owner may personally perform electrical,
heating, ventilating and air-conditioning work in his or her own singlefamily
residence owned by and occupied by or to be occupied by him or
her as a permanent residence, provided that said owner shall:
(1) Apply for and secure a permit in accordance with this article.
(2) Pay the required fees.
(3) Perform the work himself or herself in accordance with this article.
(4) Apply for inspection.
§ 106-3 BICYCLES § 106-3
101:107
(5) Receive the approval of the Building Inspector.
C. Filing. The application and plot plan and copies of the plans and
specifications for the proposed work shall be filed in triplicate with the
Building Inspector.
D. Issuance of permit.
(1) The application, plans and specifications filed by an applicant for a
permit shall be checked by the Building Board and the Building
Inspector. If they are found to conform to the requirements of this
code and all other applicable laws or ordinances, the Building
Inspector shall, upon receipt of the required fee by the Village,
issue a permit.
(2) When the Building Inspector issues the permit, he or she shall
endorse or stamp all sets of plans and specifications "conditionally
approved." One set shall be retained by the Building Inspector and
one set shall be returned to the applicant, who shall keep the
permit at the work site at all times while the work authorized is in
progress and make it available for inspection. The third set shall be
kept on file in the Village Hall.
(3) The approved plans shall not be changed, modified or altered
without permission from the Building Inspector. In all cases where
changes, modifications or alterations occur, final as-built plans
shall be filed before the issuance of an occupancy permit.
(4) No permit shall be transferred from one applicant to another
except as approved by the Building Inspector.
E. Refusal to issue permit.
(1) The Building Inspector may refuse to issue a permit if the applicant
has been guilty of continued or willful violations of the Building
Code, this chapter or other chapters of the Code. [Amended
9-24-2013]
(2) The Building Inspector may refuse to issue a permit allowing the
construction or alteration of a building if he or she determines that
the proposed construction does not comply with any applicable
Building Code provision.
(3) No permit shall be issued for the construction of a building or
structure until a driveway or access route and culvert as approved
by the Village of Elm Grove Department of Public Works from the
traveled portion of the highway has been installed to the work site.
If the driveway or access route is accomplished by a culvert of 18
inches or more in diameter, a head wall surrounding the culvert
shall be constructed in a manner to be approved by the Public
Works Director.
§ 106-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 106-3
101:108
(4) An applicant that has any outstanding order, or notice, or unpaid
fee or forfeiture, relative to this chapter or other chapters enforced
by the Village shall not be issued any permit, prior to such order, or
notice, or unpaid fee or forfeiture being paid or corrected to the
Building Inspector’s satisfaction. The Building Inspector may issue
a permit to an applicant with an outstanding order, or notice, when
such a permit is required to satisfy any outstanding order or notice.
[Added 9-24-2013]
F. Revocation of permits. The Building Inspector, with the concurrence of
the Zoning Administrator, may revoke any issued permit and may stop
business use, construction, demolition or use of approved materials,
equipment, methods of construction, devices or appliances for any of
the following reasons: [Added 9-24-20137]
(1) When there is a violation of any regulation of this Code or of any
other ordinance, law or lawful order or Wisconsin Statute relating
to the same subject matter;
(2) When the continuance of any construction or demolition becomes
dangerous to life or property;
(3) When there is any violation of any condition or provision of any
issued permit;
(4) When there is inadequate supervision, based upon required
standards, provided on the job site;
(5) When any false statement or misrepresentation has been made in
the application for permit, plans, drawings, data, specifications or
certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance of the permit or
approval was based;
(6) When there is a violation of any of the conditions of an approval or
occupancy given by the Building Inspector for the use of any new
materials, building equipment, methods of construction or devices.
(7) When the property owner fails to allow reasonable inspections of
the property;
(8) When any conditions of approval from Village boards and
committees are not being met for the building site or structure.
G. Notice for revoking a permit shall be in writing and shall be served
upon the applicant for the permit or owner of the premises, as follows:
[Added 9-24-2013]
(1) A revocation placard shall be posted on the building structure,
equipment or premises in question by the Building Inspector.
7. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsections F, G and H as
Subsections H, I and J, respectively.
§ 106-3 BICYCLES § 106-3
101:109
(2) After the notice is served upon the aforementioned persons and
posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter
with any, construction or demolition activity on the premises and
the permit which has been so revoked shall be null and void.
(3) Before any construction or demolition activity may be resumed, a
new permit, as required by this Code, shall be procured and fees
paid. Thereafter, the resumption of any construction or demolition
shall be in compliance with this Code.
H. Time for completion. After a building permit for construction or
alteration of a building has been issued, the building or structure shall
be completed according to the approved plans within 24 months.
[Amended 12-11-2000; 9-27-2005]
(1) Grading, driveways and parking surfaces for all residential,
commercial and industrial sites shall be completed according to the
approved plans and the provisions of this code within six months
after the occupancy permit has been issued or permit completion,
whichever occurs first.
(2) The landscaping of any building or premises in the Village of Elm
Grove shall be completed within six months after the occupancy
permit has been issued or permit completion, whichever occurs
first.
(3) Every permit issued by the Building Inspector under the provisions
of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if
the building and work authorized by such permit are not
commenced within 60 days from the date of such permit or if the
building and work authorized by such permit are not completed
within 24 months from the date of the issuance of said permit. For
purpose of this chapter, “permit completion” shall mean complete
enclosure of the exterior of the structure (including but not
necessarily limited to the complete installation of siding material,
windows, roofing and primary ingress/egress features). Upon
expiration of any legally issued building permit, the owner shall
make application for a permit extension, and the Building Inspector
shall issue a permit extension upon complete payment of the proper
fee as determined by resolution of the Board of Trustees. All fees
are nonrefundable.
(4) Failure of any builder or property owner to request the final
inspections within 10 working days of completion shall result in a
penalty charged to the permit holder in an amount equal to the
original permit fee, paid prior to the final inspection.
I. Penalty. Any person, firm or entity that violates the provisions of this
code shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 106-9. [Amended
9-24-2013]
§ 106-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 106-3
101:110
§ 106-4. Adoption of Administrative Code provisions. [Amended
12-11-2000; 7-26-2005]
J. Code of conduct signs required. No person shall be issued a building
permit for the demolition, construction, and/or modification of the
exterior of any structure within the Village unless such person has first
purchased a demolition and construction code of conduct sign from the
Zoning Administrator as required under the provisions of § 335-42B(3).
The fee for code of conduct signs shall be approved by resolution from
time to time as established by the Village Board. Failure to obtain and/
or display said sign throughout the course of demolition, modification,
and/or construction shall constitute a violation of this chapter and, in
addition to all other applicable penalties, shall be grounds for the
issuance of a stop-work order. [Added 4-22-2003; amended
6-22-2010]
A. The following Wisconsin Administrative Codes, their referenced codes
and standards, and subsequent revisions are adopted for municipal
administration and enforcement by the Building Inspector: § SPS
302.31, Plan Review Fee Schedule; Chapter SPS 305, Credentials;
Chapter SPS 316, Electrical Code; Chapters SPS 320 through 325,
Uniform Dwelling Code; Chapters SPS 361 through 366, Commercial
Building Code; Chapters SPS 375 through 379, Buildings Constructed
Prior to 1914; and Chapters 381 through 387, Uniform Plumbing Code.
[Amended 3-28-2016]
B. All buildings except one-and two-family dwelling units must satisfy the
requirements of the Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 360
through SPS 365 (Building and Heating, Ventilating, and Air-
Conditioning Code). [Amended 12-18-2007; 6-27-2016]
C. For the purposes of this section, the standards contained in the
Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code shall be expanded to apply as the
standards for construction of the following:
(1) Basement renovations for homes built prior to June 1, 1980 that
have a ceiling height on average of less than seven feet may be
issued a building permit for improvements to a finished ceiling
height of not less than six feet eight inches for a minimum of 50% of
the floor area as referenced in the Wisconsin Building Code Sec. VII
A(3). [Amended 8-28-2017]
(2) Detached accessory buildings 150 square feet or more in size.
[Amended 12-18-2007]
(a) Grade-beam slabs are required for detached accessory
buildings 150 square feet or more in size with a continuous
floating slab of reinforced concrete. Slab shall not be more
than four inches in thickness. Reinforcement shall be a
minimum of six by six, number ten wire mesh or by using 1.5
pounds of fiber mesh per cubic yard of concrete with varying
§ 106-3 BICYCLES § 106-4
101:111
§ 106-5. Moving buildings.
fiber mesh lengths. The slab shall be provided with a thickened
edge all around, 12 inches wide and 12 inches below the top
of the slab. A granular base of at least four inches in thickness
shall be installed below the slab.
(b) The requirements of § 106-4C(2)(a) shall apply to all detached
accessory building concrete slabs constructed after the
effective date of this section.
A. Permit. Before moving any building, its owner shall apply to the
Building Inspector for a permit.
(1) The application shall specify the following:
(a) The character and size of the building to be moved.
(b) The reason for such moving.
(c) The use, purpose and occupancy for which said building or
structure is to be used.
(d) The location from which and to which said building is to be
moved.
(e) A plot plan showing the proposed location of the building upon
the property to which said building is to be moved, provided
said location is in the Village.
(f) The streets on, over or through which it is desired to move said
building.
(g) Whether the building conforms to the zoning laws in the
location to which it is to be moved.
(2) The issuance of the permit shall be conditioned upon a written
agreement that the applicant will save and indemnify judgments,
costs and expenses which may in any way accrue against the
Village and hold the Village harmless against all liabilities,
judgments, costs and expenses which result from granting such
permits.
B. Conditions.
(1) Every permit to move a building shall state all conditions to be
complied with, designate the route to be taken and limit the time
for removal. The removal of a building shall be continuous during
all hours of the day and night, if the Building Inspector so orders,
until completed with the least possible obstruction to
thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed to remain overnight
upon any street or road crossing or intersection or so near thereto
as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant. The building shall be
§ 106-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 106-5
101:112
§ 106-6. Razing buildings.
appropriately lighted for public safety if the moving continues
during evening or night hours.
(2) The owner shall deposit cash with the Village in whatever sum is
reasonably deemed appropriate by the Village Manager in
consultation with the Public Works Director, taking into
consideration the following factors without limitation: distance of
move, weight of structure and condition of roadways. The moving
contractor shall deliver a certificate of insurance evidencing
liability coverage in an amount not less than $500,000 for liability
associated with any acts or omissions of the mover or its agents or
employees during the move. [Amended 12-11-2000]
C. Damage. Within one day after the moved building reaches its
destination, the permittee shall notify the Building Inspector, who shall
instruct the Public Works Director to inspect the route traveled. He or
she shall determine whether any damage has occurred to streets, road
crossings, intersections, trees or shrubs, poles, wire cables or other
equipment belonging to the Village. If any damage has resulted, the
permittee shall, within 10 days, pay to repair the damage following
notice from the Village.
A. The Village Board or the Building Inspector of the Village of Elm Grove
may order the owner of premises upon which is located any building or
part thereof within said Village which, in the Village Board's or Building
Inspector's judgment, is so old or dilapidated or has become so out of
repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for
human habitation, occupancy or use, and so that it would be
unreasonable to repair the same, to raze and remove such building or
part thereof or, if it can be made safe by repairs, to repair and make
safe and sanitary or to raze and remove at the owner's option or, where
there has been a cessation of normal construction of any building or
structure beyond the end of the time period allowed under § 106-3F
herein, to raze and remove such building or part thereof.
(1) The order shall specify a time in which the owner shall comply
therewith and specify repairs, if any. It shall be served on the owner
of record or his or her agent where an agent is in charge of the
building and upon the holder of any encumbrance of record in the
manner provided for service of a summons in the Circuit Court. If
the owner or a holder of an encumbrance of record cannot be
found, the order may be served by posting it on the main entrance
of the building and by posting for 14 days at least 10 days before
the time limit in the order commences to run. [Amended
4-22-2008]
(2) The owner or contractor razing any building in the Village shall file
a performance bond of not less than $50,000 prior to the issuance
of any such permit.
§ 106-5 BICYCLES § 106-6
101:113
§ 106-7. Excavations; filling and grading.
B. If the owner shall fail or refuse to comply within the time prescribed,
the Building Inspector shall cause such building or part thereof to be
razed and removed, either through any available public agency or by
contract or arrangement with private persons, or closed if unfit for
human habitation, occupancy or use. The cost of such razing and
removal or closing shall be charged against the real estate upon which
such building is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and
shall be assessed and collected as a special tax. When any building has
been ordered razed and removed under said contract or arrangement
aforesaid, the Building Inspector or the Village Board may sell the
salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. If the
building or part thereof is unsanitary and unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use and is not in danger of structural collapse, the
Building Inspector shall post a placard on the premises containing the
following words: "This Building Cannot Be Used for Human Habitation,
Occupancy or Use," and it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to
prohibit the use of the building for human habitation, occupancy or use
until the necessary repairs have been made.
C. If any building ordered razed or made safe and sanitary by repairs
contains personal property or fixtures which will unreasonably interfere
with the razing or repair of the building making necessary the removal,
sale or destruction of such personal property or fixtures, the Building
Inspector may order in writing the removal of such personal property or
fixtures by a certain date. Such order shall be served as provided in
Subsection A. If the personal property or fixtures or both are not
removed by the time specified, the Building Inspector may store the
same or may sell them, or if they have no appreciable value the Building
Inspector may destroy the same. In case the property is stored, the
amount paid for storage shall be a lien against such property and
against the real estate and shall be assessed and collected as a special
tax against the real estate if the real estate is owned by the owner of the
personal property and fixtures. If the property is stored, the owner
thereof, if known, shall be notified of the place of its storage and, if it is
not claimed by the owner, it may be sold at the expiration of six months
after it has been stored.
D. Where any building has been ordered razed or made safe and sanitary
by repairs by the Building Inspector and the same shall have been razed
or demolished pursuant to said order by the owner of the premises upon
which such building was located, such owner shall remove from such
premises any debris or unsightly construction materials resulting from
such razing or demolition within a period of 90 days from the
commencement of such razing or demolition. Accumulations of
unsightly construction materials and debris shall be deemed to be those
which, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, if permitted to continue
to be present on said premises, would cause a substantial depreciation
in the property values in the immediate neighborhood of such premises.
§ 106-6 ELM GROVE CODE § 106-7
101:114
§ 106-8. Fees. [Amended 3-28-2016]
Building permit fees and plan review fees shall be as determined by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 106-9. Violations and forfeitures; enforcement. [Amended
12-11-2000; 7-26-2005; 9-27-2005]
A. It shall be unlawful for any excavation for building purposes, whether or
not completed, to be left open for more than six months without
proceeding with the erection of a building thereon. In the event any
such excavation, whether or not completed, remains open for more than
six months, the Building Inspector shall order that the erection of a
building on the excavation begin forthwith or in the alternative that the
excavation be filled to grade. The order shall be served upon the owner
of the land or his or her agent and upon the holder of any encumbrance
of record in the manner provided in § 106-6A. If the owner of the land
fails to comply with the order within 15 days after service thereof upon
him or her, the Building Inspector shall cause the excavation to be filled
to grade and the cost shall be charged against the real estate in the
same manner provided in § 106-6B.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot to have fill placed upon the
lot and to leave fill ungraded and unleveled and unlandscaped for more
than six months. It shall also be unlawful to grade, plow, excavate or
level any lot and leave said lot unlandscaped for more than six months.
C. A permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector prior to the filling,
grading or leveling of any lot. The Building Inspector shall require a
plot plan to be submitted to the Village showing the existing and the
proposed elevations of the lot and the manner in which surface
drainage shall be handled. Lot grades shall be approved by the Village
Engineer.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, demolish, convert, equip, use or occupy or maintain any
building or structure in the Village of Elm Grove contrary to or in
violation of any provisions of this code or to cause, permit or suffer the
same to be done.
B. Any person violating any provisions of this code shall be subject to a
violation for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued or
permitted, and, upon the conviction of any such violation, such person
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
C. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and
specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an
approval of, any violation of any provision of this code. No permit
presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this
§ 106-7 BICYCLES § 106-9
101:115
§ 106-10. Appeals. [Amended 12-11-2000]
Any person who has been denied a building permit by the Building Inspector
may appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals.
code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it
authorizes is lawful.
D. The issuance of a permit upon plans and specifications shall not prevent
the Building Inspector from thereafter requiring the correction of
errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing building
operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this code or
of any other ordinance of the Village of Elm Grove.
E. It shall be the duty of the Police Department to assist the Building
Inspector and to report any building operations it believes are being
carried on in violation of this article.
§ 106-9 ELM GROVE CODE § 106-10
101:116
ARTICLE II
Demolition Permits
[Adopted 2-8-1999]
§ 106-11. Findings.
§ 106-12. Definitions.
§ 106-13. Applicability.
A. The Village of Elm Grove finds that many buildings and surrounding
landscapes having a special character or aesthetic value to the Village
have been demolished without consideration of the feasibility of
preserving and continuing the use of the building and landscape
features. In addition, an increasing number of buildings and
surrounding landscapes may be at risk of loss and destruction although
the preservation thereof may be both feasible and desirable.
B. The Village of Elm Grove finds that demolition, unless properly and
timely conducted, can present a hazard to public safety and can have a
blighting effect on the neighborhood as well as being unsightly.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — A structure comprised of a foundation, walls and a roof.
COMMENCEMENT OF DEMOLITION — Any work done pursuant to a
permit issued pursuant to this article other than any approved erosion
control.
COMPLETION OF DEMOLITION — Removal of the walls of the first
floor above the foundation of the structure being demolished.
DEMOLITION — The razing and removal of all or substantially all of a
structure. The term "demolition" shall also constitute a land disturbing
construction activity for the purposes of the application of Chapter 325,
Article I, Construction Site Erosion Control.
B. For purposes of § 106-17, the terms "commence construction" and
"commencement of construction" shall mean the completion of, and the
making of a request to the Village for inspection of, the footings for the
structure being constructed.
A. Every residential, nonresidential or mixed occupancy building shall
comply with the provisions of this article, regardless of when the
building was constructed, remodeled or otherwise altered.
B. Continuing compliance requirement after demolition. After the effective
date of this article, should only demolition of a principal structure occur
without the commencement of any new construction as described in
§ 106-17D(2) and F(2), there shall be complete compliance with all
other requirements of this article by any owner of the property, except
§ 106-11 BICYCLES § 106-13
101:117
§ 106-14. Permit required.
Except as provided in §§ 106-6 and 106-7 of this chapter, no person shall
demolish any building unless a permit therefor under this article shall first
be obtained from the Building Inspector after review and approval of the
Plan Commission. An application for a demolition permit shall be made on
forms provided by the Village and shall be accompanied by the information
in the manner required in § 106-3A(1) through (4) of this chapter.
§ 106-15. Principles.
To implement and define criteria for the purposes set forth in § 106-11
of this article, the following principles are established to apply to all
applications for a demolition permit:
§ 106-16. Review and recommendation.
the payment of the fee as provided in § 106-17C, whenever any
structure is proposed for any property which has been the subject of a
demolition permit under this article or any amendments thereto.
A. Whether, in cases where demolition is for the purpose of facilitating
new construction, due and fair consideration has been given to the
feasibility of preserving and continuing the use of the existing building.
B. Whether the end result of the applicant's project including demolition
and new construction, if any, will devalue adjoining properties by
unreasonably altering the character of the neighborhood.
C. Whether the end result of the applicant's project including demolition
and new construction, if any, will be detrimental to the public interest.
D. Whether the existing building is in such deteriorated condition that it is
not structurally or economically feasible to preserve or restore it.
A. The Building Inspector shall immediately forward to the Plan
Commission all applications for demolition permits, including
attachments and any other information required for the Plan
Commission's review.
B. Prior to review by the Plan Commission, the Village Clerk shall timely
notify in writing the owners of all properties within 300 feet of any
boundary of the parcel which is the subject of any demolition permit.
Notification shall be given to the owners of any property within 300 feet
despite any intervening public or private road.
C. Within 60 days of the applicant's filing of a complete application, the
Plan Commission shall review the application in accordance with the
principles enumerated in § 106-15 of this article and recommend that
the permit be approved or denied. The Plan Commission may impose as
a condition of recommending approval those requirements that, in its
§ 106-13 ELM GROVE CODE § 106-16
101:118
§ 106-17. Standards and conditions applicable to all work.
The following standards and conditions shall apply to all work undertaken
in the Village pursuant to a permit issued under this article.
discretion, are necessary to further the goals and objectives of this
article.
D. If the Plan Commission approves the application for demolition, the
Building Inspector shall immediately issue a demolition permit, which
shall comply with § 106-17 of this article and also with any
requirements imposed by the Plan Commission as a condition of
approval.
A. Interpretation.
(1) This section shall apply to all demolition work for which a permit is
required.
(2) In the event of any inconsistency or conflict in the application or
operation of the provisions of this section and the provisions of
§§ 106-6 and 106-7 of this chapter, the provisions of §§ 106-6 and
106-7 shall apply and control.
B. Permit time limit. A demolition permit issued pursuant to this article
shall be valid for a period of no more than 12 months after the initial
date of issuance.
C. The fee for a demolition permit shall be approved by resolution from
time to time as established by the Village Board. [Amended
10-28-2003]
D. Required plans and specifications. Every application for a demolition
permit shall be accompanied by the following plans and specifications:
(1) Existing building plans and specifications. If the application
includes demolition of a building, then the application shall include
floor plans and elevational views of that building as it exists at the
time of the application and in addition a survey of the property on
which the building to be demolished is located showing all
buildings and structures, as well as a tree inventory showing all
trees with a caliper of 12 inches diameter at breast height or more.
(2) Contingent site restoration plans and specifications. Where the
application includes demolition of a building without proposing
construction of a new building, such application shall include a
detailed site restoration plan depicting all work required to restore
the subject property, within 60 days after completion of demolition,
to a safe, clean condition until construction of a new structure has
commenced, including without limitation backfilling of any
excavation, grading, seeding, landscaping, fencing, runoff water
management and the like.
§ 106-16 BICYCLES § 106-17
101:119
(3) Site erosion control plans. The application shall include detailed
plans and specifications for runoff water management and soil
erosion control on the subject property in conformance with the
requirements of Chapter 325, Article I of the Code. Section 325-8A
shall be applicable to all demolition as defined by this article
notwithstanding that such land disturbing activities occur within
an area of one acre or less. Such plans and specifications shall be
on a drawing or drawings separate from all other plans and
specification, labeled as "Erosion Control Plan."
(4) New construction plans and specifications. Where the construction
of a new building is proposed following completion of demolition,
the application for demolition shall include floor plans and
elevational views of all new buildings together with a survey of the
property showing all of the new buildings and all trees with a
caliper of 12 inches diameter at breast height or more.
(5) Dust and airborne particulate control provisions. The application
shall include provisions for controlling dust and other airborne
particles from the subject property, including without limitation a
source of water and spraying equipment and any other measures to
be taken to control airborne particles.
(6) Damage to Village right-of-way provisions. The application for
demolition shall be accompanied by not less than 12 photographs of
the paved portions of the Village right(s)-of-way abutting the
subject property and extending 200 feet beyond the boundaries of
the subject property, depicting the condition of such pavement,
including but not limited to all existing defects or damage to such
pavement, to the reasonable satisfaction of the Public Works
Director prior to the commencement of any demolition activity on
the subject property. The photographs shall be of such resolution
and size as to accurately portray the then existing condition of the
pavement. Within one day after the completion of demolition, the
permittee shall notify the Building Inspector, who shall request the
Public Works Director to inspect the adjacent right-of-way for
damage. The Public Works Director shall, within one business day,
determine whether any damage has occurred to the pavement or
any right-of-way improvements resulting from, or arising out of,
demolition related activities. If any damage has resulted, the
permittee shall, within 10 days following notice from the Village,
pay for the repair of the damage or, in the alternative, the Village
shall deduct the cost of repairs from the site management letter of
credit provided for in Subsection (G)(1) below. [Added 8-13-2001]
E. Variations. No person shall cause or allow any variation from the
approved plans and specifications for any work unless amended plans
and specifications showing all proposed variations are first filed with
the Village and approved by both the Building Inspector and the Plan
Commission. If any variation involves an increase in the total cost of the
§ 106-17 ELM GROVE CODE § 106-17
101:120
proposed work, then a statement to that effect shall be made and all
necessary additional fees shall be paid before any approvals are made.
F. Prosecution of work.
(1) Demolition work pursuant to a permit issued under this article shall
be diligently and continuously prosecuted and completed in not
more than 60 days after the commencement of demolition within
the permit time limit period.
(2) The construction of an approved new building shall be commenced,
or the subject property shall be fully restored in conformance with
the approved site restoration plan, within 60 days after completion
of demolition.
(3) The sixty-day period provided in Subsection F(1) and (2) for
completion of demolition or site restoration may be extended by
one day for every business day that weather conditions prohibit
restoration work on the subject property, as determined by the
Building Inspector.
G. Site management letter of credit.
(1) The applicant shall post with the Village, at the time of issuance of
a demolition permit, a site management letter of credit in a form
approved by the Village Attorney or cash deposit in the amount of
$10,000 to assure timely compliance with the provision of
Subsection F and the repair of damage to Village-controlled
property under Subsection D(6). Upon the satisfactory completion
of all work required under Subsection F, except seeding and/or
landscaping, the amount of the site management letter of credit or
cash may be reduced to $3,000 upon request. Such security shall
be in addition to all other application and processing fees, costs,
escrows, bonds and performance securities required by all Village
of Elm Grove ordinances. [Amended 8-13-2001]
(2) Application of letter of credit. The site management letter of credit
shall be held by the Village and shall be applied as provided in
Subsections G and H of this section.
(3) Village right to draw on letter of credit. The Village shall have the
right at all times, at its option, to draw on the site management
letter of credit for the costs, including without limitation legal fees
and administrative expenses, incurred or to be incurred by the
Village in exercising any of its rights under this article in the event
that the applicant undertakes any work in violation of any provision
of this article or of any permit issued or plan approved pursuant to
this article, the applicant fails or refuses to complete any work
authorized by any permit issued under this article in accordance
with all plans approved in connection with said permit, or the
applicant fails to pay for damage to Village-controlled property as
required under Subsection D(6). The Village's determination of
§ 106-17 BICYCLES § 106-17
101:121
such costs shall be based either on costs actually incurred by the
Village or on the Village's reasonable estimates of costs to be
incurred. [Amended 8-13-2001]
(4) Replenishment of letter of credit. If the Village draws on the site
management letter of credit, then the applicant shall replenish the
letter of credit to the full amount required by Subsection G(1)
immediately after demand therefor is made to the applicant in
writing by the Village. Any failure of the applicant to replenish the
letter of credit shall result in cancellation of the related permit,
which permit shall not be reissued thereafter except after the filing
of a new application therefor, payment of the permit fee and
establishment of a new site management letter of credit.
(5) Return of unused letter of credit. Subject to any reduction allowed
by Subsection G(1), the Village shall return any unused portion of
the site management letter of credit or cash deposit to the
applicant, without interest, as follows:
(a) If the permit authorizes only demolition work and no
construction work is scheduled to take place within 30 days
after completion of demolition, the Village shall return the
letter of credit or cash deposit within 30 days after final
inspection of the restoration of the subject property and
approval of the work by the Building Inspector.
(b) If the permit authorizes any work in addition to demolition
work, then the Village shall return the letter of credit or cash
deposit within 30 days after issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy.
H. Village right to enforce. Every permit authorizing demolition of a
dwelling issued pursuant to this article shall be conditioned on the
agreement of the applicant and the owner of the subject property that if
any work pursuant to a permit authorizing demolition of a dwelling is
undertaken in violation of any provision of this article, then the Village
shall have the right at all times, but not the obligation, to enter onto the
subject property and to cause any and all work to be done and actions to
be taken to cure such violation.
(1) The applicant and the owner of the subject property shall be jointly
and severally responsible for all costs and expenses incurred by the
Village, including without limitation attorneys' fees and
administrative expenses, in causing such cure. The Village shall
have the right, at its option, to draw on the site management letter
of credit provided pursuant to Subsection G of this section or to
demand payment directly from the applicant or the owner for the
cost of such Village work, including without limitation legal fees
and administrative expenses, based either on costs actually
incurred by the Village or on the Village's reasonable estimates of
costs to be incurred.
§ 106-17 ELM GROVE CODE § 106-17
101:122
(2) Except as provided in Subsection K, the Village shall give a written
or oral twenty-four-hour notice and an opportunity to cure to the
applicant before taking such action; provided, however, that no
such notice and opportunity to cure shall be required in the event
of repeated violations or in the event that a condition on or near the
subject property poses, in the determination of the Village, a threat
of any kind to the public health or safety.
I. Village right to complete work. Every permit authorizing demolition of a
dwelling issued pursuant to this article shall be conditioned on the
agreement of the applicant and the owner of the subject property that if
the applicant fails or refuses to complete the work authorized by said
permit in accordance with all plans approved in connection with said
permit, or if said permit has expired or been canceled and the applicant
has failed to secure a new permit to complete the work, or if the
applicant has violated any provision of this article or of any permit
issued or plan approved pursuant to this article and fails and refuses to
cure such violation, then the Village shall have the right, in addition to
all other rights afforded to the Village by law at the Village's option, to
complete such work or to correct any defect or deficiency using the
Village's own forces or contractors hired for that purpose. The Village
shall have the right to draw on the site management letter of credit
provided pursuant to Subsection G of this section or to demand
payment directly from the applicant or the owner for the cost of such
Village work, including without limitation legal fees and administrative
expenses, based either on costs actually incurred by the Village or on
the Village's reasonable estimates of costs to be incurred.
J. Special permit fees.
(1) Additional fee for late work. If the applicant shall fail to commence
construction within 60 days or shall fail to complete site restoration
within 60 days, as provided in Subsection D(2) or F of this section,
then the applicant shall pay a special late work permit fee of $250
per day for each day until such work is completed. The Village shall
deduct such fee from the site management letter of credit provided
pursuant to Subsection G of this section.
(2) No notice required. The Village shall have no duty to notify the
applicant of a violation of any section of this article, but instead the
Village may immediately proceed pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
K. Penalties. The violation of any provision of this section shall be grounds
for revocation of any permit or approval pursuant to which the work in
question is being undertaken or for the issuance of a stop order
pursuant to § 106-2B(1) of this chapter or for the imposition of a penalty
pursuant to § 106-9 of this chapter.
§ 106-17 BICYCLES § 106-18
101:123
§ 106-18. Rules and regulations.
The Building Inspector shall promulgate such rules and regulations as may
be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purpose and intent of this
article.
§ 106-19. Appeals.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decisions of the Building Inspector
or Plan Commission regarding the issuance or nonissuance of a demolition
permit may appeal the decision to the Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall
be filed with the Village Clerk within 30 days after filing of such decision.
§ 106-18 ELM GROVE CODE § 106-19
101:124
ARTICLE III
Refuse Disposal Facilities
[Adopted 3-22-2005]
§ 106-20. Preamble; intent.
Property improvements within the Village of Elm Grove reflect the Village’s
strong economy and its desirability as a place to live and work. New
construction adds significantly to the value of properties; however, the
Village recognizes that new construction activity can be disruptive if not
properly controlled. It is the intent of this Article to ensure that
construction-related activity, including the maintenance and operation of
construction sites, is safe, compatible with existing development and not
disruptive beyond what is necessary.
§ 106-21. Demolition, construction, renovation and other nongarbage
waste requiring the use of a dumpster.
A. All residential, commercial and industrial sites where demolition,
construction, renovation, clean up or like activity is underway shall
either have a construction dumpster or similar waste receptacle for
depositing all construction waste and related non-garbage trash or
provide for storage of all debris within the subject structure. It shall be
the responsibility of both the property owner and the contractor, if
applicable, to ensure regular servicing of any construction dumpster or
similar waste receptacle.
B. All construction dumpsters and similar waste receptacles shall exhibit a
clear and legible demarcation of owner of the receptacle, contact
information, address and a contact phone number.
C. Construction dumpsters and similar waste receptacles shall be located
on the private property undergoing construction, demolition or
renovation. The location of the construction dumpster shall not block
any exit doors or fire lanes.
D. All project sites shall be free of all loose debris, such as cans, metal,
plastic, paper, scrap lumber, concrete remnants, roof tile and other
materials commonly found on construction-related sites. All dumpsters
or like receptacles shall be emptied in a timely fashion so as to prevent
the overflow of debris or litter.
E. It shall be the responsibility of both the entity that owns the dumpster
or like receptacle and the property owner to ensure safe and legal
placement and maintenance of the receptacles, in accordance with this
section.
F. The Village Manager or his or her authorized designee reserves the
right to address special circumstances on a case-by-case basis.
§ 106-20 BICYCLES § 106-22
101:125
§ 106-22. Duty to promptly remove construction dumpsters and
similar waste receptacles.
It shall be the duty of the property owner of record to provide for the timely
removal of construction dumpsters and similar waste receptacles. Upon
completion of a demolition, construction, renovation or related project, said
owner shall have seven calendar days to remove the construction dumpster
or similar waste receptacle from the project site. Removal of construction
dumpsters or similar waste receptacles shall be done in accordance with
Village Code § 208-4, Construction hours.
§ 106-22 ELM GROVE CODE § 106-22
101:126
Chapter 112
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 33.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 220.
Trees and vegetation — See Ch. 266.
§ 112-1. Purpose.
It is hereby declared necessary in the interest of public safety and welfare
that the burning of yard waste, including grass, leaves and rubbish, and the
setting of similar fires in the Village of Elm Grove be prohibited.
§ 112-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRASS — Constitute grass, field, brush or similar combustible material in
its natural state.
LEAVES — Constitutes fallen leaves, cut grass, lawn rakings, hedge
trimming and similar debris accumulated in the course of yard
maintenance.
PERSON — Includes individuals and businesses within the limits of the
Village of Elm Grove but shall not be construed to include employees of the
Village of Elm Grove while in the performance of their duties on behalf of
the Village of Elm Grove.
RUBBISH — Constitutes all other combustible materials, including tree
trunks and branches, but excluding similar materials and charcoal when
properly contained in an outside grill and other cooking device or indoor
or portable fireplace when used within the manufacturer's
specifications.[Amended 12-11-2000]
§ 112-3. Grass, leaf and rubbish burning prohibited. [Amended
2-24-2014]
No person shall burn grass, leaves or rubbish within the Village of Elm
Grove except when the following conditions are met:
A. The purpose is to enhance native prairie biome.
B. A written burn plan for a parcel that contains a minimum of 10 acres is
submitted to the Village Clerk.
C. Approval of the burn plan granted by the Fire Chief.
§ 106-22 BICYCLES § 112-3
101:127
§ 112-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-2000;
7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
Chapter 116
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 116-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Elm Grove Cable
Television Franchise Ordinance," hereinafter "franchise" or "chapter."
§ 116-2. Definitions and word usage.
D. Approval of the Director of Public Works, the Village Manager, and the
Board of Trustees.
A. For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
BASIC SERVICE — Any subscriber tier provided by the grantee which
includes the delivery of local broadcast stations and public, educational
and governmental access channels. The basic service does not include
optional program and satellite service tiers, a la carte services or perchannel,
per-program or auxiliary services for which a separate charge
is made. However, the grantee may include other satellite signals on
the basic tier.
CABLE SYSTEM OR SYSTEM OR CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM —
A system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides or
other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities designed and
constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting,
amplifying and distributing audio, video and other forms of electronic,
electrical or optical signals, which includes cable television service,
and which are located in the village. The definition shall not include
any such facility that serves or will serve only subscribers in one
or more multiple-unit buildings under common ownership, control or
management and which does not use village rights-of-way.
CLASS IV CHANNEL — A signaling path provided by a cable
communications system to transmit signals of any type from a
subscriber terminal to another point in the cable communications
system.
CONTROL AND/OR CONTROLLING INTEREST — Actual working
control or ownership of a system in whatever manner exercised. A
rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling
interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly,
§ 112-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-2
101:128
by any person or entity (except underwriters during the period in which
they are offering securities to the public) of 10% or more of a cable
system or the franchise under which the system is operated. A change
in the control or controlling interest of an entity which has control or a
controlling interest in a grantee shall constitute a change in the control
or controlling interest of the system under the same criteria. "Control"
or "controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by
more than one person or entity.
CONVERTER — An electronic device which converts signals to a
frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver
of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel selector which also
permits a subscriber to view more than 12 channels delivered by the
system at designated converter dial locations.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and any legally
appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.
GRANTEE — A person or entity to whom or which a franchise under
this chapter is granted by the village, along with the lawful successors
or assigns of such person or entity.
GROSS REVENUES —
INITIAL SERVICE AREA — All areas in the village having at least 20
dwelling units per street mile.
All revenue collected directly or indirectly by the grantee from
the provision of cable service within the village, including but not
limited to basic subscriber service monthly fees, pay cable fees,
installation and reconnection fees, leased channel fees, converter
rentals, program guides, studio rental, production equipment,
personnel fees, late fees, downgrade fees, revenue from the sale,
exchange, use or cablecast of any programming developed on the
system for community or institutional use, advertising and any
value (at retail price levels) of any nonmonetary remuneration
received by the grantee in consideration of the performance of
advertising or any other service of the system; provided, however,
that this shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the
grantee herein imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the
state, local or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee
on behalf of the governmental unit.
(1)
Subject to applicable federal law, the term "gross revenues"
includes revenues attributed to franchise fees and revenues
collected directly or indirectly from other ancillary
telecommunications services (such as, but not limited to, pointto-
point telecommunications, point-to-point multipoint
telecommunications, data transmissions, etc.) but only to the
extent that all other providers of such telecommunications services
in the village are subject to the same compensation requirements
of the village.
(2)
§ 116-2 BICYCLES § 116-2
101:129
INSTALLATION — The connection of the system from feeder cable to
subscribers' terminals.
MONITORING — Observing a communications signal, or the absence
of a signal, where the observer is neither the subscriber nor the
programmer, whether the signal is observed by visual or electronic
means, for any purpose whatsoever, provided that "monitoring" shall
not include system-wide, non-individually-addressed sweeps of the
system for purposes of verifying system integrity, controlling return
path transmissions or billing for pay services.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — As applied to the grantee, shall mean
those hours during which similar businesses in the village are open to
serve customers. In all cases, normal business hours shall include some
evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those service conditions which
are within the control of the grantee. Those conditions which are
not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to,
natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network
outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions
which are ordinarily within the control of the grantee include, but are
not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases,
regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade
of the cable system.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION AND/OR OUTAGES — The loss of either
picture or sound or both for a single subscriber or multiple subscribers.
STREET — The surface of and all rights-of-way and the space above and
below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way
or place, sidewalk, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or easement
now or hereafter held by the village for the purpose of public travel
and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held
or hereafter held by the village which shall, within their proper use
and meaning, entitle the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose
of installing poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as
may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a telecommunications
system.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person, firm, grantee, corporation or association
lawfully receiving basic and/or any additional service from the grantee.
USER — A party utilizing a cable television system channel for purposes
of production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted
with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
VILLAGE — The Village of Elm Grove, Wisconsin.
B. "May" is permissive. "Shall" is mandatory.
§ 116-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-3
101:130
§ 116-3. Rights and privileges of grantee.
Any franchise granted by the village pursuant to § 66.082, Wis. Stats., shall
grant to the grantee the right and privilege to erect, construct, operate
and maintain in, upon and along, across, above, over and under the streets
now in existence and as may be created or established during its term any
poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes and other television
conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of a
cable system.
§ 116-4. Agreement; incorporation of application by reference.
§ 116-5. Franchise territory.
Any franchise is for the present territorial limits of the village and for any
area henceforth added thereto during the term of the franchise.
§ 116-6. Duration and acceptance of franchise.
The franchise and the rights, privileges and authority granted shall take
effect and be in force as set forth in the franchise agreement and shall
continue in force and effect for a term of no longer than 15 years, provided
that within 15 days after the date of final passage of the franchise the
grantee shall file with the village its unconditional acceptance of the
franchise and promise to comply with and abide by all its provisions, terms
and conditions. Such acceptance and promise shall be in writing duly
executed and sworn to by or on behalf of the grantee before a notary public
or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths. Such franchise shall
be nonexclusive and revocable.
§ 116-7. Franchise renewal.
A. Upon adoption of any franchise agreement and execution thereof by the
grantee, the grantee agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions
contained herein.
B. Any grantee also agrees to provide all services specifically set forth in
its letter of application, if any, and to provide cable television service
within the confines of the village, and by its acceptance of the franchise
the grantee specifically grants and agrees that its application is thereby
incorporated by reference and made a part of the franchise. In the
event of a conflict between such proposals and the provisions of this
chapter, that provision which provides the greatest benefit to the
village, in the opinion of the village, shall prevail.
A. Current federal statutory process.
(1) The village may, on its own initiative, during the six-month period
which begins with the 36th month before the franchise expiration,
commence a proceeding which affords the public in the village
appropriate notice and participation for the purpose of identifying
§ 116-3 BICYCLES § 116-7
101:131
the future cable-related community needs and interests and
reviewing the performance of the grantee under the franchise.
If the grantee submits, during such six-month period, a written
renewal notice requesting the commencement of such proceeding,
the village shall commence such proceeding not later than six
months after the date such notice is submitted.
(2) Upon completion of the proceeding under Subsection A(1) above,
the grantee may, on its own initiative or at the request of the
village, submit a proposal for renewal. The village may establish a
date by which such proposal shall be submitted.
(3) Upon submittal by the grantee of a proposal to the village for the
renewal of the franchise, the village shall provide prompt public
notice of such proposal and renew the franchise or issue a
preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed
and, at the request of the grantee or on its own initiative,
commence an administrative proceeding after providing prompt
public notice of such proceeding.
(4) The village shall consider in any administrative proceeding
whether:
(a) The grantee has substantially complied with material terms of
the existing franchise and with applicable law;
(b) The quality of the grantee's service, including signal quality,
response to consumer complaints and billing practices, but
without regard to the mix or quality of cable services or other
services provided over the system, has been reasonable in the
light of community needs;
(c) The grantee has the financial, legal and technical ability to
provide the services, facilities and equipment as set forth in the
grantee's proposal; and
(d) The grantee's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cablerelated
community needs and interests, taking into account the
costs of meeting such needs and interests.
(5) In any administrative proceeding described in Subsection A(4), the
grantee shall be afforded adequate notice and the grantee and the
village, or its designee, shall be afforded fair opportunity for full
participation, including the right to introduce evidence [including
evidence related to issues raised in the proceedings under
Subsection A(4) above], to require the production of evidence and
to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of any such
proceeding at the expense of the grantee.
(6) At the completion of a proceeding under Subsection A(4), the
village shall issue a written decision granting or denying the
proposal for renewal based upon the record of such proceeding and
§ 116-7 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-7
101:132
transmit a copy of such decision to the grantee. Such decision shall
state the reasons therefor.
(7) Any denial of a proposal for renewal that has been submitted in
compliance with the procedures set forth above shall be based on
one or more adverse findings made with respect to the factors
described at Subsection A(4)(a) through (d) pursuant to the record
of the proceeding under said subsection. The village may not base a
denial of renewal on a failure to substantially comply with the
material terms of the franchise or on events considered under
Subsection A(4)(b) unless the village has provided the grantee with
notice and the opportunity to cure within 30 days, unless an
alternate timetable has been mutually established in writing
between the village and the grantee, or in any case in which it is
documented that the village has waived its right to object.
(8) The grantee may appeal any final decision or failure of the village
to act in accordance with the procedural requirements of this
section. The court shall grant appropriate relief if the court finds
that any action of the village is not in compliance with the
procedural requirements of this section or, in the event of a final
decision of the village denying the renewal proposal, the grantee
has demonstrated that the adverse finding of the village with
respect to each of the factors described in Subsection A(4)(a)
through (d) on which the denial is based is not supported by a
preponderance of the evidence, based on the record of the
administrative proceeding.
B. Franchise renewal in the event of change in federal law. A franchise
may be renewed by the village upon application of the grantee pursuant
to the procedure established in this section and in accordance with the
then-applicable law.
(1) At least 24 months prior to the expiration of the franchise, the
grantee shall inform the village in writing of its intent to seek
renewal of the franchise.
(2) The grantee shall submit a proposal for renewal which
demonstrates that:
(a) It has been and continues to be in substantial compliance with
the terms, conditions and limitations of this chapter and its
franchise;
(b) Its system has been installed, constructed, maintained and
operated in accordance with the accepted standards of the
industry and this chapter and its franchise;
(c) It has the legal, technical, financial and other qualifications to
continue to maintain and operate its system and to extend the
same as the state of the art progresses so as to assure its
subscribers high-quality service; and
§ 116-7 BICYCLES § 116-7
101:133
§ 116-8. Police powers.
(d) It has made a good faith effort to provide services and facilities
which accommodate the demonstrated needs of the community
as may be reasonably ascertained by the village.
(3) After giving public notice, the village shall proceed to determine
whether the grantee has satisfactorily performed its obligations
under the franchise. To determine satisfactory performance, the
village shall consider technical developments and performance of
the system, programming other services offered, cost of services
and any other particular requirements set in this chapter. Also, the
village shall consider the grantee's reports made to the village and
the Federal Communication Commission, may require the grantee
to make available specified records, documents and information for
this purpose and may inquire specifically whether the grantee will
supply services sufficient to meet community needs and interests.
Industry performance on a national basis shall also be considered.
Provision shall be made for public comment.
(4) The village shall then prepare any amendments to this chapter that
it believes necessary.
(5) If the village finds the grantee's performance satisfactory and finds
the grantee's technical, legal and financial abilities acceptable and
finds that the grantee's renewal proposal meets the future cablerelated
needs of the village, a new franchise shall be granted
pursuant to this chapter as amended for a period to be determined.
(6) If the grantee is determined by the village to have performed
unsatisfactorily, new applicants may be sought and evaluated, and
a franchise award shall be made by the village according to
franchising procedures adopted by the village.
A. By accepting a franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights
hereunder are subject to the police power of the village to adopt and
enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the
public and shall agree to comply with all applicable general laws and
ordinances enacted by the village pursuant to such power.
B. Any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any other
present or future lawful exercise of the village's police powers shall be
resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise that is not
of general application in the jurisdiction, or that applies exclusively to
the grantee or cable television system which contains provisions
inconsistent with this franchise, shall prevail only if upon such exercise
the village finds an emergency exists constituting a danger to health,
safety, property or general welfare or such exercise is mandated by law.
§ 116-7 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-9
101:134
§ 116-9. Franchise required.
No cable television system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets,
i.e. rights-of-way, for system installation and maintenance purposes, of the
village or be allowed to operate without a franchise granted under this
chapter.
§ 116-10. Use of grantee facilities.
The village shall have the right, during the life of this franchise, to install
and maintain free of charge upon the poles of the grantee any wire or pole
fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the cable television system
operations of the grantee. The village shall indemnify and hold harmless the
grantee from any claim that might arise due to or as a result of the village's
use.
§ 116-11. Initial franchise costs. [Amended 4-22-2008]
Costs to be borne by the grantee shall include any requirements or charges
incidental to awarding or enforcing an initial franchise under this chapter
but shall not be limited to all costs of posting of notices prior to any
public meeting provided for pursuant to this franchise and any costs not
covered by application fees incurred by the village in its study, preparation
of proposal documents, evaluation of all applications and examinations of
the applicants' qualifications. An advance deposit of funds for this purpose
may be required by the village.
§ 116-12. Notices.
All notices from the grantee to the village pursuant to this chapter shall be
to the Village Manager's Office. The grantee shall maintain with the village,
throughout the term of this franchise, an address for service of notices
by mail. The grantee shall maintain a central office to address any issues
relating to operating under this chapter.
§ 116-13. Performance bond.
A. Within 30 days after the award of a franchise under this chapter, the
initial grantee shall file with the village a performance bond in the
amount of $25,000. This bond shall be maintained throughout the
construction period and until such time as determined by the village,
unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement.
B. If the grantee fails to comply with any law, ordinance or resolution
governing the franchise or fails to well and truly observe, fulfill and
perform each term and condition of the franchise as it relates to the
conditions relative to the construction of the system, including the
franchise agreement which is incorporated herein by reference, there
shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety
of the bond any damages or loss suffered by the village as a result,
including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost
§ 116-9 BICYCLES § 116-13
101:135
§ 116-14. Liability and insurance.
of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee, plus a
reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, including the village's
Attorney, and costs, up to the full amount of the bond.
C. The village may, upon completion of construction of the service area
pursuant to the application, waive or reduce the requirement of the
grantee to maintain the bond. However, the village may require a
performance bond to be posted by the grantee for any construction
subsequent to the completion of the initial service areas, in a
reasonable amount and upon such terms as determined by the village.
D. The bond shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby
understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the
surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 30
days after receipt by the village, by registered mail, of a written notice
of such intent to cancel and not to renew." Upon receipt of a thirty-day
notice, this shall be construed as default granting the village the right
to call in the bond.
E. The village, at any time during the term of this chapter, may waive the
grantee's requirement to maintain a performance bond. The invitation
to waive the requirement can be initiated by the village or grantee.
A. The grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the franchise
specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the
franchise liability insurance insuring the village and the grantee in the
minimum amount of:
(1) One million dollars for property damage to any one person;
(2) One million dollars for property damage in any one accident;
(3) One million dollars for personal injury to any one person; and
(4) One million dollars for personal injury in any one accident.
B. The certificate of insurance obtained by the grantee in compliance with
this section is subject to the approval of the Village Attorney, and such
certificate of insurance, along with written evidence of payment of
required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the village
during the term of the franchise and may be changed from time to time
to reflect changing liability limits. The grantee shall immediately advise
the Village Attorney of any litigation that may develop that would affect
this insurance.
C. Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the
village thereunder shall be construed to or limit the liability of the
grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages.
D. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this franchise shall
contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed
§ 116-13 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-14
101:136
§ 116-15. Indemnification.
that this insurance policy may not be canceled by the surety nor the
intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 30 days after receipt
by the village, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intention
to cancel or not to renew."
A. Disclaimer of liability. The village shall not at any time be liable for
injury or damage occurring to any person or property from any cause
whatsoever arising out of the construction, maintenance, repair, use,
operation, condition or dismantling of the grantee's telecommunication
system and due to the act or omission of any person or entity other than
the village or those persons or entities for whom or which the village is
legally liable as a matter of law.
B. Indemnification. The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify and hold harmless the village, all associated, affiliated, allied
and subsidiary entities of the village now existing or hereinafter created
and their respective officers, boards, commissions, employees, agents,
attorneys and contractors (hereinafter referred to as "indemnities")
from and against:
(1) Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims,
liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without
limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert
witnesses and consultants) which may be imposed upon, incurred
by or be asserted against the indemnities by reason of any act or
omission of the grantee, its personnel, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors resulting in personal injury, bodily
injury, sickness, disease or death to any person or damage to, loss
of or destruction of tangible or intangible property, libel, slander,
invasion of privacy and unauthorized use of any trademark, trade
name, copyright, patent, service mark or any other right of any
person, firm or corporation which may arise out of or be in any way
connected with the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or condition of the cable system caused by the
grantee, its subcontractors or agents or the grantee's failure to
comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or
regulation.
(2) Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims,
liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without
limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert
witnesses and other consultants) which are imposed upon, incurred
by or asserted against the indemnities by reason of any claim or
lien arising out of work, labor, materials or supplies provided or
supplied to the grantee, its contractors or subcontractors for the
installation, construction, operation or maintenance of the cable
system caused by the grantee, its subcontractors or agents and,
upon the written request of the Commission, shall cause such claim
§ 116-14 BICYCLES § 116-15
101:137
or lien to be discharged or bonded within 15 days following such
request.
(3) Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims,
liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without
limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert
witnesses and consultants) which may be imposed upon, incurred
by or be asserted against the indemnities by reason of any
financing or securities offering by the grantee or its affiliates for
violations of the common law or any laws, statutes or regulations of
the State of Wisconsin or United States, including those of the
Federal Securities and Exchange Commission, whether by the
grantee or otherwise, excluding therefrom, however, claims which
are solely based upon and shall arise solely out of information
supplied by the village to the grantee in writing and included in the
offering materials with the express written approval of the village
prior to the offering.
C. Assumption of risk. The grantee undertakes and assumes for its
officers, agents, contractors and subcontractors and employees all risk
of dangerous conditions, if any, on or about any village-owned or
village-controlled property, including public rights-of-way, and the
grantee hereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the indemnities
against and from any claim asserted or liability imposed upon the
indemnities for personal injury or property damage to any person
arising out of the installation, operation, maintenance or condition of
the cable system or the grantee's failure to comply with any federal,
state or local statute, ordinance or regulation.
D. Defense of indemnities. In the event any action or proceeding shall be
brought against the indemnities by reason of any matter for which the
indemnities are indemnified hereunder, the grantee shall, upon notice
from any of the indemnities, at the grantee's sole cost and expense,
resist and defend the same with legal counsel mutually acceptable to
the Village Attorney of the Village of Elm Grove and the grantee,
provided further, however, that the grantee shall not admit liability in
any such matter on behalf of the indemnities without the written
consent of the Village Attorney of the Village of Elm Grove or Village
Attorney's designee.
E. Notice cooperation and expenses. The village shall give the grantee
prompt notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any
action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this
section. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the village from
cooperating with the grantee and participating in the defense of any
litigation by the village's own counsel. The grantee shall pay all
reasonable expenses incurred by the village in defending itself with
regard to any such actions, suits or proceedings. These expenses shall
include all out-of-pocket expenses, such as attorney fees, and shall also
include the reasonable value of any services rendered by or on behalf of
the Village Attorney, if such service is determined necessary and
§ 116-15 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-15
101:138
§ 116-16. Rights of individuals.
§ 116-17. Public notice. [Amended 4-22-2008]
Minimum public notice of any public meeting relating to this franchise shall
be by posting at least 24 hours prior to the meeting.
§ 116-18. Service availability; record of service requests.
The grantee shall provide cable communications service throughout the
entire franchise area pursuant to the provisions of this franchise and shall
keep a record for at least three years of all requests for service received by
the grantee. This record shall be available for public inspection at the local
office of the grantee during regular office hours.
§ 116-19. System construction.
appropriate by the Village Attorney, and the actual expenses of the
village's agents, employees or expert witnesses and disbursements and
liabilities assumed by the village in connection with such suits, actions
or proceedings. No recovery by the village of any sum under the letter
of credit shall be any limitation upon the liability of the grantee to the
village under the terms of this section, except that any sum so received
by the village shall be deducted from any recovery which the village
might have against the grantee under the terms of this section.
F. Nonwaiver of statutory limits. Nothing in this agreement is intended to
express or imply a waiver of the statutory provisions, of any kind or
nature, as set forth in § 893.80 et seq., Wis. Stats., including the limits
of liability of the village as exist presently or may be modified from time
to time by the legislature.
A. The grantee shall not deny service, deny access or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on
the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, income or sex. The
grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state
and local laws and regulations and all executive and administrative
orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and
made part of this chapter by reference.
B. The grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity
requirements of federal, state and local regulations and as amended
from time to time.
C. The grantee shall, at all times, comply with the privacy requirements of
state and federal law.
D. The grantee is required to make all services available to all residential
dwellings throughout the service area.
A. New construction timetable.
§ 116-15 BICYCLES § 116-19
101:139
(1) Within two years from the date of the award of initial franchise, the
grantee must make cable television service available to every
dwelling unit within the initial service area.
(a) The grantee must make cable television service available to at
least 20% of the dwelling units within the initial service area
within six months from the date of the award of the franchise.
(b) The grantee must make cable television service available to at
least 50% of the dwelling units within the initial service area
within one year from the date of the award of the franchise.
(2) The grantee, in its application, if any, may propose a timetable of
construction which will make cable television service available in
the initial service area sooner than the above minimum
requirements, in which case said schedule will be made part of the
franchise agreement and will be binding upon the grantee.
(3) Any delay beyond the terms of this timetable, unless specifically
approved by the village, will be considered a violation of this
chapter for which the provisions of either § 116-36 or 116-44 shall
apply, as determined by the village.
(4) In special circumstances, the village can waive one-hundredpercent
completion within the two-year time frame, provided
substantial completion is accomplished within the allotted time
frame, substantial completion construed to be not less than 95%,
and justification for less than 100% must be submitted subject to
the satisfaction of the village.
B. Line extensions.
(1) In areas of the franchise territory not included in the initial service
areas, the grantee shall be required to extend its system pursuant
to the following requirements:
(a) No customer shall be refused service arbitrarily. The grantee is
hereby authorized to extend the cable system as necessary
within the village. To expedite the process of extending the
cable system into a new subdivision, the village will forward to
the grantee an approved engineering plan of each project.
Subject to the density requirements, the grantee shall
commence the design and construction process upon receipt of
the final engineering plan. Upon notification from the village
that the first home in the project has been approved for a
building permit, the grantee shall have a maximum of three
months to complete the construction/activation process within
the project phase.
(b) The grantee must extend and make cable television service
available to every dwelling unit in all unserved, developing
areas having at least 20 dwelling units planned per street mile,
§ 116-19 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-19
101:140
as measured from the existing system, and shall extend its
system simultaneously with the installation of utility lines.
(c) The grantee must extend and make cable television service
available to any isolated resident outside the initial service
area requesting connection at the standard connection charge,
if the connection to the isolated resident would require no
more than a standard drop line of 175 feet.
(2) Early extension.
(a) In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory
extension of service, the grantee shall provide, upon the
request of a potential subscriber desiring service, an estimate
of the costs required to extend service to the subscriber. The
grantee shall then extend service upon request of the potential
subscriber. The grantee may require advance payment or
assurance of payment satisfactory to the grantee. The amount
paid by subscribers for early extensions shall be
nonrefundable, and in the event the area subsequently reaches
the density required for mandatory extension, such payments
shall be treated as consideration for early extension.
(b) Line extension policy. All residents who request cable
television service in the village not currently serviceable to the
existing cable plant will be forwarded to the grantee's
engineering department. The grantee will prepare a cost
estimate based on the remaining actual construction footage
and the current year's actual cost of materials and labor using
the formula provided in Appendix A of this chapter.
(3) New development underground. In cases of new construction or
property development where utilities are to be placed
underground, the developer or property owner shall give the
grantee reasonable notice of such construction or development and
of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for
the grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults and
laterals to be provided at the grantee's expense. The grantee shall
also provide specifications as needed for trenching. Costs of
trenching and easements required to bring service to the
development shall be borne by the developer or property owner,
except that if the grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/
or vaults and laterals within five working days of the date the
trenches are available, as designated in the notice given by the
developer or property owner, then should the trenches be closed
after the five-day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne by
the grantee. Except for the notice of the particular date on which
trenching will be available to the grantee, any notice provided to
the grantee by the village of a preliminary plat request shall satisfy
the requirement of reasonable notice if sent to the local general
§ 116-19 BICYCLES § 116-19
101:141
§ 116-20. Construction and technical standards.
manager or system engineer of the grantee prior to approval of the
preliminary plat request.
C. Special agreements. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
grantee from serving areas not covered under this section upon
agreement with developers, property owners or residents, provided
that 3% of those gross revenues is paid to the village as a franchise fee
under § 116-26.
(1) The grantee, in its application, may propose a line extension policy
which will result in serving more residents of the village than as
required above, in which case the grantee's policy will be
incorporated into the franchise agreement and will be binding on
the grantee.
(2) The violation of this section shall be considered a breach of the
terms of this chapter for which the provisions of either § 116-36 or
116-44 shall apply, as determined by the village.
A. Compliance with construction and technical standards. The grantee
shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner
consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction standards,
governmental requirements and FCC technical standards. In addition,
the grantee shall provide the village, upon request, with a written
report of the results of the grantee's annual proof of performance tests
conducted pursuant to Federal Communications Commission standards
and requirements.
B. Additional specifications.
(1) Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable television
system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner.
All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel to
electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be
arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering
considerations.
(2) The grantee shall at all times comply with:
(a) The National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of
Standards);
(b) The National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire
Underwriters);
(c) The Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction; and
(d) Applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations.
§ 116-19 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-20
101:142
§ 116-21. Use of streets.
(3) In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the
safety of persons or property in the franchise area or other areas
where the grantee may have equipment located.
(4) Any antenna structure used in the system shall comply with
construction, marking and lighting of antenna structures required
by the United States Department of Transportation.
(5) All working facilities and conditions used during construction,
installation and maintenance of the cable television system shall
comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration.
(6) RF leakage shall be checked at reception locations for emergency
radio services to prove no interference signal combinations are
possible. Stray radiation shall be measured adjacent to any
proposed aeronautical navigation radio sites to prove no
interference to airborne navigational reception in the normal flight
patterns. FCC rules and regulations shall govern.
(7) The grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby
power for head end and transport system for a minimum of two
hours.
(8) In all areas of the village where the cables, wires and other like
facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the grantee
shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground.
When public utilities relocate their facilities from pole to
underground, the cable operator must concurrently do so.
A. Interference with persons and improvements. The grantee's system,
poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected and
maintained so that none of its facilities shall endanger or interfere with
the lives of persons or interfere with the rights or reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets and
public ways or interfere with any improvements the village may deem
proper to make or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the
streets, alleys, bridges, easements or public property.
B. Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of pavement,
sidewalk, landscaping, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall,
at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the village,
replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping or
surface of any street or alley disturbed in as good condition as before
the work was commenced and in accordance with standards for such
work set by the village.
C. Erection, removal and uses of poles, antennas or wire-holding
structures:
§ 116-20 BICYCLES § 116-21
101:143
(1) No poles, antennas or wire-holding structures shall be erected by
the grantee without prior approval of the village with regard to
location, height, types and any other pertinent aspect. However, no
location of any pole or wire-holding structure of the grantee shall
be a vested interest, and such poles, antennas or structures shall
be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense
whenever the village determines that the public convenience would
be enhanced thereby.
(2) Where poles, antennas or wire-holding structures already existing
for use in serving the village are available for use by the grantee
but it does not make arrangements for such use, the village may
require the grantee to use such poles and structures if it
determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby
and the terms of the use available to the grantee are just and
reasonable.
(3) In the absence of any governing federal or state statute, where the
village or a public utility serving the village desires to make use of
the poles or other wire-holding structures of the grantee but
agreement thereof with the grantee cannot be reached, the village
may require the grantee to permit such use for such consideration
and upon such terms as the village shall determine to be just and
reasonable, if the village determines that the use would enhance
the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the
grantee's operations.
D. Relocation of the facilities. If at any time during the period of this
franchise the village shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of
any street, alley or other public ways, the grantee, upon reasonable
notice by the village, shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles,
wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its
own expense, unless the utilities are compensated, in which case the
grantee shall be similarly compensated.
E. Cooperation with building movers. The grantee shall, on the request of
any person holding a building moving permit issued by the village,
temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings.
The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires
shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall
have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee
shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for
such temporary wire changes.
F. Tree trimming. The grantee shall not remove any tree or trim any
portion, either above, at or below ground level, of any tree within any
public place without the prior consent of the village. The village shall
have the right to do the trimming requested by the grantee at the cost
of the grantee. Regardless of who performs the work requested by the
grantee, the grantee shall be responsible and shall defend and hold the
village harmless for any and all damages to any tree as a result of
§ 116-21 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-21
101:144
§ 116-22. Operational standards.
trimming or to the land surrounding any tree, whether such tree is
trimmed or removed.
A. The grantee shall put, keep and maintain all parts of the system in good
condition throughout the entire franchise period.
B. Upon the reasonable request for service by any person located within
the franchise territory, the grantee shall, within 30 days, furnish the
requested service to such person within terms of the line extension
policy. A request for service shall be unreasonable for the purpose of
this subsection if no trunk line installation capable of servicing that
person's block has as yet been installed.
C. The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and
shall occur during periods of minimum system use.
D. The grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere
with television reception of subscribers or persons not served by the
grantee, nor shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any
manner the operation of the various utilities serving the residents
within the confines of the village, nor shall other utilities interfere with
the grantee's system.
E. The grantee shall have knowledgeable, qualified grantee
representatives available to respond to customer telephone inquiries 24
hours per day and seven days per week.
F. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time, including
wait time and the time required to transfer the call, shall not exceed 30
seconds. This standard shall be met no less than 90% of the time as
measured on an annual basis.
G. Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy
signal less than 3% of the total time that the office is open for business.
H. Standard installations will be performed within seven business days
after an order has been placed. A standard installation is one that is
within 175 feet of the existing system.
I. Excluding those situations constituting acts of God which are beyond its
control, the grantee will restore any service interruption promptly and
in no event later than 24 hours from the time of initial notification of
interruption of service. All other regular service requests will be
provided to within 36 hours during the normal workweek for that
system. The appointment window alternatives for installations, service
calls and other installation activities will be morning or afternoon, not
to exceed a four-hour window during normal business hours for the
system, or at a time that is mutually acceptable. The grantee will
§ 116-21 BICYCLES § 116-22
101:145
schedule supplemental hours during which appointments can be
scheduled based on the needs of the community. If at any time an
installer or technician is running late, an attempt to contact the
customer will be made and the appointment rescheduled as necessary
at a time that is convenient to the customer.
J. Customer service centers and bill payment locations will be located in
the Milwaukee metropolitan area and open for walk-in customer
transactions a minimum of eight hours a day Monday through Friday,
unless there is a need to modify those hours because of the location or
customers served. The grantee and village by mutual consent will
establish supplemental hours on weekdays and weekends if it would fit
the needs of the community.
K. Subscriber credit for outages. Upon service interruption and/or outages
of subscribers' cable service, the following shall apply:
(1) For service interruptions and/or outages of over four hours and up
to seven days, the grantee shall provide, at the subscriber's
request, a credit of 1/30 of one month's fees for affected services
for each twenty-four-hour period service is interrupted for four or
more hours for any single subscriber, with the exception of
subscribers disconnected because of nonpayment or excessive
signal leakage.
(2) For service interruptions and/or outages of seven days or more in
one month, the grantee shall provide, at the subscriber's request, a
full month's credit for affected services for all affected subscribers.
L. The grantee will provide written information in each of the following
areas at the time of installation and at any future time upon the request
of the customer:
(1) Product and services offered.
(2) Prices and service options.
(3) Installation and service policies.
(4) How to use the telecommunications services.
M. Bills will be clear, concise and understandable, with all cable services
itemized.
N. Credits will be issued promptly, but no later than the customer's next
billing cycle following the resolution of the request and the return of the
equipment by the grantee if service has been terminated.
O. Customers will be notified a minimum of 30 days in advance of any rate
or channel change, provided that the change is within the control of the
grantee.
§ 116-22 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-22
101:146
§ 116-23. Continuity of service.
§ 116-24. Complaint procedure.
P. The grantee shall maintain and operate its network in accordance with
the rules and regulations as are incorporated herein or may be
promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission, the United
States Congress or the State of Wisconsin.
Q. The grantee shall continue, through the term of the franchise, to
maintain the technical standards and quality of service set forth in this
chapter. Should the village find, by resolution, that the grantee has
failed to maintain these technical standards and quality of service, the
grantee shall be required to implement a plan for resolution. Failure to
make such improvements within three months of such resolution will
constitute a breach of a condition for which penalties contained in
§ 116-44 are applicable.
R. The grantee shall keep a monthly service log which will indicate the
nature of each service complaint received in the last 24 months, the
date and time it was received, the disposition of said complaint and the
time and date thereof. This log shall be made available for periodic
inspection by the village.
A. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service
insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are
honored. If the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the
system or the village gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew
this franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers
receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the
circumstances.
B. If there is a change of franchise or if a new operator acquires the
system, the grantee shall cooperate with the village, new franchisee or
operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During
such period, the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period
during which it operates the system and shall be entitled to reasonable
costs for its services until it no longer operates the system.
C. If the grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days
without prior approval of the village or without just cause, the village
may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until
such time as the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable
to the village or a permanent operator is selected. If the village is
required to fulfill this obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall
reimburse the village for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of
revenues from the system received by the village that are the result of
the grantee's failure to perform.
§ 116-22 BICYCLES § 116-24
101:147
A. The Village Manager is designated as having primary responsibility for
the continuing administration of the franchise and implementation of
complaint procedures.
B. During the terms of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the grantee
shall maintain a central office for the purpose of receiving and resolving
all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions
and similar matters. The office must be reachable by a local, toll-free
telephone call to receive complaints regarding quality of service,
equipment functions and similar matters. The grantee will use its good
faith efforts to arrange for one or more payment locations in a central
location where customers can pay bills or conduct other business
activities.
C. As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the system, the grantee
shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish
information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or
complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of
the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or
complaints are to be addressed.
D. When there have been similar complaints made or where there exists
other evidence which, in the judgment of the village, casts doubt on the
reliability or quality of cable service, the village shall have the right and
authority to require the grantee to test, analyze and report on the
performance of the system. The grantee shall fully cooperate with the
village in performing such testing and shall prepare results and a
report, if requested, within 30 days after notice. Such report shall
include the following information:
(1) The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the
special tests;
(2) What system component was tested;
(3) The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;
(4) The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was
resolved; and
(5) Any other information pertinent to the tests and analysis which may
be required.
E. The village may require that tests be supervised by an independent
professional engineer or equivalent of the village's choice. The engineer
should sign all records of special tests and forward to the village such
records with a report interpreting the results of the tests and
recommending actions to be taken. Should such a test prove that the
grantee failed to meet the technical standard, the grantee shall bear the
cost of the test. If the test should prove that the grantee met the
technical standards, the village shall bear the cost of the test.
§ 116-24 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-24
101:148
§ 116-25. Grantee rules and regulations.
The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be
reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and
perform its obligations under this franchise and to assure an uninterrupted
service to each and all of its customers; provided, however, that such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions
hereof or applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations.
§ 116-26. Franchise fee.
F. The village's right under this section shall be limited to requiring tests,
analysis and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics
based on complaints or other evidence when and under such
circumstances as the village has reasonable grounds to believe that the
complaints or other evidence requires that tests be performed to
protect the public against substandard cable service.
A. For the reason that the streets of the village to be used by the grantee in
the operation of its system within the boundaries of the village are
valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the village at
great expense to its taxpayers and that the grant to the grantee to the
streets is a valuable property right without which the grantee would be
required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and
acquisitions, the grantee shall pay to the village an amount equal to 3%
of the grantee's gross annual revenue from the operations of the
grantee within the confines of the village or contract area. If the
statutory five-percent limitation on franchise fees is raised or the
federal statute deletes the franchise fee limitation entirely, then the
franchise fee may be subject to renegotiation.
B. This payment shall be in addition to any other tax or payment owed to
the village by the grantee.
C. The franchise fee and any other costs or penalties assessed shall be
payable quarterly on a calendar year basis to the village, and the
grantee shall file a complete and accurate verified statement of all
gross receipts as previously defined within 45 days after the quarter as
established between the village and the grantee.
D. The village shall have the right to inspect the grantee's income records
and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be
payable under this chapter; provided, however, that such audit shall
take place within 24 months following the close of each of the grantee's
fiscal years. Any additional amount due to the village as a result of the
audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the
grantee by the village, which notice shall include a copy of the audit
report.
§ 116-24 BICYCLES § 116-26
101:149
§ 116-27. Transfer of ownership or control.
E. If any franchise payment or recomputed amount, cost or penalty is not
made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest
shall be charged daily from such date at the legal maximum rate
charged by the United States Internal Revenue Service for late tax
payments, and the grantee shall reimburse the village for any additional
expenses and costs incurred by the village by reason of the delinquent
payment(s).
A. Except as may be provided in a franchise agreement, this franchise
shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or
leased, sublet or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto,
either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein pass
to or vest in any person without the prior written consent of the village.
The grantee may, however, transfer or assign the franchise to a wholly
owned subsidiary of the grantee and such subsidiary may transfer or
assign the franchise back to the grantee without such consent, provided
that such assignment is without any release of liability of the grantee.
(1) The proposed assignee must show financial responsibility as
determined by the village and must agree to comply with all
provisions of the franchise.
(2) The village shall have 120 days to act upon any request for
approval of such a sale or transfer submitted in writing that
contains or is accompanied by such information as is required in
accordance with FCC regulations and by the Village of Elm Grove.
The village shall be deemed to have consented to a proposed
transfer or assignment if its refusal to consent is not communicated
in writing to the grantee within 120 days following receipt of
written notice and the necessary information as to the effect of the
proposed transfer or assignment upon the public unless the
requesting party and the village agree to an extension of time. The
village shall not unreasonably withhold such consent to the
proposed transfer.
B. Except as may be provided in a franchise agreement, the grantee shall
promptly notify the village of any actual or proposed change in, or
transfer of or acquisition by any other party of control of the grantee.
The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders
but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. A
rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall
arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of
persons of 10% of the voting shares of the grantee. Every change,
transfer or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise
subject to cancellation unless and until the village shall have consented
thereto, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld. For the
purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change,
transfer or acquisition of control, the village may inquire into the
§ 116-26 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-27
101:150
§ 116-28. Availability of books and records.
§ 116-29. Other petitions and applications.
Copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports either
submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission,
Securities and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state
regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any
qualification of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall
assist the village in such inquiry.
C. The consent or approval of the village to any transfer of the grantee
shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the village in and
to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms be expressly
subordinate to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
D. In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the village will not
approve any transfer or assignment of an initial franchise prior to
substantial completion of construction of the proposed system.
E. In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without
the successor in interest becoming a signatory to this franchise
agreement.
A. The grantee shall fully cooperate in making available at reasonable
times, and the village shall have the right to inspect where reasonably
necessary to the enforcement of the franchise, books, records, maps,
plans and other like materials of the grantee applicable to the cable
television system, at any time during normal business hours, provided
that where volume and convenience necessitate, the grantee may
require inspection to take place on the grantee's premises in the
Milwaukee metro area.
B. The following records and/or reports are to be made available to the
village upon request, but no more frequently than on an annual basis
unless mutually agreed upon by the grantee and the village:
(1) A quarterly review and resolution or progress report submitted by
the grantee to the village.
(2) Periodic preventive maintenance reports.
(3) Any copies of FCC Form 395-A (or successor form) or any
supplemental forms related to equal opportunity or fair contracting
policies.
(4) Subscriber inquiry/complaint resolution data and the right to
review documentation concerning these inquiries and/or
complaints periodically.
(5) Periodic construction update reports, including where appropriate
the submission of as-built maps.
§ 116-27 BICYCLES § 116-29
101:151
matters affecting cable television operations authorized pursuant to the
franchise or received from such agencies shall be provided to the village
upon request.
§ 116-30. Fiscal reports.
The grantee shall file annually with the village no later than 120 days after
the end of the grantee's fiscal year a copy of a gross revenues statement
certified by an officer of the grantee.
§ 116-31. Removal of cable television system.
At the expiration of the terms for which this franchise is granted and any
renewal denied or upon its termination as provided herein, the grantee
shall forthwith, upon notice by the village, remove at its own expense all
designated portions of the cable television system from all streets and
public property within the village. If the grantee fails to do so, the village
may perform the work at the grantee's expense. Upon such notice of
removal, a bond shall be furnished by the grantee in an amount sufficient to
cover this expense.
§ 116-32. Required services and facilities.
A. The cable television system shall have a minimum channel capacity of
77 channels and at least 750 MHz of bandwidth available for future use.
B. Such system shall maintain a plant having the technical capacity for
two-way communications.
C. The grantee shall maintain the following:
(1) At least one specially designated noncommercial public access
channel available on a first-come nondiscriminatory basis; at least
one specially designated channel for use by local educational
authorities; at least one specially designated channel for local
governmental uses; and at least one specially designated channel
for leased access uses; provided, however, that these uses may be
combined on one or more channels until such time as additional
channels become necessary in the opinion of the village. Financial
and technical support and replacement and maintenance of
equipment of this facility shall be separately incorporated into a
franchise agreement.
(2) An institutional network (I-Net) of cable, optical, electrical or
electronic equipment used for the purpose of transmitting two-way
telecommunications signals interconnecting designated entities as
set forth in the franchise agreement and mutually agreed to by the
grantee and the grantor. Such institutional network may be
provided as needed by utilizing capacity on the subscriber system.
D. Interconnection.
§ 116-29 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-32
101:152
§ 116-33. Additional rules and regulations.
(1) The grantee may be required to interconnect its system with other
adjacent cable television systems for the purpose of sharing public,
educational and governmental access programming. Such
interconnection shall be made within a reasonable time limit to be
established by the village.
(2) Interconnection procedure. Upon receiving the directive of the
village to interconnect, the franchisee shall immediately initiate
negotiations with the other affected system or systems in order that
all costs may be shared equally among cable companies for both
construction and operation of the interconnection link.
(3) Relief. The franchisee may be granted reasonable extensions of
time to interconnect or the village may rescind its order to
interconnect upon petition by the franchisee to the village. The
village shall grant the request if it finds that the franchisee has
negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an approval from
the operator or franchising authority of the system to be
interconnected or that the cost of the interconnection would cause
an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates.
(4) Cooperation required. The grantee shall cooperate with any
interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or
village, county, state and federal regulatory agency which may be
hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, financing or
otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable systems
beyond the boundaries of the village.
(5) Initial technical requirements to assure future interconnection
capability.
(a) All cable systems receiving franchises to operate within the
village shall use the standard frequency allocations for
television signals.
(b) All cable systems are required to use signal processors at the
head end for each television signal.
(c) The village also urges franchisees to provide local origination
equipment that is compatible throughout the area so that
videocassettes or videotapes can be shared by various systems.
(d) The grantee shall provide such additional services and
facilities as are contained in its application, if any.
A. In addition to the inherent powers of the village to regulate and control
this cable television franchise and those powers expressly reserved by
the village or agreed to and provided for herein, the right and power is
hereby reserved by the village to promulgate such additional
regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its lawful powers
§ 116-32 BICYCLES § 116-33
101:153
§ 116-34. Performance evaluation sessions.
§ 116-35. Rate change procedures.
Pursuant to the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
of 1992, the Village of Elm Grove is currently not certified to regulate the
basic service rates charged by the grantee. Should federal or state law
permit further rate regulation beyond the basic service, the Village of Elm
Grove shall assume such rate regulation and adopt appropriate procedures
for such regulation.
§ 116-36. Termination of franchise.
and in furtherance of the terms and conditions of this franchise;
provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions
shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable state and
federal laws, rules and regulations.
B. The village may also adopt such regulations at the request of grantee
upon application.
A. The village and the grantee may hold scheduled performance
evaluation sessions within 30 days of the third, sixth and 12th
anniversary dates of the grantee's award or renewal of the franchise
and as may be required by federal and state law. All such evaluation
sessions shall be open to the public.
B. Additional evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term
of the franchise at the request of the village or the grantee.
C. All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a
newspaper of general circulation in accordance with legal notice. The
grantee shall notify its subscribers of all evaluation sessions by
announcements on at least one channel of its system between the hours
of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. for five consecutive days preceding each
session.
D. Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation
session may include, but not be limited to, service rate structures;
franchise fees; penalties; free or discounted services; application of
new technologies; system performance; services provided;
programming offered; customer complaints; privacy; amendments to
this chapter; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and
grantee or village rules.
E. Members of the general public may add topics either by working
through the negotiating parties or by presenting a petition. If such a
petition bears the valid signatures of 50 or more residents of the village,
the proposed topic or topics shall be added to the list of topics to be
discussed at the evaluation session.
§ 116-33 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-36
101:154
A. In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the village under
this franchise or otherwise, the village reserves the right to terminate
the franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder in
the event of a substantial breach of its terms and conditions. A
substantial breach by the grantee shall include but shall not be limited
to the following:
(1) Violation of any material provision of the franchise or any material
rule, order, regulation or determination of the village made
pursuant to the franchise;
(2) Attempt to evade any material provision of the franchise or practice
any fraud or deceit upon the village or its subscribers or customers;
(3) Failure to begin or complete system construction or system
extension as provided under § 116-19;
(4) Failure to provide the services promised in the grantee's
application, if any, as incorporated herein by § 116-4;
(5) Failure to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of interrupted
service, except when approval of such interruption is obtained from
the village; or
(6) Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or
negotiation of the franchise.
B. The foregoing shall not constitute a major breach if the violation occurs
but is without fault of the grantee or occurs as a result of circumstances
beyond its control or constituting acts of God which are beyond its
control. The grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship
nor by misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers or
employees.
C. The village may make a written demand that the grantee comply with
any such provision, rule, order or determination under or pursuant to
this franchise. If the violation by the grantee continues for a period of
30 days following such written demand without written proof that the
corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously
pursued, the village may place the issue of termination of the franchise
before the Village Board. The village shall cause to be served upon the
grantee, at least 20 days prior to the date of such meeting, a written
notice of intent to request such termination and the time and place of
the meeting. Public notice shall be given of the meeting and the issue(s)
which the Board is to consider.
D. The Village Board shall hear and consider the issue(s) and shall hear
any person interested therein and shall determine in its discretion
whether or not any violation by the grantee has occurred.
E. If the Village Board shall determine the violation by the grantee was the
fault of the grantee and within its control, the Board may, by resolution,
§ 116-36 BICYCLES § 116-36
101:155
§ 116-37. Foreclosure.
Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the
system or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a substantial
part of the system, the grantee shall notify the village of such fact, and such
notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of the
grantee has taken place, and the provisions of this franchise governing the
consent of the village to such change in control of the grantee shall apply.
§ 116-38. Right of acquisition by village.
§ 116-39. Receivership.
The village shall have the right to cancel this franchise 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to take over and conduct the business
of the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other
action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have
been vacated prior to the expiration of 120 days or unless:
declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be terminated unless
there is compliance within such period as the Board may fix. Such
period shall not be less than 60 days, provided that no opportunity for
compliance need be granted for fraud or misrepresentation.
F. The issue of termination shall automatically be placed upon the Board
agenda at the expiration of the time set by it for compliance. The Board
then may terminate the franchise forthwith upon finding that the
grantee has failed to achieve compliance or may further extend the
period, in its discretion.
A. Federal regulations as per U.S.C. § 537 shall apply to the right of
acquisition by the village. In the event that the relevant federal
regulations are repealed, the guidelines specified in Subsection B below
shall apply.
B. Upon the expiration of the term of the franchise and denial of any
renewal or upon any other termination thereof as provided herein the
village at its election and upon the payment to the grantee of a price
equal to the fair market value shall have the right to purchase and take
over the system upon resolution by the Village Board. If the village has
denied the grantee's petition for renewal of its franchise as provided by
§ 116-7, the village must exercise its option to purchase the system
within 60 days of the denial of renewal and at least six months prior to
the end of the franchise. Nothing shall prohibit the grantee, in the event
of the election of the village to purchase the system, from requesting
the court to set a reasonable bond of the village to secure the purchase
price. The grantee shall execute such warranty deeds and other
instruments as may be necessary.
§ 116-36 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-39
101:156
§ 116-40. Compliance with state and federal laws.
§ 116-41. Landlords and tenants.
A. Within 120 days after his/her election or appointment, such receiver or
trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter
and remedied all defaults thereunder; and
B. Such receiver or trustee, within the 120 days, shall have executed an
agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be
bound by each and every provision of this chapter and the franchise
granted to the grantee.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this franchise to the contrary,
the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the
state and federal government or any administrative agencies thereof;
provided, however, that if any such state or federal law or regulation
shall require the grantee to perform any service or shall permit the
grantee to perform any service or shall prohibit the grantee from
performing any service in conflict with the terms of this franchise or of
any law or regulation of the village, then as soon as possible following
knowledge thereof the grantee shall notify the village of the point of
conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or
regulations of the village or this franchise.
B. If the village determines that a material provision of this chapter is
affected by any subsequent action of the state or federal government,
the village and the grantee shall negotiate to modify any of the
provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to
carry out the full intent and purpose of this agreement.
A. Interference with cable service prohibited. Neither the owner of any
multiple-unit residential dwelling nor his or her agent or representative
shall interfere with the right of any tenant or lawful resident thereof to
receive cable communication service, cable installation or maintenance
from a cable communication grantee regulated by and lawfully
operating under a valid and existing franchise issued by the village.
B. Gratuities and payments to permit service prohibited. Neither the
owner of any multiple-unit residential dwelling nor his or her agent or
representative shall ask, demand or receive any payment, service or
gratuity in any form as a condition for permitting or cooperating with
the installation of a cable communication service to the dwelling unit
occupied by a tenant or resident requesting service.
C. Penalties and charges to tenants for service prohibited. Neither the
owner of any multiple-unit residential dwelling nor his or her agent or
representative shall penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or resident
or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or resident or
discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who requests or
§ 116-39 BICYCLES § 116-41
101:157
§ 116-42. Bids for initial franchise.
receives cable communication service from a grantee operating under a
valid and existing cable communication franchise issued by the village.
D. Reselling service prohibited. No person shall resell, without the
expressed, written consent of both the grantee and the village, any
cable service, program or signal transmitted by a cable communication
grantee under a franchise issued by the village.
E. Protection of property permitted. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit
a person from requiring that cable communication system facilities
conform to laws and regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to
protect safety, functioning, appearance and value of premises or the
convenience and safety of persons or property.
F. Risks assumed by grantee. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a
person from requiring a grantee from agreeing to indemnify the owner
or his or her agents or representatives for damages or from liability for
damages caused by the installation, operation, maintenance or removal
of cable communication facilities.
A. All bids received by the village from the applicants for an initial
franchise will become the sole property of the village.
B. The village reserves the right to reject any and all bids and waive
informalities and/or technicalities where the best interest of the village
may be served.
C. All questions regarding the meaning or intent of this chapter or
application documents shall be submitted to the village in writing.
Replies will be issued by addenda mailed or delivered to all parties
recorded by the village as having received the application documents.
The village reserves the right to make extensions of time for receiving
bids as it deems necessary. Questions received less than 14 days prior
to the date for the opening of bids will not be answered. Only replies to
questions by written addenda will be binding. All bids must contain an
acknowledgment of receipt of all addenda.
D. Bids must be sealed and submitted at the time and place indicated in
the application documents for the public opening. Bids may be modified
at any time prior to the opening of the bids, provided that any
modifications must be duly executed in the manner that the applicant's
bid must be executed. No bid shall be opened or inspected before the
public opening.
E. Before submitting a bid, each applicant must:
(1) Examine this chapter and the application documents thoroughly;
(2) Familiarize himself/herself with local conditions that may in any
manner affect performance under the franchise;
§ 116-41 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-42
101:158
§ 116-43. Financial, contractual, shareholder and system
disclosure.
(3) Familiarize himself/herself with federal, state and local laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations affecting performance under the
franchise; and
(4) Carefully correlate the bid with the requirements of this chapter
and the application documents.
F. The village may make such investigations as it deems necessary to
determine the ability of the applicant to perform under the franchise,
and the applicant shall furnish to the village all such information and
data for this purpose as the village may request. The village reserves
the right to reject any bid if the evidence submitted by, or investigation
of, such applicant fails to satisfy the village that such applicant is
properly qualified to carry out the obligations of the franchise and to
complete the work contemplated therein. Conditional bids will not be
accepted.
G. All bids received shall be placed in a secure depository approved by the
village and not opened nor inspected prior to the public opening.
A. No franchise will be granted to any applicant unless all requirements
and demands of the village regarding financial, contractual,
shareholder and system disclosure have been met.
B. Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in
the applicant, shall:
(1) Fully disclose all agreements and undertakings, whether written or
oral or implied, with any person, firm, group, association or
corporation with respect to this franchise and the proposed cable
television system. The grantee of this franchise shall disclose all
other contracts to the village as the contracts are made. This
section shall include, but not be limited to, any agreements
between local applicants and national companies.
(2) Submit all requested information as provided by the terms of this
chapter or the application documents, which are incorporated
herein by reference. The requested information must be complete
and verified as true by the applicant.
(3) Disclose the numbers of shares of stock and the holders thereof and
shall include the amount of consideration for each share of stock
and the nature of the consideration.
(4) Disclose any information required by the application documents
regarding other cable systems in which they hold an interest of any
nature, including but not limited to the following:
§ 116-42 BICYCLES § 116-43
101:159
§ 116-44. Violations and penalties.
(a) Locations of all other franchises and the dates of award for
each location;
(b) Estimated construction costs and estimated completion dates
for each system;
(c) Estimated number of miles of construction and number of
miles completed in each system as of the date of this
application; and
(d) Date for completion of construction as promised in the
application for each system.
(5) Disclose any information required by the application documents
regarding pending applications for other cable systems, including
but not limited to the following:
(a) Location of other franchise applications and date of application
for each system;
(b) Estimated dates of franchise awards;
(c) Estimated number of miles of construction; and
(d) Estimated construction costs.
A. For the violation of any of the following provisions of this franchise,
penalties shall be chargeable to the letter of credit or performance
bond as applicable as follows, and the village may determine the
amount of the fine for other violations which are not specified in a sum
not to exceed $500 for each violation, with each day constituting as
separate violation:
(1) Failure to furnish, maintain or offer all cable services to any
potential subscriber within the village upon order of the village:
$200 per day, per violation, for each day that such failure occurs or
continues.
(2) Failure to obtain or file evidence of required insurance,
construction bond, performance bond or other required financial
security: $200 per day, per violation, for each day such failure
occurs or continues.
(3) Failure to provide access to data, documents, records, or reports to
the village as required by §§ 116-19, 116-28, 116-29, 116-30 and
116-36: $200 per day, per violation, for each day such failure
occurs or continues.
(4) Failure to comply with applicable construction, operation or
maintenance standards: $300 per day, per violation.
§ 116-43 ELM GROVE CODE § 116-44
101:160
§ 116-45. Enforcement procedures.
(5) Failure to comply with a rate decision or refund order: $500 per
day, per violation, for each day such a violation occurs or continues.
B. The grantor may impose any or all of the above-enumerated measures
against the grantee, which shall be in addition to any and all other legal
or equitable remedies it has under the franchise or under any
applicable law.
C. For any violations for noncompliance with the customer service
standards of §§ 116-22 through 116-24 the grantee shall pay $200 per
day for each day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues.
D. Any other violations of this franchise agreement to be determined by
the grantor in a public hearing but not specifically noted in this section
shall not exceed $500 per day, per violation.
A. Whenever the village believes that the grantee has violated one or more
terms, conditions or provisions of this franchise and wishes to impose
penalties, a written notice shall be given to the grantee informing it of
such alleged violation or liability. The written notice shall describe in
reasonable detail the specific violation so as to afford the grantee an
opportunity to remedy the violation. The grantee shall have 30 days
subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation
before the village may impose penalties, unless the violation is of such a
nature as to require more than 30 days and the grantee proceeds
diligently within the 30 days to correct the violation, or as promptly as
possible thereafter to correct the violation. In any case where the
violation is not cured within 60 days of notice from the village, or such
other time as the grantee and the village may mutually agree to, the
village may proceed to impose liquidated damages.
B. The grantee may, within 10 days of receipt of notice, notify the village
that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has, in fact,
occurred. Such notice by the grantee to the village shall specify with
particularity the matters disputed by the grantee and shall stay the
running of the thirty-day cure period pending Board decision as
required below. The Board shall hear the grantee's dispute. The grantee
must be given at least five days' notice of the hearing. At the hearing,
the grantee shall be entitled to the right to present evidence and the
right to be represented by counsel. After the hearing, the village shall
provide the grantee a copy of its action, along with supporting
documents. In the event the village upholds the finding of a violation,
the grantee shall have 30 days subsequent to such determination, or
such other time period as the grantee and the village mutually agree, to
correct the alleged violation before penalties may be imposed.
C. The rights reserved to the village under this section are in addition to
all other rights of the village, whether reserved by this franchise or
authorized by law or equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a
§ 116-44 BICYCLES § 116-45
101:161
Chapter 120
COAL TAR SEALANT
§ 120-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COAL TAR SEALANT — A pavement sealant that contains coal tar, coal tar
pitch, coal tar pitch volatiles, RT-12, refined tar or any variation assigned
the Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) numbers 65996-92-1, 65996-93-2,
65996-89-6, or 8007-45-2 or related substances.
HIGH-PAH SEALANT — Any pavement sealant that contains greater than
1.0% polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) by weight, including, but
not limited to, coal tar sealants and pavement sealants containing steamcracked
petroleum residues, steam-cracked asphalt, pyrolysis fuel oil, heavy
fuel oil, ethylene tar, or any variation of those substances assigned the
Chemical Abstracts Service numbers 64742-90-1 or 69013-21-4 or related
substances.
PAVEMENT SEALANT — Any substance that is typically applied on paved
surfaces to protect the surfaces. This may include but is not limited to
products that are coal-tar- or asphalt-based.
§ 120-2. Application and sale of high-PAH sealants.
right with respect to penalties shall affect any other right the village
may have.
D. The village shall stay or waive the imposition of any penalty set forth
above upon a finding that any failure or delay is a result of an acts of
nature or due to circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the
grantee.
A. Except as provided in § 120-3 (Exemptions), no person shall apply any
high-PAH sealant within the Village of Elm Grove (hereinafter Village).
B. No person shall allow a high-PAH sealant to be applied upon property
within the Village that is under that person's ownership or control.
C. No person shall sell, offer to sell, or display for sale any high-PAH
sealant within the Village.
D. Any person who sells pavement sealants within the Village shall
prominently display, in the area where such pavement sealants are sold,
a notice that contains the following language:
"The application of pavement sealants containing greater than 1.0%
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) by weight on driveways,
parking lots and all other paved surfaces in the Village of Elm Grove is
prohibited by Chapter 120 of the Village Code of Ordinances. Polycyclic
§ 116-45 ELM GROVE CODE § 120-2
101:162
§ 120-3. Exemptions.
The Public Works Director may exempt a person or entity from a
requirement of this chapter if:
§ 120-4. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 123
DANCE HALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 87.
Drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 128.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 171.
Minors — See Ch. 190.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 208.
§ 123-1. License required.
Any person desiring to procure a license for any room or building in which
to conduct public or private dances within the limits of the Village of Elm
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), are a group of organic chemicals that
are known to cause cancer and are toxic to aquatic life and that can
travel into homes, buildings, and soils, or be carried by stormwater and
other run off into water resources."
E. No commercial applicator company, residential or commercial
developer, or other similar individual or entity shall apply or direct any
employee, independent contractor, volunteer, or other person to apply
any high-PAH sealant to any driveway, parking lot, or other surface
within the Village.
A. The person is conducting bona fide research concerning the effects of a
high-PAH sealant on the environment;
B. The use of the high-PAH sealant is required for said research; and
C. It is determined that said research will not cause significant
contamination of the surrounding environment, including soils and
aquatic ecosystems, and will not unduly endanger human health.
A. Any person, company or other entity that violates § 120-2 shall be
subject to a fine as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
B. Each day that a violation of § 120-2C occurs or continues is a separate
offense and subject to an additional fine.
C. Each incidence of a violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 120-2 DANCE HALLS § 123-1
123:163
Grove shall file with the Village Clerk a written application therefor upon
a form furnished by the village. Such applications shall then be referred to
the Finance and Licensing Committee of the Village Board for the purpose
of investigation and recommendation to the Village Board, which alone shall
have the right to issue to such applicant a license to conduct and maintain
a public dance hall. No license shall be refused except for a specific reason
based on the protection of public safety, health, morals or general welfare.
Licenses shall expire on the 30th day of June each year, and the license fee
therefor shall be $25 per year.
§ 123-2. Rules for operation.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association
conducting a public dance hall to:
§ 123-3. Processing of applications.
The Village Clerk shall refer any application for a license for a public dance
hall to the Fire Inspector, who shall inspect or cause to be inspected the
premises for which a public dance hall license is requested to determine
whether such premises sought to be licensed complies with all regulations,
ordinances and laws applicable thereto. The Fire Inspector shall transmit
to the Clerk, in writing, the information derived from such inspection,
accompanied by a recommendation as to whether a license should be
granted or refused.
§ 123-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the conducting of dancing
lessons or instructions or dance exhibitions in which the audience and
persons paying for admission do not participate nor to dances held in
churches and schools.
§ 123-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
A. Permit the sale or serving of liquor in such dance hall.
B. Permit any person under the influence of liquor or drugs to participate
in or remain in such premises where dances are being conducted.
C. Hold such dances or keep the premises in which such dances are being
held open later than 1:00 a.m.
D. Permit any person under the age of 18 years to enter or remain in a
public dance hall unless such person is accompanied by his or her
parents or legal guardian or unless such dance is being supervised by
properly qualified chaperons.
§ 123-1 ELM GROVE CODE § 123-6
123:164
§ 123-6. Revocation of license.
Upon written complaint to the Village Clerk that there has been disorderly
or immoral conduct upon premises licensed as a public dance hall under this
chapter or that there has been any violation of any of the rules, regulations,
ordinances or laws governing or applying to dance halls, the Clerk shall set
a hearing upon such complaint before the Finance and Licensing Committee
of the Village Board, which may recommend that the dance hall license
heretofore granted be revoked for the reason set out in the complaint or
for the protection of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare.
Upon receiving such recommendation, the Village Board may revoke such
license for such reason. Whenever any license shall be revoked, no refund
of any unearned portion of the fee paid shall be made, and at least six
months from the time of such revocation shall elapse before another license
shall be granted for the same premises. Written notice of such hearings and
reasons therefor shall be served by the Clerk upon the person named in the
application by mailing the same to the address given in said application.
Chapter 128
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 87.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 171.
Minors — See Ch. 190.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 208.
Tobacco products — See Ch. 255.
§ 128-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-11-2000]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — All equipment, products and materials of any
kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body
a controlled substance, as defined in Ch. 961, Wis. Stats., in violation of this
chapter.
"Drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to:
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
(1)
A.
§ 123-6 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 128-1
128:165
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances.
(2)
Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance.
(3)
Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances.
(4)
Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
(5)
Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances.
(6)
Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or
refining, marijuana.
(7)
Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
(8)
Capsules, balloons, envelopes or other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
(9)
Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for
use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
(10)
Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish,
hashish oil or other controlled substance under Ch. 961, Wis.
Stats., into the human body, including but not limited to:
Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls.
(a)
(b) Water pipes.
(c) Carburation tubes and devices.
(d) Smoking and carburation masks.
Objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana
cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand.
(e)
(f) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
(11)
§ 128-1 ELM GROVE CODE § 128-1
128:166
§ 128-2. Determination that object is drug paraphernalia.
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the following shall
be considered:
(g) Chamber pipes.
(h) Carburator pipes.
(i) Electric pipes.
(j) Air-driven pipes.
(k) Chillums.
(l) Bongs.
(m) Ice pipes or chillers.
"Drug paraphernalia" excludes:
Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended
for use in parenterally injecting substances into the human body.
(1)
Any items, including pipes, papers and accessories, that are
designed for use or primarily intended for use with tobacco
products.
(2)
B.
A. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
B. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the
object under any municipal, state or federal law, regulation or
ordinance relating to any controlled substance.
C. The proximity of the object in time and space to a direct violation of this
chapter.
D. The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
E. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
F. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone
in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom the person knows,
or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a
violation of this chapter. The innocence of an owner or of anyone in
control of the object as to a direct violation of this chapter shall not
prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use
as drug paraphernalia.
G. Oral or written instructions provided with the object concerning its use.
H. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use.
§ 128-1 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 128-2
128:167
§ 128-3. Prohibited acts. [Amended 7-25-2006]
§ 128-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-25-2006]
I. National and local advertising concerning its use.
J. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
K. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to
the total sales of the business enterprise.
L. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
M. Expert testimony concerning its use.
A. Possession of drug paraphernalia. No person may use, or possess with
intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare,
test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale
or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of this chapter.
B. Manufacture, sale or delivery of drug paraphernalia. No person may
sell, deliver, possess with intent to deliver or manufacture with intent to
deliver drug paraphernalia knowing that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of this chapter.
C. Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. No person may place in any
newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication or upon any
outdoor billboard or sign any advertisement knowing that the purpose
of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of
objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
D. Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor. No person may deliver drug
paraphernalia to a person 17 years of age or under who is at least three
years younger than the violator knowing that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of this chapter.
E. Exemption. This section does not apply to manufacturers, practitioners,
pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct is
in accordance with Ch. 961, Wis. Stats. This section does not prohibit
the possession, manufacture or use of hypodermics in accordance with
Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
§ 128-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 128-4
128:168
Chapter 134
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 106. Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
A. Any drug paraphernalia used in violation of this chapter shall be seized
and forfeited to the Village.
B. If a court finds that a person who is under 17 years of age has
committed a violation of this chapter, the court shall disregard § 128-4C
in imposing penalties and shall, pursuant to § 938.344(2e), Wis. Stats.,
suspend or revoke the child's operating privilege under § 340.01(40),
Wis. Stats., for not less than six months nor more than five years and, in
addition, shall order one of the following penalties:
(1) For a first violation, a forfeiture of not more than $50 plus costs.
(2) For a violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation,
a forfeiture of not more than $100 plus costs.
(3) For a violation committed within 12 months of two or more
previous violations, a forfeiture of not more than $500 plus costs.
C. If a court finds that a person who is 17 years of age or older has
committed a violation of this chapter, the court shall order one of the
following penalties:
(1) For a violation of § 128-3A or § 128-3C above, the person shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not more than $500, together with the
costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeitures
and costs may be imprisoned in the county jail in the manner
provided for in Ch. 800, Wis. Stats.
(2) For a violation of § 128-3B above, the person shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not more than $1,000, together with the costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeitures and costs
may be imprisoned in the county jail in the manner provided for in
Ch. 800, Wis. Stats.
(3) For a violation of § 128-3D above, the person shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not more than $10,000, together with the costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeitures and costs
may be imprisoned in the county jail in the manner provided for in
Ch. 800, Wis. Stats.
§ 128-4 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 134-1
128:169
§ 134-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Electrical Code of the Village of Elm
Grove" and will be referred to hereinafter as "this chapter."
§ 134-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations governing
electrical installations in the Village of Elm Grove.
§ 134-3. Electrical Inspector.
The Village Board shall appoint an Electrical Inspector upon
recommendation of the Village Manager pursuant to Chapter 54, § 54-3C,
who shall be certified as such by the state pursuant to §§ 101.82(2) and
101.88(2), Wis. Stats., concerning the inspection of public buildings and
places of employment, and pursuant to §§ 101.63(2) and 101.66(2), Wis.
Stats., concerning the inspection of one- and two-family dwellings. It shall
be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to faithfully enforce all the laws and
ordinances relating to electrical installations. The Electrical Inspector shall
maintain a record of all transactions pertaining to his or her office.
§ 134-4. License for electricians. [Amended 3-28-2016]
No person shall alter, install, or repair electrical wires, equipment or
devices for any purpose in the Village without first having procured a
license or registration per § 101.862, Wis. Stats., except for any person
meeting the requirements of § 106-3B.
§ 134-5. Electrical permit.
A. Required. No electrical equipment or installation shall be installed,
altered, renewed, replaced or connected without first obtaining an
electrical permit and paying the fee provided for under this chapter.
B. Issuance. Permits shall be issued by the Electrical Inspector upon the
payment of the applicable permit fee and the filing of a proper
application describing the nature of the work as well as such other
information as may be required for inspection. Permits are valid for a
period of 24 months from the date of issuance, after which they shall
expire and new permits shall be obtained in a manner consistent with
the provisions of § 106-3F(3). All fees are nonrefundable.
C. Inspections. All electrical work requiring a permit shall require periodic
inspections, as required by the Electrical Inspector.
D. When permits not required.
(1) No permit shall be required for the following:
§ 134-1 ELM GROVE CODE § 134-5
128:170
(a) The repair and maintenance of portable or stationary electrical
appliances and equipment previously installed in compliance
with state and municipal codes.
(b) Minor repair work such as repairing drop cords and flush and
snap switches, replacing fuses or changing lamp sockets.
(c) In single-family residences only, the extension or alteration of
an existing circuit. All circuits, together with extensions, shall
not exceed 500 watts, nor shall the circuit exceed two outlets.
(d) Electrical installations of communication systems, security
systems and signaling systems not exceeding 49 volts
electromotive force.
(2) Electrical contractor licensees shall keep a complete separate
record of all work for which a permit is not required, which record
shall be open for inspection at all times.
E. Emergency work. Emergency work may be commenced without a
permit, provided the licensee reports the same to the Electrical
Inspector within 48 hours after commencing such work and thereafter
obtains the required permit and pays the proper fee.
F. Special permit for temporary work. Special permits may be issued by
the Electrical Inspector for limited periods of time not to exceed six
months for the installation and use of temporary electric wiring and
equipment that does not conform to the regulations of this chapter.
Such permits may be authorized for buildings where conduit wiring is
required for open work and exposed wiring, lights, power for building
operations, display and decorative lighting, carnivals, circuses,
theatrical acts, exhibitions and all places of temporary outdoor
assembly. The person installing such wiring or equipment shall be
directly responsible and accountable for the safe condition of the
installation at all times and its complete removal at the end of the
temporary period, as fixed by the Inspector, or as soon as reasonably
possible when ordered by the Inspector. Such temporary work shall be
installed, maintained and operated in a safe and workmanlike manner.
All such electric wiring and equipment shall be isolated from the public
by proper elevation and guarding, and all electric fuses and switches
shall be installed in approved enclosures. Cable laid on the ground in
areas traversed by the public shall be buried in trenches or protected
by approved covers.
G. Revocation of permits.
(1) The Inspector may revoke any permit issued under this chapter and
may stop construction or use of approved new materials,
equipment or methods of construction, devices or appliances in the
event any of the following occurs:
(a) There is a violation of any applicable legal requirements.
§ 134-5 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 134-5
128:171
§ 134-6. Permit fees.
Electrical permit fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
§ 134-7. Installation standards. [Amended 6-27-2016]
No certificate of inspection shall be issued unless the electric light, power
or heating installation and all other electrical apparatus connected with
it are in strict conformity with the provisions of Wisconsin Administrative
Code Chapter SPS 316.
§ 134-8. Right of entry.
The Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to enter all buildings and
premises during reasonable hours in the discharge of his or her official
duties. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the acquisition
of an inspection warrant in accordance with §§ 66.122 and 66.123 Wis.
Stats. and § 12-4 of the Village of Elm Grove Code of Ordinances, nor shall
it be construed to prohibit access by way of property owner and/or tenant
consent.
§ 134-9. Adoption of state code.
(b) The continuance of any construction becomes dangerous to life
or property, as determined by the Inspector.
(c) The Inspector determines that there is inadequate supervision
provided on the construction or work site.
(2) Such revocation shall be effected by written notice of the same
delivered to the applicant for the permit, the owner of the subject
premises or his or her agent or the person having charge of the
construction or activity which is the subject of such permit. A
revocation placard shall be posted on the building or structure,
equipment or appliance, as the case may be. After the notice is
delivered, it is unlawful for any person to thereafter proceed with
any construction or activity that is the subject of the permit, and
the revoked permit shall be null and void. Before any such
construction or activity may resume, a new permit shall be
obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 316, with amendments
thereto, is hereby adopted and shall be complied with by all persons,
firms or corporations performing electrical work within the scope of
this chapter within the Village. It is the intent of the Village that all
revisions to the Wisconsin State Electrical Code shall be considered to
be adopted by the Village as they occur and become effective within the
Wisconsin State Electrical Code without further revision of this chapter
or action on the part of the Village. [Amended 3-28-2016]
§ 134-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 134-9
128:172
§ 134-10. Sale of illegal equipment.
No person, firm or corporation shall keep or offer for sale or sell for
use within the Village of Elm Grove any apparatus, equipment or fixtures
designed or intended to be used for the production, transmission or
utilization of electrical current or power if said apparatus, equipment or
fixtures, when installed for use, would be in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter or would be unsafe or dangerous.
§ 134-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 137
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 22. Fire Department — See Ch. 33.
§ 137-1. Legislative determination.
B. Installation, alterations, replacements and repairs of electrical
equipment used for light, heat or power shall be installed in a workable
and workmanlike manner in conformity with the regulations of this
chapter.
A. Any person or firm who or which makes application for a permit under
this chapter and fails to take out the permit by failing to make
arrangements to accept delivery of the permit shall be deemed in
violation of this chapter.
B. Any person or firm who or which fails to notify the Electrical Inspector
that the work for which the permit has been procured is ready for
inspection within five working days of completion of such work shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter.
C. Any person, firm, company or corporation who or which shall violate or
assist in the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
A. The Village Board finds that continuous increases in the cost of
providing adequate ambulance service to the village has created a need
for additional funds to underwrite the costs of this service. This is
despite the fact that tax funds provided by residents and village
businesses have, and will be, used for basic costs associated with the
ambulance service. In order to provide for an orderly and equitable use
of emergency medical services furnished by the Village of Elm Grove to
all persons requiring such service within the village, it is deemed
necessary to adopt a fee and rules for such service.
§ 134-9 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 137-1
128:173
§ 137-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the stated
meanings:
ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT — Emergency medical care that is rendered
to a sick, disabled or injured individual, based on signs, symptoms or
complaints, prior to the individual's hospitalization or while transporting
the individual between health care facilities that uses knowledge, skills
and techniques received from training beyond that which is required for
licensure in the State of Wisconsin as an emergency medical technician -
basic.
BASIC LIFE SUPPORT — Emergency medical care that is rendered to
a sick, disabled or injured individual, based on signs, symptoms or
complaints, prior to the individual's hospitalization or while transporting
the individual between health care facilities and that is limited to use of
the knowledge, skills and techniques received from training required for
licensure in the State of Wisconsin as an emergency medical technician -
basic.
COMMERCIAL HEALTH FACILITY — Facilities that routinely provide
routine, urgent and/or emergency medical care to patients, including but
B. The Village Board finds that, historically, substantial financial
contributions for ambulance vehicles and major equipment components
carried on those vehicles have been received from village residents and
their families and others affiliated with them and village businesses on
behalf of themselves and their employees.
C. The Village Board further finds that the staffing of village ambulances
has occurred on a voluntary paid on-call basis by persons, many of
whom are village residents, village business operators and their
employees with minimal compensation to them for their many long
hours of services and training. [Amended 12-11-2000]
D. The Village Board finds that the value of financial and in-kind labor
contribution by emergency medical services (EMS) personnel, many of
whom are village residents and business people, must be recognized in
the establishment of any fee. [Amended 12-11-2000]
E. The Village Board finds that in establishing fees the failure to
differentiate between persons who as a class have contributed to the
establishment and ongoing operation of the ambulance service and
those who as a class have not or are not likely to make such
contributions will have an adverse effect on future receipt of financial
and in-kind service donations vital and necessary for the operation of
this ambulance service.
F. The following provisions are authorized, and it is further declared that
the fees established herein shall be for the purpose of providing
revenue to assist in defraying the costs of the ambulance service.
§ 137-1 ELM GROVE CODE § 137-2
128:174
not limited to private physicians' offices and chiropractic offices but
excluding residential or assisted living facilities.[Amended 12-11-2000]
NONRESIDENT OF THE VILLAGE — Any person who is not a resident of
the village.
RESIDENT OF THE VILLAGE — Any person whose primary legal residence
pursuant to the laws of the State of Wisconsin is within the village.
§ 137-3. Fees; geographic area of operation.
§ 137-4. Review of fees.
The fees as provided under this chapter shall be reviewed annually by
the Emergency Medical Services Director, taking into account current
manpower, equipment, material and maintenance costs, and by the Village
Board for adjustment.
§ 137-5. Fees to be binding.
The above fees shall be binding upon all persons receiving such services as
well as their successors in interest, assigns, estates and heirs.
§ 137-6. Enforcement.
The Village Attorney may enforce the provisions of this chapter by civil
action in court for the collection of amounts due and any other appropriate
relief.
§ 137-7. Services not to be refused for nonpayment.
Nothing in this chapter shall authorize any village department or personnel
to refuse or delay any service to any person that has not paid for services or
that owes for previous services.
Chapter 143
A. The Emergency Medical Services Director or designee shall collect a
fee as established in the fee schedule adopted from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees. The Emergency Medical Services
Director shall, however, have discretion to adjust the amount of fee
levied in a particular circumstance based on the nature of the response,
the level of services needed and/or provided and other various
circumstances of the request for services and/or response the
Emergency Medical Services Director deems, in his or her judgment, to
be relevant.
B. Limitations of emergency service. Such emergency ambulance service
shall be furnished within the geographic limits and to such hospitals as
designated and approved by resolution of the Village of Board of
Trustees.
§ 137-2 FAIR HOUSING § 137-7
143:175
FAIR HOUSING
§ 143-1. Declaration of intent.
§ 143-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISCRIMINATE AND DISCRIMINATION — To segregate, separate, exclude
or treat any person unequally only because of sex, race, color, religion,
national origin, sexual orientation, as defined in § 111.32(13m), Wis. Stats.,
handicap, sex or marital status of the person maintaining a household,
lawful source of income, age or ancestry. It is intended that the factors set
forth herein shall be the sole basis for prohibiting discrimination.
HOUSING — Any improved property, including any mobile home as defined
in § 66.058, Wis. Stats., which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged
or designed to be used or occupied as a home or residence.
UNIMPROVED RESIDENTIAL LOT — Any residential lot upon which no
permanent building or structure containing living quarters has been
constructed.
§ 143-3. Discrimination prohibited.
No person shall discriminate:
A. It is the intent of this chapter to render discrimination in housing
unlawful. It is our belief that in a small community removal of
discrimination is best accomplished by education and quiet persuasion
rather than by court litigation; however, it is the declared policy of this
village that all persons shall have an equal opportunity for housing
regardless of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, and it is
the duty of this village to assist in the orderly prevention or removal of
all discrimination in housing.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit an owner or his or
her agent from requiring information concerning family, marital,
financial and business status but not concerning race, color or creed.
A. By refusing to sell, lease, finance or contract to construct housing or by
refusing to discuss the terms thereof.
B. By refusing to permit inspection or exacting different or more stringent
price, terms or conditions for the sale, lease or rental of housing.
C. By refusing to finance or sell an unimproved residential lot or to
construct a home or residence upon such lot.
D. By publishing, circulating, issuing or displaying or causing to be
published, circulated, issued or displayed any communication, notice,
advertisement or sign in connection with the sale, financing, lease or
§ 137-7 ELM GROVE CODE § 143-3
143:176
§ 143-4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Village Attorney. The
Village Attorney, upon receipt of a complaint verified by the complainant,
may issue a complaint if in his or her judgment an action of discrimination is
sustainable in court and will, giving due consideration to available state and
federal laws, assist in the elimination of discrimination. The complaint may
be filed in the Circuit Court seeking a temporary injunction or restraining
order pending final disposition of the complaint.
§ 143-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who willfully violates any provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code, except that the
forfeiture shall not be less than $100. Payment of any such forfeiture shall
be stayed during the period in which any appeal may be taken and during
the pendency of any appeal.
Chapter 147
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 208.
§ 147-1. Use or discharge restricted. [Amended 12-11-2000;
2-24-2014]
rental of housing which states or indicates any discrimination in
connection with housing.
A. No person, except a peace officer or individual who is part of a deer
management program approved by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources and the Village Board of Trustees and conducted
under the supervision of the Chief of Police, shall use or discharge a
rifle, revolver, pistol, shotgun or other firearm regardless of caliber; air
rifle or air gun, pellet or shot (including BB shot), in or by slingshot,
within the Village of Elm Grove.
B. The hunting of any bird, wild fowl or animal with a bow and arrow or
crossbow on property owned by the Village is prohibited.
C. Hunting with a bow and arrow or crossbow may take place on private
property within the Village with the following restrictions:
(1) No person may hunt on private property with a bow and arrow or
crossbow that is within 100 yards of a building located on private
property owned by another individual, unless the owner of the land
§ 143-3 FAIR HOUSING § 147-1
143:177
§ 147-2. Concealed firearms and weapons. [Amended 8-28-2007;
8-23-2011]
§ 147-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-14-1999; 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code. The parent or legally appointed guardian of any minor
under 18 years of age who is found guilty of knowingly permitting such
minor to violate, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall also be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this
Code. It shall be lawful and the duty of any police officer of the village to
seize any of the weapons described in this chapter and retain the same until
any fine levied hereunder shall have been paid.
Chapter 150
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 22.
Fire Department — See Ch. 33.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 91.
Building construction — See Ch. 106.
Open burning — See Ch. 112.
Fireworks — See Ch. 153.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 164.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 220.
§ 150-1. Fire Inspector.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be the Fire Inspector. Upon the
recommendation of the Chief of the Fire Department and the concurrence
on which the building is located allows hunting with a bow and
arrow or crossbow within 100 yards of the building.
(2) Any person hunting with a bow and arrow or crossbow must be at
an elevation where the discharge of the arrow or bolt from the
respective weapon is always toward the ground.
A. No person shall carry on his or her person any concealed firearms or
other dangerous weapons as defined in § 939.22(10), Wis. Stats., unless
a valid license as designated under § 175.60, Wis. Stats., has been duly
issued. This section does not apply to any police officer as defined under
§ 939.22(22), Wis. Stats.
B. No person shall carry on his or her person any concealed firearms or
other dangerous weapons in any duly posted Village of Elm Grove
building. This section does not apply to any police officer as defined
under § 939.22(22), Wis. Stats.
§ 147-1 ELM GROVE CODE § 150-1
143:178
of the Village Manager, the Village President may appoint from among the
officers or members of the Fire Department a person who shall hold the
office of Deputy Fire Inspector. Such Deputy Fire Inspector shall perform
the same duties and have the same powers as the Fire Inspector. Such
appointment shall be subject to confirmation by the Village Board.
§ 150-2. Inspections; reports and records.
§ 150-3. Removal and control of fire hazards. [Amended 2-26-2002]
Whenever and wherever any fire inspection reveals a fire hazard, any
condition liable to substantially interfere with the extinguishing or control
of fire or public safety and/or violation of any law or ordinance related
to fire hazards or the prevention of fires, the Fire Inspector shall serve a
written notice upon the property owner or occupant giving said owner or
A. It shall be the duty of the Fire Inspector to inspect at least once in each
nonoverlapping six-month period per calendar year all buildings
(except the interiors of private dwellings), premises and public
thoroughfares within the limits of the Village for the purposes of
determining and causing to be eliminated any fire hazard, any condition
liable to substantially interfere with the extinguishing or control of fire
or public safety and/or violation of any law or ordinance related to fire
hazards or the prevention of fires. The Inspector shall also investigate
the storage and handling of explosives and inflammable liquids within
the Village. "Fire hazard" shall include not only dangerous conditions
but also the absence of recognized fire prevention devices, warning
systems, proper exits and proper exit lights.
B. The Fire Inspector shall make all reports of inspections required by the
State of Wisconsin and shall keep a written record card that conforms
to the requirements of the state for each property inspected.
C. Every owner of a private vehicular bridge within the limits of the Village
shall have a duty to have the bridge inspected by a structural engineer
at least once in each nonoverlapping two-year period. Every property
owner shall comply with the provisions of this subsection for the first
time within 12 months of its enactment. The purpose of such
inspections shall be to ensure that each private bridge is capable of
supporting the imposed loads of fire apparatus during all weather
conditions and to determine causes that may require the elimination of
any fire hazard, any condition liable to substantially interfere with the
extinguishing or control of fire or the prevention of fires, in accordance
with § 150-3. Such inspections shall be conducted by a licensed
professional structural engineer, qualified to inspect bridges, and shall
include a load rating analysis. A written report shall be provided to the
Village of Elm Grove Engineer for review and subsequently to the
Director of Public Works for approval in accordance with the provisions
of Wisconsin Administrative Code §§ Comm 66.225, Trans 214.03(2)
and Trans 214.04 to the extent applicable. [Added 2-26-2002]
§ 150-1 FAIR HOUSING § 150-3
143:179
occupant a reasonable time under the circumstances in which to remove
or correct the same. Conditions that potentially can substantially interfere
with the extinguishing or control of fire or public safety also include, but are
not limited to, access roadways for fire apparatus over private roads and
bridges.
§ 150-4. Interference with Fire Inspector.
No person shall hinder or obstruct the Fire Inspector in the performance of
his/her duty or refuse to observe any lawful direction by the Fire Inspector.
§ 150-5. Fire Prevention Code.
The current edition of the Fire Prevention Code recommended by the
National Board of Fire Underwriters adopted under Wisconsin
Administrative Code § Comm 30.02(4), as amended from time to time, is
made part of this chapter by reference and specifically incorporated herein.
§ 150-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code, except that the forfeiture shall not be less than $100.
§ 150-7. Inspection fees. [Added 6-23-2009]
The Village shall establish, from time to time by resolution, fees for fire
inspection services. Such fees shall be charged and billed on an annual
basis to the property owner of record. Any outstanding balance as of
November 1 shall be placed on the property tax bill pursuant to § 66.0627,
Wis. Stats.
Chapter 153
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
§ 153-1. Statutory provisions adopted.
Section 167.10 of the Wisconsin Statutes regulating the sale and use of
fireworks, exclusive of any penalty imposed thereby, is adopted by reference
and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in full.
§ 150-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 153-2
153:180
§ 153-2. Restrictions on sale.
No person may sell, or possess with intent to sell, fireworks in the village
except:
§ 153-3. Restrictions on use.
A. To a person holding a permit under § 167.10(3)(c), Wis. Stats.;
B. To a city, village or town; or
C. For a purpose specified under § 153-3B(2) to (6) of this chapter.
A. No person may possess or use fireworks in the Village of Elm Grove
without a user's permit from the Village Fire Chief. No person may use
fireworks, or any of the following devices, on any village-owned
property or while attending a fireworks display for which a permit has
been issued to a person listed under Subsection C(1) to (5) or under
Subsection C(6) if the display is open to the general public.
(1) A cap containing not more than 1/4 grain of explosive mixture, if
the cap is used or possessed or sold for use in a device which
prevents direct bodily contact with a cap when it is in place for
explosion.
(2) A toy snake that contains no mercury.
(3) A model rocket engine.
(4) A sparkler on a wire or wood stick.
(5) A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and
which contains less than 1/4 grain of explosive mixture.
(6) A fuseless device that is designed to produce audible or visible
effects or audible and visible effects and that contains less than 1/4
grain of explosive mixture.
(7) A device that is designed primarily to burn pyrotechnic smokeproducing
mixtures, at a controlled rate, and that produces audible
or visible effects or audible and visible effects.
(8) A cylindrical fountain that consists of one or more tubes and that is
classified by the Federal Department of Transportation as a
Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50.
B. Subsection A does not apply to:
(1) The village, but municipal fire and law enforcement officials shall
be notified of the proposed use of fireworks at least two days in
advance.
(2) The possession or use of explosives in accordance with rules or
general orders of the Department of Commerce.
§ 153-2 FIREWORKS § 153-3
153:181
(3) The disposal of hazardous substances in accordance with rules
adopted by the Department of Natural Resources.
(4) The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in any
manufacturing process.
(5) The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in
connection with classes conducted by educational institutions.
(6) A possessor or manufacturer of explosives in possession of a license
or permit under 18 U.S.C. §§ 841 to 848 if the possession of the
fireworks is authorized under the license or permit.
(7) The possession of fireworks in the village while transporting the
fireworks to a city, town or village where the possession of the
fireworks is authorized by permit or ordinance, unless, in the
course of transporting the fireworks through a city, town or village,
the person remains in the village for a period of at least 12 hours.
C. A permit under this section may be issued only to the following:
(1) A public authority.
(2) A fair association.
(3) An amusement park.
(4) A park board.
(5) A civic organization.
(6) A group of resident or nonresident individuals.
D. No permit shall be issued unless an indemnity bond with good and
sufficient sureties or policy of liability insurance for the payment of all
claims that may arise by reason of injuries to person or property from
the handling, use or discharge of fireworks under the permit has been
provided in a form reasonably satisfactory to the Village Attorney. The
bond or policy, if required, shall be taken in the name of the Village of
Elm Grove in an amount equal to $1,000,000, and any person injured
thereby may bring an action on the bond or policy in the person's own
name to recover the damage the person has sustained, but the
aggregate liability of the surety or insurer to all persons shall not
exceed the amount of the bond or policy. The bond or policy, if required,
together with a copy of the permit shall be filed in the office of the clerk
of the city, village or town.
E. A permit under this section shall specify all of the following:
(1) The name, age, telephone number(s) and address of the permit
holder.
(2) The date on and after which fireworks may be purchased.
§ 153-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 153-3
153:182
§ 153-4. Parental liability.
§ 153-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREWORKS — Anything manufactured, processed or packaged for
exploding, emitting sparks or combustion that does not have another
common use.
(3) The kind and quantity of fireworks that may be purchased.
(4) The date and location of permitted use.
(5) The time periods during which the fireworks may be used.
F. A copy of a permit under this section shall be given to the municipal fire
or law enforcement official at least two days before the date of
authorized use.
G. No permit under this section may be issued to a minor.
A. Pursuant to § 167.10(7), Wis. Stats., a parent, foster parent, treatment
foster parent, family-operated group home parent or legal guardian of a
minor who consents to the use of fireworks by the minor is liable for
damages caused by the minor's use of the fireworks.
B. Pursuant to § 167.10(9)(c), Wis. Stats., any parent or legal guardian of a
minor who consents to the use of fireworks by the minor shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $1,000.
In addition to those items and devices constituting fireworks under
the foregoing definition, pursuant to the provisions of § 167.10(5), Wis.
Stats., for purposes of this chapter, the term "fireworks" shall also
include the following:
A toy snake that contains no mercury.
[Note: Wisconsin Administrative Code Section COMM 9.15,
Definitions, Subsection (5)(e)2: "Snake or glow worm" means a
pressed pellet of pyrotechnic composition that produces a large,
snakelike ash upon burning. The ash expands in length as the
pellet burns. These devices may not contain mercuric
thiocyanate.]
(1)
A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and that
contains an explosive mixture.
(2)
A fuseless device that is designed to produce audible or visible
effects or audible and visible effects and that contains an explosive
mixture.
(3)
A.
§ 153-3 FIREWORKS § 153-5
153:183
A device that is designed primarily to burn pyrotechnic smokeproducing
mixtures, at a controlled rate, and that produces audible
or visible effects or audible and visible effects.
(4)
A cylindrical fountain that consists of one or more tubes and that
is classified by the Federal Department of Transportation as a
Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50.
[Note: Wisconsin Administrative Code Section COMM 9.15,
Definitions, Subsection (a)(2): "Cylindrical fountain" means a
cylindrical tube not more than 3/4 inch inside diameter,
containing up to 75 grams of pyrotechnic composition. Upon
ignition, a shower of colored sparks, and sometimes a whistling
effect, is produced. This device may be provided with a spike for
insertion into the ground, spike fountain, a wood or plastic base
for placing on the ground, base fountain or a wood or cardboard
handle, if intended to be hand-held, or handle fountain.]
(5)
A cone fountain that is classified by the Federal Department of
Transportation as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR
173.50.
[Note: Wisconsin Administrative Code Section COMM 9.15,
Definitions, Subsection (a)(1): "Cone fountain" means a cardboard
or heavy paper cone containing up to 50 grams of pyrotechnic
composition. The effect is the same as that of a cylindrical
fountain.]
(6)
For purposes of this chapter, the term "fireworks" does not include any
of the following:
(1) Fuel or a lubricant.
(2) A firearm cartridge or shotgun shell.
A flare used or possessed or sold for use as a signal in an
emergency or in the operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or
motor vehicle.
(3)
A match, cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space
heater.
(4)
A cap containing not more than 1/4 grain of explosive mixture,
if the cap is used or possessed or sold for use in a device that
prevents direct bodily contact with a cap when it is in place for
explosion.
(5)
(6) A model rocket engine.
(7) Tobacco and a tobacco product.
B.
§ 153-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 153-5
153:184
Chapter 161
HANDBILLS
§ 161-1. Definitions.
The following words when used in this chapter shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a
different meaning.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Includes any printed or written advertising
matter or any other sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet,
newspaper, paper, booklet or other printed matter or literature which
relates solely to the economic interests of the speaker and its audience.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Includes any sample, device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, paper, booklet or other printed
matter or literature which relates in some degree to something other than
the economic interests of the speaker or its audience.
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
§ 161-2. Distribution on public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person either directly or indirectly to deposit,
place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial handbill in or on any public
thoroughfare, park, ground or other public place within the village so as to
create a litter problem. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed
to prohibit the handling, transmitting or distributing of any commercial
handbill to any person willing to accept such handbill, nor shall they be
deemed to prohibit the distribution of any noncommercial handbill in any
orderly manner.
§ 161-3. Distribution on vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person either directly or indirectly to deposit,
place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial handbill in or upon any
automobile or other vehicle so as to create a litter problem. The provisions
of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting
A sparkler on a wire or wood stick not exceeding 36 inches in
length that is designed to produce audible or visible effects or to
produce audible and visible effects.
[Note: Wisconsin Administrative Code Section COMM 9.15,
Definitions, Subsection (5)(e)4: "Wire sparkler" means a wire
coated with pyrotechnic composition that produces a shower of
sparks upon ignition. These items may not contain magnesium
and must not exceed 100 grams of composition per item. Devices
containing any chlorate or perchlorate salts may not exceed five
grams of composition per item.]
(8)
§ 153-5 HANDBILLS § 161-3
161:185
or distributing of any commercial handbill to the owner or other occupant
of any automobile or other vehicle who is willing to accept such handbill,
nor shall they be deemed to prohibit the distribution of any noncommercial
handbill in any orderly manner.
§ 161-4. Distribution on private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to deposit,
place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial handbill in or upon any private
yard, grounds, walk, porch, steps, mailbox, vestibule, house, residence,
building or any other private property when there is already in or upon
such property any commercial or noncommercial handbill or any other
newspaper, paper or anything else which would indicate to the person
distributing the commercial handbill that the property is presently
unoccupied. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit
the handing, transmitting or distributing of any commercial handbill to
the owner or other occupant of said premises who is willing to accept
such handbill, nor shall they be deemed to prohibit the distribution of any
noncommercial handbill in any orderly manner.
§ 161-5. Hours of distribution.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any handbill between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. of any day and 9:00 a.m. of the following day.
§ 161-6. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to messenger
service or to the distribution of United States mail or telegrams, nor to the
delivery of any handbill to any person who has requested delivery of the
same, nor to the distribution of campaign material for candidates running
for public office.
§ 161-7. Methods of distribution.
No person shall distribute handbills in such a manner as to impede the free
flow of traffic upon any street or sidewalk, nor shall any such person molest
or annoy any individual, group or gathering.
§ 161-8. Improper posting.
It shall be unlawful to tack, nail, paste, paint or otherwise affix any handbill
upon any public property, including any bridge, fence, sidewalk, building,
monument, pole or post. Handbills may be affixed upon private property,
buildings or billboards if the consent of the owner shall have first been
obtained and if the same is not otherwise prohibited by the ordinances of
the Village of Elm Grove. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit
lawfully posted legal notices.
§ 161-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 161-9
161:186
§ 161-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
Chapter 164
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 22.
Open burning — See Ch. 112.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
Fireworks — See Ch. 153.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 220.
§ 164-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
§ 164-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISCHARGE — Includes but is not limited to spilling, leaking, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping.
GARBAGE — Discarded materials resulting from the handling, processing,
storage or consumption of food.
A. Ensure the safety of the general populace by providing for appropriate,
prompt, safe and effective means of regulating substances and actions
which contaminate, or may potentially contaminate, or render unclean
or impure the air, land or waters of the Village of Elm Grove or make the
same injurious to public health, harmful for commercial or recreational
use or injurious to fish, bird, animal or plant life.
B. Provide a means for the prevention and/or remedy of contamination by
substances and actions which may contaminate or render unclean or
impure the air, land or waters of the Village of Elm Grove or may make
the same injurious to public health, harmful for commercial or
recreational use or injurious to fish, bird, animal or plant life.
C. Provide a means by which the Village of Elm Grove may seek
compensation for services rendered at the expense of the Village of Elm
Grove by it, or on its behalf, from any person whose actions or neglect
has caused the release of substances or wastes which are sought to be
controlled by Subsection A.
§ 161-9 HANDBILLS § 164-2
161:187
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance or combination of substances,
including any waste of a solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous form, which may
cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in
serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or which may pose a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment
because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics. This term includes, but is not limited to, substances which
are toxic, corrosive, flammable, irritants, strong sensitizers or explosives
as determined by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or the
United States Department of Transportation or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
PERSON — An individual, owner, operator, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality, interstate agency, state agency or federal agency.
PREVENTIVE MEASURES — The installation or testing of equipment or
devices, a designated way of performing a specified operation or the
preparation of an emergency response plan.
REGISTERED PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances
properly registered with the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture or under
the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. § 136 et
seq.), as amended, and regulations issued under that Act which is labeled,
designed or intended for use in preventing, destroying, repelling or
mitigating any pest or as a plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant.
WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water
supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and other discarded
or salvageable materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and
agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include
solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage or solid or dissolved
materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which are point
sources subject to permits under Ch. 283, Wis. Stats., source material, as
defined in § 254.31(10), Wis. Stats., special nuclear material, as defined in
§ 254.31(11), Wis. Stats., or by-product material, as defined in § 254.31(3),
Wis. Stats.
§ 164-3. Discharge prohibited.
No person, except those persons specifically exempted under § 164-12, shall
discharge or cause to be discharged any hazardous substance into or onto
the air, lands or waters contained within the limits of the Village of Elm
Grove.
§ 164-4. Preventive measures.
The Village of Elm Grove Fire Department may require that preventive
measures be taken by any person possessing or having control over a
hazardous substance if the Fire Department finds that existing control
measures are inadequate to prevent discharges.
§ 164-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 164-5
161:188
§ 164-5. Notice requirements.
Any person who does discharge or cause to be discharged any hazardous
substance shall notify the Village of Elm Grove Fire Department
immediately of any discharge not exempted under § 164-12 in addition to
reporting the discharge to any state or federal agency which may also
require notice.
§ 164-6. Action following discharge.
Any person in violation of § 164-3 shall immediately take all actions
necessary to contain and clean up the discharge by removing the hazardous
substance to a repository approved by the appropriate state or federal
department or agency. Persons in violation of § 164-3 shall also take the
actions necessary to restore the environment to the extent necessary to
minimize the harmful effects from the discharge to the air, lands or waters
within the Village of Elm Grove.
§ 164-7. Removal or other emergency action.
In any case where action required of a person under § 164-6 is not being
adequately taken or the identity of the person responsible for the discharge
is unknown, any duly authorized officer, employee or agent of the Village of
Elm Grove Fire or Police Department may identify, locate, monitor, contain,
remove or dispose of the hazardous substance or take any other emergency
action which said officer deems appropriate under the circumstances.
§ 164-8. Right of entry.
Any duly authorized officer, employee or agent of the Village of Elm Grove
may, upon notice to the owner or occupant, enter any property, premises or
place at any time for the purposes of performing duties under § 164-7 if the
entry is necessary to prevent increased damage to the air, land or waters
within the Village of Elm Grove. In the event that the owner or occupant of
the property, premises or place refuses to allow access after having been
given notice, the warrant provisions contained within Ch. 61, Wis. Stats.,
shall be followed. However, no notice to the owner or occupant or warrant
is required if the delay necessary to provide them will result in imminent
risk to public health or safety or to the environment.
§ 164-9. Evacuation of affected area.
Should any discharge prohibited under this chapter occur that reasonably
poses a threat to the life, safety or health of the public, the senior Village
of Elm Grove Fire or Police Department official on the scene may order
an evacuation of the area or take other appropriate protective steps for a
period of time until the emergency is deemed to have passed.
§ 164-5 HANDBILLS § 164-10
161:189
§ 164-10. Reimbursement of village costs.
The person who possessed or controlled a hazardous substance which was
discharged or who caused the discharge of a hazardous substance shall
reimburse the Village of Elm Grove for all actual and necessary expenses,
in addition to reasonable costs and overhead, incurred in carrying out its
duties under § 164-7. Additionally, as provided in § 66.60(16), Wis. Stats.,
the Elm Grove Village Board shall have the authority to, without notice,
allocate said costs and expenses against property which has been the site
of a violation of § 164-3 as a special assessment or special charge. In the
event that any special charge remains unpaid for longer than 30 days, a lien
against the property shall be created in accordance with the provisions of
§ 66.60(16)(b), Wis. Stats.
§ 164-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-2000]
In addition to those costs enumerated within § 164-10, a person who
controlled a hazardous substance which was discharged or who caused
the discharge of a hazardous substance shall be subject to a forfeiture of
not less than $500 nor more than $10,000 and in default of such payment
thereof may be imprisoned not more than 90 days. Each and every day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 164-12. Exemptions.
§ 164-13. Liability for damages; effect on other laws.
No common law liability and no statutory liability, state or federal, for
damages resulting from a discharge is affected in any manner by this
chapter. The authority, power and remedies provided in this chapter are in
A. Any person holding a valid permit under Ch. 283, Wis. Stats., is
exempted from the reporting and penalty requirements of this chapter
with respect to substances discharged within the limits authorized by
the permit.
B. Law enforcement officers, members of a fire department or building or
health inspectors using hazardous substances in carrying out their
responsibility to protect public health, safety and welfare are exempted
from the penalty requirements of this chapter but shall report to the
Village of Elm Grove Fire Department any discharges occurring within
the performance of their duties.
C. Any person discharging in conformity with a permit or program
approved under Ch. 283, Wis. Stats., is exempted from the reporting
and penalty requirements of this chapter.
D. Any person applying a registered pesticide according to the label
instructions is exempted with respect to the reporting and penalty
requirements of this chapter.
§ 164-10 ELM GROVE CODE § 164-13
161:190
addition to any authority, power or remedy provided in any other statutes or
provided at common law.
Chapter 171
INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND FERMENTED MALT
BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 87.
Dance halls — See Ch. 123.
Drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 128.
Minors — See Ch. 190.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 208.
§ 171-1. Adoption of statutory provisions.
A. The provisions of Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as created by
Chapter 79 of the 1981 Laws of Wisconsin, and all acts amendatory
thereof and supplementary thereto relating to the regulation of
intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages are adopted as a
portion of this chapter so far as applicable, except as otherwise lawfully
provided by this chapter. A violation of any such provisions shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
B. Underage persons.
(1) As provided for in § 125.10, Wis. Stats., the provisions of
§§ 125.07(1) and (4)(a), (b) and (bm), 125.085(3)(b) and 125.09(2),
Wis. Stats., regulating the conduct of underage persons are hereby
expressly adopted and incorporated into this chapter by reference.
Violators of these provisions shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in said sections of the Wisconsin Statutes and as hereafter
amended.
(2) As provided for in § 125.07(1), Wis. Stats.:
(a) No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away any
alcohol beverages to any underage person not accompanied by
his or her parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the
legal drinking age.
(b) No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in
alcohol beverages to or with any underage person not
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or spouse who has
attained the legal drinking age.
(c) No adult may knowingly permit or fail to take action to prevent
the illegal consumption of alcohol beverages by an underage
person on premises owned by the adult or under the adult's
§ 164-13 HANDBILLS § 171-1
161:191
§ 171-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES — Fermented malt beverages and intoxicating
liquor.
CLUB — An organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner,
lessee or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for
club purposes, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social,
patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purpose but not for pecuniary gain
and which only sells alcohol beverages incidental to its operation.
FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGES — Any beverage made by the alcohol
fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley malt and hops, with or
without unmalted grains or decorticated and degerminated grains or sugar
containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
HOTEL — A hotel as defined in § 254.61(3), Wis. Stats., that is provided
with a restaurant, except that for purposes of § 171-6C(3) of this chapter,
it shall have 100 or more rooms of sleeping accommodations and either an
attached restaurant with a seating capacity of 150 or more persons or a
banquet room in which banquets attended by 400 or more persons may be
held.[Amended 8-9-1999]
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — All ardent, spirituous, distilled or vinous liquors,
liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented or not, and
by whatever name called, containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume,
which are beverages, but does not include fermented malt beverages.
LEGAL DRINKING AGE — The meaning prescribed in § 125.02(8m), Wis.
Stats.
PERSON — A natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited
liability company, corporation or association.
PREMISES — The area described in a license or permit.
control. This subsection does not apply to alcohol beverages
used exclusively as part of a religious service.
(d) No adult may intentionally encourage or contribute to a
violation of § 125.07(4)(a) or (b), Wis. Stats.
(3) Any person who commits a violation of Subsection B(2)(a), (b), (c)
or (d) of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than
$500 if the person has not committed a previous violation within 30
months of the violation. The thirty-month period shall be measured
from the dates of violations that resulted in the imposition of a
forfeiture or conviction. Any person who commits more than one
violation of Subsection B(2)(a), (b), (c) or (d) within a thirty-month
period shall be subject to penalties set forth in § 125.07(1)(b)(2)(b)
to (d), Wis. Stats. [Amended 12-11-2000]
§ 171-1 ELM GROVE CODE § 171-2
161:192
RESTAURANT — A restaurant as defined in § 254.61(5), Wis. Stats., except
that for purposes of § 171-6C(3) of this chapter it shall have a seating
capacity of 300 or more persons.[Amended 8-9-1999]
SELL, SOLD, SALE OR SELLING — Any transfer of alcohol beverages with
consideration or any transfer without consideration if knowingly made for
purposes of evading the law relating to the sale of alcohol beverages or
any shift, device, scheme or transaction for obtaining alcohol beverages,
including the solicitation of orders for, or the sale for future delivery of,
alcohol beverages.
UNDERAGE PERSON — A person who has not attained the legal drinking
age.
VILLAGE — The Village of Elm Grove, Wisconsin.
WHOLESALER — A person, other than a brewer, manufacturer or rectifier,
who sells alcohol beverages to a licensed retailer or to another person who
holds a permit to sell alcohol beverages at wholesale.
WINE — Products obtained from the normal alcohol fermentation of the
juices or must of sound, ripe grapes, other fruits or other agricultural
products, imitation wine compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry,
mead and sake, if such products contain 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
WINE COOLER — Beverages containing products obtained from the normal
alcohol fermentation of the juices or must of sound, ripe grapes, other fruits
or other agricultural products, imitation wine compounds sold as wine,
vermouth, cider, perry, mead and sake, if such beverages contain not more
than 6% of alcohol by volume.
§ 171-3. Licenses required.
§ 171-4. Classes of licenses and permits; fees.
There shall be the following classes and denominations of licenses which,
when issued by the Village Clerk under the authority of the Village Board
after payment of the fee herein specified, shall permit the holder to sell, deal
or traffic in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages as provided in
this section and as provided in §§ 125.17, 125.18, 125.25, 125.26, 125.28
A. When required. No person, except as provided by § 125.06, Wis. Stats.,
shall distribute, vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail or wholesale,
deal or traffic in or, for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance,
give away or gift any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage, or
cause the same to be done, without having procured a license, permit or
authorization as provided in this chapter nor without complying with all
the provisions of this chapter and all statutes, ordinances and
regulations of the state and village applicable thereto.
B. Separate license required for each place of sale. A license shall be
required for each of those premises where intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale.
§ 171-2 HANDBILLS § 171-4
161:193
and 125.51, Wis. Stats. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the full
license fee shall be charged for the whole or fraction of any year. All license
years shall be deemed to commence as of July 1.
A. Retail Class "A" license. A Class "A" license may be issued by the Village
Board under § 125.25, Wis. Stats., and authorizes retail sales of
fermented malt beverages in original packages, containers or bottles
only for consumption off the premises where sold. The license fee shall
be $100 per year. A license may be issued after July 1. That license shall
expire on the following June 30. The fee for a license for less than 12
months shall be prorated according to the number of months or fraction
thereof for which the license is issued.
B. Retail Class "B" license. A Class "B" license may be issued by the Village
Board under § 125.26, Wis. Stats., and authorizes retail sales of
fermented malt beverages to be consumed either on the premises
where sold or off the premises. Persons holding a Class "B" license may
sell beverages containing less than 0.5% alcohol by volume without
obtaining a license under § 66.053(1), Wis. Stats.
(1) The fee for a Class "B" license shall be $100 per year. A license may
be issued after July 1. That license shall expire on the following
June 30. The fee for a license for less than 12 months shall be
prorated according to the number of months or fraction thereof for
the which the license is issued. A Class "B" license may be issued at
any time after July 1 for a period of six months in any license year,
for which 50% of the license fee shall be paid. But such short-term
licenses shall not be renewable during the calendar year in which
issued.
(2) Special events. A temporary Class "B" license may be issued by the
Village Clerk to bona fide clubs, to county or local fair associations
or agricultural societies, to churches, lodges or societies and to
posts of veterans' organizations any of which have been in
existence for at least six months before the date of application for
special events. A license issued under this subsection authorizes
the sale of fermented malt beverages at particularly described
picnics or other similar gatherings, such as at a meeting of the
veterans' post or during a fair conducted by the fair association or
agricultural society. No temporary Class "B" license holder shall
allow any underage person to be present on the premises for which
the temporary Class "B" license is issued unless the temporary
Class "B" license specifically grants permission for underage
persons to be present. Application for a temporary Class "B" license
under the provisions of this subsection shall be made not less than
five business days before the event is scheduled to take place. Upon
approval the applicant shall receive a temporary Class "B" license
under the provisions of this subsection upon payment of a fee of
$10 per permitted event.
C. Picnics or similar gatherings on public property.
§ 171-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 171-4
161:194
(1) Special permit. A special permit may be issued by the Village Clerk
to families or clubs including, but not limited to, nonprofit
charitable organizations, to state, county, or local fair associations
or agricultural societies, to churches, lodges or societies and to
posts of veterans' organizations. A special permit issued under this
section authorizes the consumption and dispensing of fermented
malt beverages and/or wine coolers at particularly described
picnics or other similar gatherings which are held on public
property. No charge shall be allowed in connection with the
serving, selling, consumption, or distribution of fermented malt
beverages and/or wine coolers at events for which a special permit
has been granted unless a Temporary Class "B" license or a
Temporary "Class B" license has also been obtained under this
chapter for said event. A special permit for an event for which a
Temporary Class "B" or Temporary "Class B" license has been or
will be procured may only be issued by the Village Clerk upon proof
by the applicant that liability insurance coverage of not less than
one-half-million dollars has been procured for the contemplated
event. This subsection is not intended to regulate the internal
activities of private organizations, nor legitimate private social
events held entirely on private property.
(2) Except as otherwise provided within Subsection C(1) of this section
or authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board, the
consumption or dispensing of alcoholic beverages on any public
property or on a highway as defined in § 340.01(22), Wis. Stats., is
prohibited. [Amended 2-8-1999; 6-14-1999]
(3) The application for a special permit under the provisions of this
subsection shall be made to the Village Clerk not less than 48 hours
before the event takes place. Said application shall include an
agreement signed by the applicant on behalf of the entity applying
for a special permit whereby the applicant expressly warrants and
represents that the Village of Elm Grove, its officers, agents and
employees shall be held harmless and indemnified from any and all
claims which may arise from the issuance of a special permit under
this chapter. The Village Clerk shall refer to the Finance and
Licensing Committee any applications for a special permit under
this subsection where there is a question as to whether an
applicant qualifies for a special permit under this subsection.
(4) There shall be no fee for a special permit under this subsection.
However, a special permit may not be issued to any family or club
for more than three occasions per year under this subsection,
provided that each "occasion" is defined to mean no more than
three consecutive calendar days. [Amended 12-11-2000]
(5) A special permit may be issued by the Village Clerk to organized
sports teams participating in an Elm Grove Recreation Department
program. Applicants shall be charged $25 for one special permit
which shall be good for the entire season, not to exceed a four-
§ 171-4 HANDBILLS § 171-4
161:195
month period, provided that an authorized member of the team
provides an application on the form provided by the village
together with a team roster and schedule, including name, address
and date of birth for all members. This is a nonrefundable fee,
and the permit can be revoked without notice for violation of
this chapter or at the discretion of the Village Manager. [Added
2-8-1999]
(6) Except as otherwise provided within this section, residents
attending village-sponsored events in the park, such as July 4th
celebration and concerts in the park, and as otherwise specified by
the Village Manager upon prior notice to the Village Board of
Trustees at a scheduled Board meeting do not have to apply for a
special permit for consumption of fermented malt beverages, wine
and/or wine coolers, providing that said beverages will not be
consumed by, or dispensed to, persons other than those legally
permitted to possess or consume said types of beverages. [Added
2-8-1999]
D. Wholesaler's fermented malt beverage license. A wholesaler's license
may be issued by the Village Board under § 125.28, Wis. Stats., and
authorizes sales of fermented malt beverages only in original packages
or containers to retailers or wholesalers, not to be consumed in or
about the premises where sold. The fee shall be $25 per year.
E. Retail "Class A" license. A "Class A" license may be issued by the Village
Board under § 125.51(2), Wis. Stats., and authorizes the retail sale of
intoxicating liquor in original packages and containers for consumption
off the premises where sold. The fee shall be $500 per year.
F. Retail "Class B" license. A "Class B" license may be issued by the Village
Board under § 125.51(3), Wis. Stats., and authorizes the sale of
intoxicating liquor to be consumed by the glass only on the premises
where sold and also authorizes the sale of intoxicating liquor in the
original package or container, in quantities not to exceed four liters at
any one time, and to be consumed off the premises where sold. Wine,
however, may be sold for consumption off the premises in the original
package or container in any quantity. The fee shall be $500 per year.
Except as otherwise specified in § 125.51(3)(f), Wis. Stats., a "Class B"
license may be issued only to a holder of a Class "B" license to sell
fermented malt beverages.
G. Reserve "Class B" license. A reserve "Class B" license may be issued by
the Village Board under § 125.51(4)(a)(4), Wis. Stats., to authorize the
sale of intoxicating liquors to be consumed by the glass only on the
premises where sold and also to authorize the sale of intoxicating liquor
in the original package or container, in quantities not to exceed four
liters at any one time, and to be consumed off the premises where sold.
Wine, however, may be sold for consumption off the premises in the
original package or container in any quantity. The fee shall be $10,000
for initial issuance plus $500 for the first year's license. Each annual
§ 171-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 171-4
161:196
renewal fee shall be $500 per year. Except as otherwise specified in
§ 125.51(3)(f), Wis. Stats., a reserve "Class B" license may be issued
only to a holder of a Class "B" license to sell fermented malt beverages.
Bona fide clubs, as defined in § 171-2, that make application for a
reserve "Class B" liquor license are exempted from the issuance fee of
$10,000 and required to pay only the first year license fee, provided
that the club is situated in the village and incorporated in the state for
at least six years. [Added 8-9-1999]
H. "Class A" and "Class B" licenses. For either "Class A" or "Class B"
licenses: [Amended 8-9-1999]
(1) A license may be issued after July 1 in any license year. All licenses
shall expire on the following June 30. The fee for the license shall
be prorated according to the number of months or fractions thereof
remaining until the following June 30, except that the initial
issuance fee of $10,000 for a reserve "Class B" liquor license shall
not be prorated.
I. Temporary "Class B" licenses. Notwithstanding § 125.68(3), Wis. Stats.,
temporary "Class B" licenses may be issued by the Village Clerk to bona
fide clubs, to county or local fair associations or agricultural societies,
to churches, lodges or societies that have been in existence for at least
six months before the date of application and to posts of veterans'
organizations authorizing the sale of wine containing not more than 6%
alcohol by volume in an original package, container or bottle or by the
glass if the wine is dispensed directly from an original package,
container or bottle at a particular picnic or similar gathering, at a
meeting of the post or during a fair conducted by the fair association or
agricultural society. application for a temporary "Class B" license under
the provisions of this chapter shall be made not less than five business
days before the event is scheduled to take place. Upon approval the
applicant shall receive a temporary "Class B" license under the
provisions of this subsection upon payment of a fee of $10 per
permitted event, except that no fee shall be charged if a temporary
Class "B" license is applied for at the same time for the same event.
J. Operator's license.
(1) Under § 125.17, Wis. Stats., an operator's license may be issued by
the Village Board for purposes of compliance with §§ 125.32(2) and
125.68(2), Wis. Stats. The fee shall be $50 and it shall be valid for
two years.
(2) Effective July 1, 1991, no operator's license may be issued unless
the applicant provides the Village Board with evidence of
compliance with license training provisions contained in
§ 125.17(6), Wis. Stats.
(3) A provisional operator's license shall be issued to an applicant by
the Village Clerk upon written application. The applicant must be
§ 171-4 HANDBILLS § 171-4
161:197
§ 171-5. License applications.
18 years of age and a resident of this state and must have applied
for an operator's license and have provided proof of enrollment
in the training class required by § 125.17(6), Wis. Stats. No
provisional operator's license shall be granted if the applicant has
been denied an operator's license by the Village Board or if the
applicant, subject to §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, Wis. Stats.,
has an arrest or conviction record of alcohol offenses. The
provisional operator's license shall cost $15 and expire 60 days
from the date of issuance or when an operator's license is issued
by the Village Board, whichever is sooner. The Village Clerk shall
immediately revoke the provisional operator's license in the event
the holder fails to successfully complete the course required by
§ 125.17(6), Wis. Stats.
K. Temporary operator's license. A temporary operator's license may be
issued by the Village Board for purposes of compliance with
§§ 125.32(2) and 125.68(2), Wis. Stats., to persons employed by or
donating their services to nonprofit corporations. No person may hold
more than one temporary operator's license per year. The temporary
operator's license shall cost $10 and shall be valid for the period stated
on the license, which shall be from one day to 14 days.
L. Retail "Class C" license. A "Class C" license may be issued by the Village
Board under Wis. Stat. § 125.51(3m) to a person qualified under Wis.
Stat. § 125.04(5) for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol beverages
accounts for less than 50% of gross receipts and which does not have a
barroom or for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol beverages
accounts for less than 50% of gross receipts and which has a barroom in
which wine is the only intoxicating liquor sold. A "Class C" license may
not be issued to a foreign corporation, a foreign limited liability
company or a person acting as agent for or in the employ of another.
The fee shall be $100 per year. A "Class C" license issued under this
section authorizes the retail sale of wine by the glass or in an opened
original container for consumption on the premises where sold. For
purposes of this subsection, "barroom" means a room that is primarily
used for the sale or consumption of alcohol beverages. [Added
12-11-2000]
A. Applications for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on the form
prescribed by law and shall be sworn to by the applicant and shall be
filed with the Village Clerk for presentation to the Finance and
Licensing Committee of the Village Board. Said Committee shall meet
not later than May 15 of each year and be in session from day to day
thereafter so long as it may be necessary for the purpose of acting upon
such applications for licenses as may be presented to it on or before
April 15. On or before June 1 of each year, said Committee shall make
recommendations to the Village Board as to whether any and all
§ 171-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 171-5
161:198
§ 171-6. License restrictions.
applications for licenses so filed shall be granted and issued or denied,
and, on or before June 15 of each year, the Village Board shall act on
all such applications for licenses and grant and issue or deny them. Any
application for a license filed with the Village Clerk after April 15 of
any year may be presented to the Finance and Licensing Committee of
the Village Board at any regular or special meeting thereof for action,
but in no event shall such license be granted by the Village Board after
recommendation by its Finance and Licensing Committee in less than
15 days after the application for such license has been filed with the
Village Clerk.
B. Prior to approval of a license application under this chapter, the Village
Clerk shall publish each application for a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A"
or "Class B" license, except for temporary Class "B" and temporary
"Class B" license applications. Said notice shall be published in a
newspaper having the largest circulation within the village. If the
newspaper is a daily newspaper, notice shall be published on three
successive occasions or at least one time if the newspaper is a weekly
newspaper. Such publication shall include the name and address of the
applicant, the kind of license applied for and the location of the
premises to be licensed. [Amended 4-22-2008]
C. Upon the filing of the application, the applicant shall pay the village a
sum for publication of the notice of the application for license as
computed by the rate per folio for legal notices as established by law.
D. Within 10 days of any change in any fact set out in an application for a
license or permit to sell alcohol beverages, the licensee or permittee
shall file a written description of the changed fact with the Village
Clerk.
E. The Village Clerk shall retain all applications made for licenses to sell
beverages. However, the Village Clerk may destroy all applications
more than four years old.
F. Any person may inspect applications for licenses to sell alcohol
beverages retained by the village.
G. By July 15 annually, the Village Clerk shall mail to the Wisconsin
Department of Revenue a list containing the name, address and trade
name of each person holding a license issued by the village, other than
a manager's or operator's license or a temporary Class "B" license, the
type of license held and, if the person holding the license is a
corporation or limited liability company, the name of the agent required
under § 125.04(6), Wis. Stats.
A. Statutory requirements. Licenses shall be issued only to persons
eligible therefor under §§ 125.04(5), 125.33(7)(b) and 125.69(4)(b),
Wis. Stats.
§ 171-5 HANDBILLS § 171-6
161:199
B. Health and sanitation requirements. No Class "B" or "Class B" license
shall be issued for any premises which does not conform to the sanitary,
safety and health requirements of the State Department of Commerce
pertaining to buildings and plumbing, to the rules and regulations of
the State Department of Health and Family Services applicable to
restaurants and to all such ordinances and regulations adopted by the
Village of Elm Grove.
C. License quota. The number of persons and places that may be granted a
"Class B" liquor license under this section is limited by § 125.51(4), Wis.
Stats. [Amended 8-9-1999]
(1) Retail "Class B" liquor license. Effective December 1, 1997, the
village shall not issue more than seven Retail "Class B" liquor
licenses.
(2) Reserve "Class B" liquor license. Effective December 1, 1997, the
village shall not issue more than five reserve "Class B" liquor
licenses. The village may issue one additional reserve "Class B"
liquor license whenever the village population of 6,203 increases
by a population of 500, or fraction thereof. Increases in population
shall be determined by the Village Clerk pursuant to
§ 125.51(4)(bm), Wis. Stats.
(3) Exception. If no reserve or retail "Class B" liquor licenses are
available, the village may nevertheless issue a retail "Class B"
liquor license to a hotel or restaurant, as those terms are defined in
§ 171-2 of this chapter. The initial and the renewal fee shall be the
same as provided under § 171-4F for a retail "Class B" license.
(4) Wholesaler's fermented malt beverage license. No more than two
wholesaler's fermented malt beverage licenses shall be in use in
any one year.
D. Corporations and limited liability companies. No license shall be
granted to any corporation or limited liability company which does not
meet the requirements set forth in § 125.04(5) and (6), Wis. Stats. The
corporation or limited liability company shall appoint an agent as
required by § 125.04(6), Wis. Stats., by the filing of the form prescribed
by the village together with the application for a license. In addition to
meeting the requirements set forth in § 125.04(5), Wis. Stats., the agent
must, with respect to character, record and reputation, be satisfactory
to the village.
E. Age requirements. No license, other than operators' licenses or
temporary operators' licenses, shall be granted to any person under the
minimum age specified by Wisconsin Statutes pursuant to
§§ 125.02(8m) and 125.04(5), Wis. Stats., for the consumption of
alcohol. Operators' licenses may be issued only to applicants who have
attained the age of 18.
§ 171-6 ELM GROVE CODE § 171-6
161:200
§ 171-7. Form and expiration of licenses. [Amended 12-11-2000]
All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date of
issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee and, unless sooner
revoked, shall expire on June 30 thereafter except as otherwise provided.
The license shall not be delivered until the applicant shall produce and file
with the clerk a receipt showing payment of the sum required therefor to
the Village Treasurer.
§ 171-8. Transfer of licenses.
F. Effect of revocation of license. Whenever any license has been revoked,
at least six months from the time of such revocation shall elapse before
another license shall be granted for the same premises and 12 months
shall elapse before another license shall be granted to the person whose
license was revoked.
G. Issuance for sales and sales in dwellings prohibited. No license may be
issued to any person for the purpose of possessing, selling or offering
for sale any alcoholic beverage in any dwelling house, flat or residential
apartment. No person shall sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage in
any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment.
H. State residency requirement. Licenses, other than operators' licenses
and temporary operators' licenses, may be issued only to persons who
have been residents of this state continuously for at least 90 days prior
to the date of application.
I. Sales of alcoholic beverages to intoxicated persons. No licensee may
procure for, sell, dispense or give away alcoholic beverages to a person
who is intoxicated. Any licensee who violates this provision shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100 nor more than $500.
J. Proof of seller's permit required. Prior to the issuance of a license to a
person or business required to have a seller's permit under Ch. 77, Wis.
Stats., the Village Clerk shall require proof that the person to whom
such license or permit is to be issued is the holder of a seller's permit or
has been informed by an employee of the Wisconsin Department of
Revenue that the Department of Revenue will issue a seller's permit to
that person.
A. As to person.
(1) Licenses to sell alcohol beverages, except reserve "Class B" liquor
licenses, may be transferred to persons other than the licensee if
the licensee, or an applicant for a subsequently granted license,
dies or becomes bankrupt or makes an assignment for the benefit
of creditors during the license year or after filing the application. If
a retail licensee, other than the holder of a reserve "Class B" liquor
license, becomes disabled, the village may, upon application,
§ 171-6 HANDBILLS § 171-8
161:201
§ 171-9. Posting and care of license.
Every license issued under this chapter shall be posted and at all times
displayed as provided in § 125.04(10), Wis. Stats.
§ 171-10. Regulation of licensed premises.
transfer the license to the licensee's spouse if that spouse may
hold that type of license under the Wisconsin Statutes and complies
with all requirements under this chapter applicable to original
applicants, except that the spouse is exempt from payment of
the license fee for the year in which the transfer takes place.
[Amended 8-9-1999]
(2) Upon the happening of any of the events under Subsection A(1), the
personal representative, the surviving spouse if a personal
representative is not appointed, the trustee or the receiver may
continue or sell or assign the business.
(3) If the business is sold or assigned, the license, except for a reserve
"Class B" liquor license, may be transferred to the successor owner
or assignee at no charge if: [Amended 8-9-1999]
(a) He or she complies with the requirements applicable to
original applicants; and
(b) He or she is acceptable to the village and consent to the
transfer is given by the village.
(4) Reserve "Class B" liquor licenses may be transferred or assigned,
provided the transferee or assignee complies with the
requirements applicable to original applicants, including payment
of the initial fee and the prorated fee set forth under § 171-4G and
the transfer fee set forth under Subsection B. [Added 8-9-1999]
B. As to place. Every alcohol beverage license or permit may be
transferred to another place or premises within the village. An alcohol
beverage warehouse permit under § 125.19, Wis. Stats., a winery
permit under § 125.53, Wis. Stats., or an intoxicating liquor
wholesaler's permit under § 125.54, Wis. Stats., may be transferred to
another premises within this state. Transfers shall be made by the
village upon payment of a fee of $10. No retail licensee, retail
permittee, intoxicating liquor wholesaler or holder of a warehouse or
winery permit is entitled to more than one transfer during the license or
permit year.
A. Gambling and disorderly conduct prohibited. Each licensed premises
shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly,
riotous or indecent conduct or gambling shall be allowed at any time on
any licensed premises.
§ 171-8 ELM GROVE CODE § 171-10
161:202
§ 171-11. Closing hours.
B. Employment of underage persons. Minors 14 through 17 years of age
may be employed in places where alcohol beverages are stored, sold or
served provided the minors are not serving, selling, dispensing or
giving away alcohol beverages and they are at all times under the
immediate supervision of the licensee, a member of the licensee's
immediate family who is of legal drinking age or a person holding an
operator's license.
C. Safety and sanitation requirements. Each licensed premises shall be
maintained and conducted in a sanitary manner and shall be a safe and
proper place for the purpose for which used.
D. Presence on licensed premises of licensee or operator; serving of
alcohol beverages.
(1) Pursuant to §§ 125.32(2) and 125.68(2), Wis. Stats., except as
otherwise permitted under §§ 125.32(3)(b) and 125.07(3)(a)(10),
Wis. Stats., there shall be upon such premises at all times during
operation of the business the licensee, the agent named in the
license if the licensee is a corporation or limited liability company
or some person who shall have an operator's license or a member of
the immediate family of the licensee who has attained the age of
18, who shall be responsible for the acts of all persons selling or
serving in any manner fermented malt beverages or intoxicating
liquor to customers.
(2) No person, including underage members of a licensee's immediate
family, other than the licensee or agent may serve alcohol
beverages in any establishment licensed by a Class "A," Class "B,"
"Class A" or "Class B" license under this chapter unless he or she
has an operator's license or is at least 18 years of age and is under
the immediate supervision of the licensee or agent or a person
holding an operator's license who is on the premises at the time of
the service.
E. Restriction of persons allowed on licensed premises after hours. Except
as provided in § 125.32(3)(b), Wis. Stats., no persons, other than the
licensee, employees of the licensee, salespersons, service personnel or
employees of wholesalers, who are actively performing job-related
activities shall be upon the licensed premises after closing hours.
[Amended 3-22-2005]
F. Consumption on licensed premises after closing hours. [Added
3-22-2005]
(1) No person shall consume fermented malt beverages or intoxicating
liquor on the licensed premises after the closing time for such
licensed premises.
§ 171-10 HANDBILLS § 171-11
161:203
§ 171-12. Revocation or suspension of licenses. [Amended
8-9-1999]
The provisions of § 125.12(1) through (2)(ar), Wis. Stats., are hereby
incorporated by reference in their entirety. Any licensee who procures for,
sells, dispenses or gives away alcoholic beverages to a person who is a
minor under state law shall be subject to suspension as provided under
§§ 125.07 and 125.12(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 171-13. Procedure on hearing; effect of revocation.
The provisions of § 125.12(2)(b), Wis. Stats., are hereby incorporated by
reference in their entirety. Whenever the Village Board or Municipal Court
revokes or suspends a license or permit or imposes a penalty on a licensee
or permittee for the violation of this chapter or Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., the
Village Clerk or the Clerk of the Municipal Court shall, within 10 days after
the revocation, suspension or imposition of the penalty, mail a report to
the Department of Revenue at Madison, Wisconsin, giving the name of the
licensee, the address of the licensed premises and a full description of the
penalty imposed.
§ 171-14. Nonrenewal of license.
The Village Board may refuse to renew a license for the causes provided in
§ 125.12(2)(ag), Wis. Stats. Prior to the time for the renewal of the license,
A. No premises for which a wholesale or retail liquor or fermented malt
beverage license has been issued shall remain open for the sale of
alcoholic beverages:
(1) If a wholesale liquor permit, between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.,
except on Saturday when the closing hour shall be 9:00 p.m.
(2) If a wholesale fermented malt beverage license has been issued,
between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(3) If a Class "A" or "Class A" license, between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(4) If a Class "B" or a "Class B" license, between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m., except on Saturdays and Sundays between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. On January 1, the premises shall not be required to close.
B. Between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. no person may sell fermented
malt beverages on Class "B" licensed premises in an original unopened
package, container or bottle or for consumption away from the
premises.
C. Hotels and restaurants whose principal business is the furnishing of
food or lodging to patrons, and bowling centers and golf courses, may
remain open for the conduct of their regular business, but no
intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages shall be sold during
prohibited hours.
§ 171-11 ELM GROVE CODE § 171-14
161:204
the Village Board shall notify the licensee in writing of the village's intention
not to renew the license and provide the licensee with an opportunity for
a hearing. The notice shall state the reasons for the intended action. The
hearing shall be conducted as provided in § 125.12(2)(b), Wis. Stats., and
judicial review shall be as provided in § 125.12(2)(d), Wis. Stats.
§ 171-15. Violation by agent or employee.
A violation of this chapter by a duly authorized agent or employee of the
licensee shall constitute a violation by the licensee or permit holder.
§ 171-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
Chapter 185
MASSAGE THERAPISTS AND MASSAGE PARLORS
§ 185-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MASSAGE PARLOR — A place or establishment where the primary or
secondary function is to offer massage or massage therapy or bodywork.
MASSAGE THERAPIST OR BODYWORKER — A person who engages in
massage therapy or bodywork.
MASSAGE THERAPY OR BODYWORK —
§ 185-2. License required.
The science and healing art that uses manual actions to palpate and
manipulate the soft tissue of the human body and includes determining
whether massage therapy or bodywork is appropriate or
contraindicated or whether a referral to another health care
practitioner is appropriate.
A.
Does not include making a medical diagnosis or any service or
procedure for which a license to practice medicine or physical therapy
is required by law.
B.
A. No person shall engage in massage therapy or bodywork within the
village on an individual who is not a related family member unless such
person has first been issued a license of registration as a massage
therapist or bodyworker pursuant to § 440.981, Wis. Stats.
B. No person shall within the village carry on any aspect of the business of
operating a massage parlor or administering massage or performing
§ 171-14 MASSAGE THERAPISTS AND MASSAGE § 185-2
185:205
§ 185-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code, except that the forfeiture shall not be less than $100.
Chapter 190
MINORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dance halls — See Ch. 123.
Drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 128.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 171.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 208.
§ 190-1. Loitering prohibited; exceptions.
No person under the age of 17 years shall congregate, loiter, wander, stroll,
stand, play or travel in or upon any public street, sidewalk, highway, road,
alley, park, vacant lot, public building, place of amusement or entertainment
or any public place within the Village of Elm Grove, either on foot or in or
upon any conveyance being driven or parked thereon, between 11:00 p.m.
and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless accompanied by his or her parent,
spouse or guardian or other adult person having legal care or custody of
such person. The prohibition of this chapter shall not apply to any person
under 17 years of age who is:
massage therapy or bodywork in exchange for any type of consideration
in or outside the village, unless each person administering massage,
massage therapy or bodywork holds a license of registration as
described in Subsection A of this section and engages in such activity
in a permitted zoning district.
A. Returning to his or her home directly from and immediately after the
end of any educational, athletic or social event sponsored by any
accredited school, tax-exempt church or governmental unit or agency,
which event such person could properly and did in fact attend.
B. Returning directly from and going directly to his or her place of
employment, which place of employment is known to and approved by
his or her parent, spouse or guardian or other adult person having legal
care or custody of such person.
C. Returning directly from or going directly to any other activity which has
been specifically approved in advance in writing by his or her parent,
spouse or guardian or other adult person having legal care or custody of
such person, provided that such written approval is in the possession of
§ 185-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 190-1
190:206
§ 190-2. Responsibility of parents.
No parent, spouse or guardian or other adult person having legal care or
custody of a person under the age of 17 years shall suffer or permit or
by inefficient control allow such person to violate the provisions of § 190-1
of this chapter, provided that any such parent, spouse, guardian or other
adult person who shall have made a missing person notification to the law
enforcement authorities shall not be considered to have suffered, permitted
or allowed any person to be in violation of § 190-1 of this chapter.
§ 190-3. Places of amusement or entertainment.
No person operating a place of amusement or entertainment within the
Village of Elm Grove or any agent, servant or employee of any such person
shall permit any person under the age of 17 years to enter or loiter in such
places of amusement or entertainment during the hours specified in § 190-1
of this chapter unless such person is accompanied by his or her parent,
spouse or guardian or other adult person having legal care or custody of
such person.
§ 190-4. Hotels, motels and rooming houses.
No person operating a hotel, motel or lodging or rooming house within the
Village of Elm Grove or any agent, servant or employee of any such person
shall permit any person under the age of 17 years to visit, idle, wander
or stroll in any portion of such hotel, motel or lodging or rooming house
between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, unless such person is
accompanied by his or her parent, spouse or guardian or other adult person
having legal care or custody of such person.
§ 190-5. School and playground areas.
No person not in official attendance or on official school business shall enter
into, congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or play in any school building
or in or about any playground area adjacent thereto within the Village of
Elm Grove between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on official school days.
§ 190-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code, except that a person under the age of 18 years shall
be referred to the proper authorities as provided in Ch. 48, Wis. Stats.
such person while returning from or going to such other place or
activity.
§ 190-1 MINORS § 190-6
190:207
Chapter 193
MOTELS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Room tax for hotels and motels — See Ch.
249, Art, I.
§ 193-1. Purpose.
It is hereby declared necessary in the interest of public health, welfare and
morals that the use of motels for residence purposes or by transients or
tourists in the village be regulated.
§ 193-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LODGING UNIT — Includes the individual rooms, cabins, cottages and like
units included in a motel.
MOTEL — Includes any structure where overnight lodging facilities are
provided for persons traveling by automobile or otherwise.
§ 193-3. Restrictions on private dwellings.
No private dwelling shall be used or advertised for use for hire for overnight
lodging purposes for persons traveling by automobile or otherwise.
§ 193-4. License procedure.
A. License required. No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter
operate or maintain any motel in the village without first obtaining a
license therefor as herein provided.
B. Term. All licenses shall expire on the 30th day of June after the date of
their issuance and shall be subject to revocation by the Village Board
upon violation by the owner or operator of any of the provisions of this
chapter.
C. Application.
(1) Any person desiring a license to operate and maintain a motel shall
make written application setting forth the name and address of
such motel, the name and address of the owner and operator, the
location of the premises on which the motel is situated and any
other information required by the Finance and Licensing
Committee of the Village Board.
§ 190-6 ELM GROVE CODE § 193-4
193:208
§ 193-5. State regulations adopted.
Each motel shall be maintained and operated in accordance with the
regulations and requirements of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, State
Board of Health Departmental Rules.
§ 193-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-2000;
7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
Chapter 204
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 95.
Bicycles — See Ch. 101.
Fireworks — See Ch. 153.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 171.
Snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles — See
Ch. 238.
Trailers and camping — See Ch. 259.
Trees and vegetation — See Ch. 266.
§ 204-1. Regular hours.
Except in emergencies, the Village parks shall be open to the public every
day of the year during hours designated by a resolution of the Village Board
of Trustees. The opening and closing hours for any Village park shall be
posted therein for public information. No one shall enter or be in any Village
park during the hours when closed.
§ 204-2. Special hours.
Any Village park or part thereof may be declared opened or closed to the
public by the Village Board of Trustees at any time for any interval of time,
either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals, daily or otherwise, and
(2) Upon the filing of such application, it shall be referred to the
Finance and Licensing Committee for its consideration and
recommendation. The application, with such recommendation,
shall then be considered by the Village Board for approval or
disapproval. If such application is approved, the village shall be
directed to issue the license.
D. Fees. The annual license fee shall be $5 for the first lodging unit and
$2.50 for each additional lodging unit.
§ 193-4 MOTELS § 204-2
193:209
either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Village Board of Trustees
shall find reasonably necessary.
§ 204-3. Dogs. [Added 12-11-2000; amended 2-12-2001;
11-22-2005]
A. Dogs used by a disabled person to assist him/her in his/her activities
and any police canine performing a law enforcement function are
allowed in Village parks.
B. All other dogs are allowed in Village parks with the following
restrictions:
(1) Dogs are allowed in parks if they are on a leash, no longer than six
feet in length, at all times and held by a person of sufficient size and
strength to restrain the dog.
(2) Dogs are restricted to pathways on the perimeter of the parks and
pond and are not allowed in playground areas, the pool area, sand
volleyball courts, soccer fields, softball fields, and/or hard and clay
courts.
(3) Dogs will only be allowed in parks during regular park hours, and
they will not be allowed during special events. Special events
include:
(a) Soccer tournaments.
(b) Memorial Day.
(c) Fourth of July.
(d) Other special events as determined by the Village Board of
Trustees.
(4) Dog owners must maintain effective verbal control of their dogs.
Dogs that show aggression toward people or other dogs must be
removed immediately. The owner is personally liable for any
damages or injury the dog inflicts or receives.
(5) Owners must clean up after their dog.
(6) Dogs must wear a collar with identification at all times, be licensed
and vaccinated, healthy (have no contagious conditions or
diseases), and be parasite free.
(7) The number of dogs per person is limited to three, subject to
§ 204-3B(1).
(8) Dogs in heat shall not be allowed in the park.
(9) Dogs shall not chase or disturb wildlife.
§ 204-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 204-3
193:210
§ 204-4. Reservation of park facilities. [Amended 3-23-2010]
The Village of Elm Grove hereby determines that, as it is necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of persons and property within the
Village of Elm Grove, use of any park facility shall be regulated. "Park
facility" is defined as land, area, structure, equipment or feature of or within
a Village park.
C. Any person violating any provisions of this Code shall be subject to a
violation, and upon the conviction of any such violation, such person
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
A. A permit shall be obtained from the Village Clerk in order to reserve any
park facility for personal, business, or nonprofit use.
B. No person shall allow or conduct a for-profit activity within any park
facility unless a permit has first been obtained.
(1) Applications for for-profit use of any park facility permits shall be
made to the Village Clerk, on forms provided by the Village of Elm
Grove, and shall include at a minimum all of the following
information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
(b) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all of the
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; the names,
addresses and telephone numbers of all of the officers and
directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or members if the
applicant is a limited-liability company;
(c) The location at which the for-profit use is to be conducted;
(d) Details related to the nature of the for-profit use, including:
[1] Amplified noise, if permitted, shall not commence prior to
7:30 a.m. any day of the week and must terminate at 9:00
p.m. if the for-profit use is held Sunday through Thursday
and at 11:00 p.m. if the for-profit use is held on a Friday,
Saturday or holiday weekend.
[2] Whether or not alcoholic beverages will be served;
[3] The anticipated number of for-profit use attendees/
participants;
(e) Hours and/or days of the for-profit use;
(f) An activity site plan for the for-profit use of park facilities;
(g) The Village Manager, in consultation with Village department
heads, may include specific conditions which require cleanup
and/or damage repair of public and private property in the
vicinity of the location of the for-profit use that may be
§ 204-3 MOTELS § 204-4
193:211
damaged or require cleanup. A cash deposit, to be determined
by resolution by the Village Board of Trustees from time to
time, may be required as a condition to assure such cleanup
and/or damage repair is satisfactorily accomplished within 24
hours of the end of the event. Said deposit shall be used by the
Village to offset any costs which it may incur in completing the
cleanup and/or damage repair and the balance of the deposit,
if any, should be refunded upon final inspection. In the event
insufficient funds are available to offset costs, the Village
reserves the right to seek reimbursement through any means
available to the Village. There will be no reissuance or new
issuance of for-profit use permits to the applicant or his or her
organization until such reimbursements are made;
(h) A contact person who will be available at all times during the
for-profit use and that person's cell phone number which must
be accessible throughout the for-profit use;
(i) The Village Manager may require that the applicant deliver
notice to property owners within a five-hundred-foot radius of
the for-profit use site at least three weeks prior to the proposed
activity and at least one week prior to review of the proposal by
the Recreation Committee (property owner list to be provided
by the Village); the applicant must provide evidence of mailing,
such as an affidavit, and a copy of the notice to the Village
Clerk;
(j) Proof of insurance, subject to Village Manager approval, based
on potential degree of risks posed by the for-profit use based
on factors set forth in the application;
(k) Signage and proposed location for such signage (to the extent
allowed by § 335-42);
(l) Such other information as may be required to process the
application.
(2) Completed applications shall be submitted to the Village Clerk at
least 60 days prior to the scheduled date of the for-profit use.
(3) Upon receipt of a completed for-profit use permit application, the
Village Clerk shall refer said application to the Recreation
Committee for review.
(a) The Village Manager may instruct all potentially affected
Village departments to review the completed for-profit use
permit application and provide a report with recommendations
concerning all phases of the proposed activity;
(b) Should the application be deemed consistent with the
requirements of this chapter, and pose no threat to the health,
safety and welfare of persons and property within the Village of
§ 204-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 204-4
193:212
§ 204-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-2000;
7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code, except that a person under the age of 18 years
Elm Grove, the Recreation Committee may approve the forprofit
use permit. Any application that is denied by the
Recreation Committee shall be processed in accordance with
§ 204-4B(4).
(4) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Recreation
Committee pursuant to this chapter is able to appeal solely to the
Board of Trustees. Any appeal to the Board of Trustees under this
chapter shall be made within 10 business days of the date that the
Recreation Committee issued the decision being appealed from.
The Board shall consider the matter at the next available regular
Board of Trustees meeting or at a special meeting as the Village
Board President may determine. Based upon testimony provided by
both the applicant and the Recreation Committee, and after
consideration of impacts generated by the for-profit use related to
the health, safety and welfare of the Village, the Board may affirm,
reverse, or modify the Recreation Committee's initial decision.
(5) All permits approved under this chapter are effective for only the
times and dates specified within the approved application and shall
expire upon the cessation of the permit activities as identified on
the permit application.
(6) The granting of a for-profit use permit does not reserve any park
facilities for the exclusive use of the permit applicant. All park
facilities shall remain open for public use during the permitted forprofit
use activities and Village use of any park facilities shall take
precedence over the permitted for-profit use activities.
(7) Applicable fees. The Village Board of Trustees may require fees for
the use of specific facilities in the park as passed by resolution from
time to time and as listed in the fee schedule in the Village Clerk's
office.
(8) Termination of permit. A permit for an in-progress for-profit use
activity may be terminated by the Police Chief or Fire Chief, or
respective designee, if public safety is compromised or threatened
or if participants engage in violent, riotous, disorderly or
destructive behavior, causing injury to persons or damage to
property, or if conditions of the permit are violated.
(9) Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision
of this section or any rule or regulation made under this section
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 204-4 MOTELS § 204-5
193:213
shall be referred to the proper authorities as provided in Chapter 48 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 204-6. Vending and peddling prohibited. [Added 2-26-2002;
amended 4-25-2016]
No person, at any time, shall sell or offer to sell any article, thing, or food
item, or station or place any stand, table, display unit, cart or vehicle for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article, thing or food item in any
Village park or lands unless said person holds a valid temporary vending
permit for special events under § 262-12 of this Code or, with respect to the
paved area of a Village-owned parcel located at 12600 Bluemound Road,
provided that a person or entity has met all of the following requirements:
§ 204-7. Boating regulations. [Added 5-22-2007]
A. A temporary plan of operation for a seasonal business engaged in the
sale of locally produced fresh agricultural products, including
vegetables, fruits and flowers grown within 300 miles of the Village, has
been reviewed and approved by the Plan Commission as provided under
§ 335-85B.
B. The Village Board has reviewed and approved a license agreement for
the use of the seasonal business purposes.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to the man-made
bodies of water located within Village Park to be known as "Village Park
waters."
B. Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by Village of Elm Grove law
enforcement officers.
C. Intent. The intent of this section is to protect the public health and
safety while at the same time allowing for enjoyment of Village Park
waters consistent with the capabilities and limitations of such waters.
D. State boating and safety laws adopted. State boating laws as found in
§ 30.50 to § 30.71, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted by reference and
made applicable to Village Park waters. In the event of any conflict
between the state laws and this section, the provisions of this section
shall control.
E. Motorboats prohibited. No person shall operate a boat equipped with
propulsion machinery, regardless of whether such machinery is a
source of propulsion, with the exception of emergency boats,
maintenance boats, and boats which are used for Village of Elm Grove
sponsored special events.
F. Certain toy boats prohibited. No person shall operate toy sail boats or
toy boats unless powered by wind or battery.
§ 204-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 204-7
193:214
§ 204-8. Fishing regulations. [Added 5-22-2012]
§ 204-9. Private tennis lessons. [Added 11-26-2013]
G. Permitted boating hours. Boating not otherwise prohibited hereunder is
permitted only between the following hours: sunrise to one-half hour
after sunset.
H. Posting. The Village of Elm Grove shall place and maintain a synopsis of
this section within the jurisdiction of the Village Park.
I. Penalties. Forfeitures for violation of any provision of ch. 30, Wis. Stats.,
adopted by reference in Subsection D of this section, shall conform to
forfeitures for violation of the comparable state offense, including any
variations or increases for second (or subsequent) offenses. Any person
found guilty of violating the provisions of this section for which a
penalty is not otherwise specifically provided shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 204-5 of this chapter.
A. Fishing at Village Park is permitted during the regular hours that the
park is open to the public. Fishing in any manner shall be limited to
catch and release only except as provided in § 204-8B. After capture, all
fish shall be unhooked or released from any retaining device and
returned to the water unharmed. No person shall take or carry away or
attempt to take or carry away any fish caught in the Village Park.
B. Exception. Children 12 years of age and under shall be allowed to take
or carry away no more than three fish per day.
C. Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
subject to a violation, and upon the conviction of any such violation,
such person shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this
Code.
A. No organized private tennis instruction or private tennis instruction for
compensation shall be permitted on Village property other than that
provided by the Elm Grove Recreation Department. An exception to this
policy may be made, outside of the period of time between Memorial
Day and Labor Day, at the recommendation of the Recreation
Committee and approval of the Village Board on an individual basis, as
requested. [Amended 6-26-2017]
B. Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
subject to a violation, and upon the conviction of any such violation,
such person shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this
Code.
§ 204-7 MOTELS § 204-9
193:215
Chapter 208
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 87.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 91.
Animals — See Ch. 95.
Dance halls — See Ch. 123.
Drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 128.
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 147.
Fireworks — See Ch. 153.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 171.
Minors — See Ch. 190.
§ 204-9 ELM GROVE CODE § 204-9
193:216
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 7-11-1955; amended 12-11-2000]
§ 208-1. Indecent exposure.
No person shall indecently expose his or her person.
§ 208-2. Loafing or loitering.
No person shall loaf or loiter on any public street or at or near the entrance
of or in any public place of amusement, commercial building, school or
church.
§ 208-3. Destruction of property; littering.
No person within the Village shall injure, damage, deface or destroy any
public or private property, including gardens, trees, lawns, shrubs,
windows, fences, buildings, walls, roads, mailboxes or hydrants, nor molest
or injure any domestic animal nor throw or deposit any debris or other
material on public or private property.
§ 208-4. Unreasonable noise and disturbances. [Amended
12-17-2002]
A. No person shall either:
(1) Make or assist in making any unreasonable noise or disturbance;
or
(2) Commit or assist in committing the following acts:
(a) Motor vehicle noise. Using any motorized vehicle so as to
create a loud or unreasonable noise which disturbs or annoys
another person or persons. Such uses shall include but are not
limited to:
[1] Operation with damaged or modified exhaust.
[2] Operation of horn other than in emergency situations.
[3] Operation of audio equipment at excessive levels.
[4] Excessive acceleration or excessive road or engine noise
as prohibited in Chapter 275, Vehicles and Traffic,
§ 275-1B.
(b) Use of construction tools and equipment. No person or entity
may use construction, excavation, demolition or power
equipment other than those tools customarily used to perform
landscape maintenance except between 7:30 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. Monday through Friday and between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00
§ 208-1 MOTELS § 208-4
193:217
p.m. on Saturdays; provided, however, that such tools and
equipment shall not be used at any time on Sundays or federal
holidays in which the Village Hall is closed.
(c) Delivery of construction materials. No construction materials
shall be delivered to or removed from any residentially zoned
lot prior to 7:30 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday or any time on Sundays or federal holidays in which
the Village Hall is closed.
(d) Use of generators. The use of gasoline, natural gas, propane or
diesel fueled portable electric generators to power
construction, excavation, or demolition tools and equipment is
prohibited except during emergencies when power is not
available from public utility sources.
(e) Landscape maintenance equipment shall only be operated
between 7:30 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and
between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Saturdays, and 10:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays. [Added 8-28-20178]
(f) Other noise. Repeatedly creating a loud noise which, under the
circumstances involved, unreasonably disturbs or annoys
another person or persons through use of any radio,
phonograph or other audio equipment or through excessive
yelling or shouting or through the keeping of any noisy bird or
animal not otherwise regulated by Chapter 95, Animals.
B. Homeowner maintenance and repair shall be exempt to the extent that
activities do not violate § 208-4A(2)(b), (c), (d) and (e). [Amended
7-26-2005; 8-8-2017]
C. No person or persons shall be cited for any violation of Subsection A(1),
(2)(a), or (2)(e) except upon the evidence of two persons from separate
households. [Amended 7-26-2005]
D. Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to restrict
or penalize the causing of noise:
(1) In an emergency situation;
(2) To protect life or personal property;
(3) To restore utilities;
(4) To remove snow; or
(5) In a manner related to the normal course of business approved
through a plan of operation accepted by the Plan Commission.
(6) Any municipal service.
8. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(2)(e) as Subsection
A(2)(f).
§ 208-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 208-5
193:218
§ 208-5. Disorderly assemblage.
No person shall participate in, aid or countenance any disorderly
assemblage.
§ 208-6. Indecent literature.
No person shall distribute any obscene, filthy, indecent or pornographic
literature, records or periodicals.
§ 208-7. Loitering or prowling.
No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual
for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that reasonably warrant
alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Circumstances
which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is reasonably
warranted include, but are not limited to, the fact that the person takes
flight upon appearance of a police or peace officer, refuses to identify
himself or herself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself
or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes
it impracticable, a police or peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an
offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any
alarm which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to
identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct. No
person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the police or
peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence or if it appears at
trial that the explanation given by the person at the time was true and, if
believed by the police or peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the
alarm.
§ 208-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any rule or
regulation made under this article shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
B. The parent or legally appointed guardian of any minor under 18 years of
age who is found guilty of knowingly permitting such minor under 18
years of age to violate, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
provisions of this article shall also be subject to a penalty as provided in
§ 1-16 of this Code.
§ 208-5 MOTELS § 208-8
193:219

ARTICLE II
Certain Offenses Defined as Misdemeanors by State Law
[Adopted 1-12-1976; amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 208-9. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The provisions of the following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are
adopted and by reference made a part of this article as if fully set forth
herein. A violation of any such provisions shall constitute a violation of this
article.
A. Section 939.05, Aiding and abetting any of such listed offenses.
B. Section 939.32(1) and (3), Attempted theft.
C. Section 940.19(1), Battery.
D. Section 941.01(1), Negligent operation of vehicle off highway.
E. Section 941.23, Carrying a concealed weapon.
F. Section 943.01(1), Criminal damage of property up to $2,500.
[Amended 11-26-2013]
G. Section 943.13, Trespass to land.
H. Section 943.14, Criminal trespass to dwellings.
I. Section 943.145, Criminal trespass to a medical facility.
J. Section 943.20, Theft of property up to $2,500 in value. [Amended
11-26-2013]
K. Section 943.21, Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper.
L. Section 943.24, Issue of worthless check of not more than $2,500.
[Amended 11-26-2013]
M. Section 943.41, Fraudulent use of credit cards where value of property
or services does not exceed $2,500. [Amended 11-26-2013]
N. Section 943.50, Shoplifting.
O. Section 946.41, Resisting or obstructing an officer.
P. Section 947.01, Disorderly conduct.
Q. Section 947.012, Unlawful use of telephone.
R. Section 947.0125, Unlawful use of computerized communication
systems.
S. Sections 961.01(14) [subject to § 961.41(3g) (e) and (em)], possession
of marijuana and synthetic cannabinoids. [Amended 10-25-2011]
§ 208-9 MOTELS § 208-9
193:221
§ 208-10. Disorderly conduct.
No person shall, within the Village, in any public or private place, engage
in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or
other disorderly conduct which tends to cause or provoke an immediate
disturbance of public order or tends to disturb or annoy any other person or
persons.
§ 208-11. Violations and penalties.
T. Section 941.235, Carrying a firearm in public building. [Added
3-27-2012]
U. Section 941.237, Carrying handgun where alcohol beverages may be
sold and consumed. [Added 3-27-2012]9
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any rule or
regulation made under this article shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in § 1-16 of this Code. [Amended 7-26-2005]
B. In cases where § 943.24 or 943.50, Wis. Stats., is violated, the
Municipal Judge may, in addition to any forfeiture, order the violator to
pay as restitution to the victim an amount equal to the pecuniary loss
caused by the offense.
9. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection V, regarding possession of a switchblade knife, added
3-27-2012, and which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-25-2016.
§ 208-9 ELM GROVE CODE § 208-11
193:222
ARTICLE III
Chronic Nuisance Property
[Adopted 4-22-2008]
§ 208-12. Findings.
§ 208-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY — Any residentially zoned or
residentially used parcel of land or structure which has generated three or
more calls for police service for nuisance activities on separate days in one
month, or six or more calls in a twelve-month period.
NUISANCE ACTIVITY —
A. The Village Board finds that any residential property that has generated
three or more calls for police service for nuisance activities in one
month, or six or more calls in a period of 12 months, has received more
than the level of general and adequate police service and has placed an
undue and inappropriate burden on the taxpayers of the Village. The
Village Board further finds that residential property owners are in a
better position than commercial property owners to control who enters
their property and to control the activities which take place thereon, as
opposed to commercial property owners, which often hold their
properties open to the public. The Village Board further finds that as a
matter of policy it does not want to discourage commercial property
owners from reporting offenses committed against them.
B. The Village Board therefore directs the Chief of Police and the Village
Clerk, as provided in this article, to charge the owners of such property
the costs associated with providing police and administrative services
for purposes of abating the violations at property where nuisance
activities occur.
Any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct whenever engaged
in by property owners, operators, tenants, occupants, or persons
associated with a property:
(1) An act of harassment as defined in § 947.013, Wis. Stats.
Disorderly conduct as defined in Article I, § 208-10, and § 947.01,
Wis. Stats.
(2)
Battery, substantial battery or aggravated battery as defined in
§ 940.19, Wis. Stats.
(3)
(4) Indecent conduct as defined in § 944.20(1), Wis. Stats.
A.
§ 208-12 MOTELS § 208-13
193:223
Prostitution or keeping a place of prostitution, or leasing a building
for the purposes of prostitution as defined in § 944.30 and § 944.34,
Wis. Stats.
(5)
(6) Theft as defined in § 943.20, Wis. Stats.
(7) Arson as defined in § 943.02, Wis. Stats.
Possession, manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance or
related offenses as defined in Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
(8)
Gambling or other offenses as defined in Village of Elm Grove Code
§ 171-10 and § 945.02, Wis. Stats.
(9)
Trespass as to building and land as defined in § 943.13, Wis. Stats.,
or criminal trespass to dwelling as defined in § 943.14, Wis. Stats.
(10)
Discharge of a firearm as defined in Village of Elm Grove Code
§ 147-1.
(11)
The production or creation of unnecessary noise and disturbances
as defined in Article I, § 208-4.
(12)
Loitering or loafing as defined in Village of Elm Grove Code
§§ 190-1, 208-2 and 208-7.
(13)
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverage violations as
defined in Village of Elm Grove Code Chapter 171.
(14)
Owning, keeping, having or harboring any bird or animal that
causes a disturbance of the peace as defined in Village of Elm
Grove Code Chapter 95. [Amended 4-28-2009]
(15)
Selling or giving away tobacco products to persons under the age
of 18 as defined in § 134.66, Wis. Stats.
(16)
Illegal sale, discharge and use of fireworks as defined in Village of
Elm Grove Code Chapter 153.
(17)
Misuse of emergency telephone numbers as defined in Village of
Elm Grove Code § 66-11.
(18)
Removal of snow and ice as defined in Village of Elm Grove Code
§ 243-15.
(19)
Zoning violations as defined in Village of Elm Grove Code
Chapter 335.
(20)
Any other offense against peace and good order as defined in
Chapter 208.
(21)
Exception. Any offenses that may be listed under Subsection A of
this definition which are determined to be a domestic violence event
as described under § 968.075, Wis. Stats., shall not be considered a
nuisance activity for purposes of this article.
B.
§ 208-13 ELM GROVE CODE § 208-13
193:224
PERSON ASSOCIATED WITH — Any person who, whenever engaged in a
nuisance activity, enters, patronizes, visits, or attempts to enter, patronize
or visit, a property, including any officer, director, customer, agent,
employee or independent contractor of a property owner, tenant, or
occupant.
PROPERTY — Any residentially zoned or residentially used parcel of land or
structure.
VERIFIABLE EVENT — An event that is initially observed by a police officer,
or a call for service that is reported to the Police Department by a known
person who is identifiable to support the event, or a call for service that
is reported to the Police Department by an unknown person if the event is
substantiated by a police officer, or a witness; and the call for service was
made.
§ 208-14. Chronic nuisance property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any property owner, operator, tenant, occupant, or
person associated with a property to allow the establishment of, to keep, or
to maintain a chronic nuisance property.
§ 208-15. Notification of violation.
A. Whenever the Chief of Police determines that two nuisance activities
have occurred at a property on separate days during any twelve-month
period, the Chief of Police may notify the property owner that the
property is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property.
B. Whenever the Chief of Police determines that three nuisance activities
have occurred at a property on separate days during any calendar
month, or six nuisance activities have occurred at a property during a
twelve-month period, and said nuisance activities are verifiable events,
the Chief of Police shall notify the property owner in writing that the
property is a chronic nuisance property, and any further violations
within said month or twelve-month period will be cause for levying a
special charge against the property pursuant to this article.
C. The notice described in Subsection B shall be deemed to be properly
delivered if sent either by first-class mail to the property owner's last
known address or if delivered in person to the property owner. If the
property owner cannot be located, the notice shall be deemed to be
properly delivered if a copy of it is left at the property owner's usual
place of abode in the presence of some competent member of the family
at least 14 years of age or a competent adult currently residing there
and who shall be informed of the contents of the notice. If a current
address cannot be located, it shall be deemed sufficient if a copy of the
notice is sent by first-class mail to the last known address of the owner
as identified by the records of the tax roll.
D. The notice shall contain:
§ 208-13 MOTELS § 208-15
193:225
§ 208-16. Violations and penalties.
§ 208-17. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the determination of the Chief of Police issued
pursuant to § 208-15A or B or the levying of any special charges pursuant
to this article is able to appeal solely to the Board of Trustees. Any appeal
to the Board of Trustees under this article shall be made within 10 business
days of the date that the Chief of Police issued the decision being appealed
from to the Village Clerk. The Board shall consider the matter at the
next available regular Board of Trustees meeting. Based upon testimony
provided by both the applicant and the Chief of Police, and after
(1) The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification
of the property.
(2) A description of the nuisance activities that have occurred at the
property and a statement indicating that the cost of future
enforcement or abatement will be assessed as a special charge
against the property.
(3) A statement that the property owner shall, within 10 days, respond
to the Chief of Police to propose a written course of action to abate
the nuisance activities which is acceptable to the Chief.
E. If the property owner fails to respond within the ten-day period with a
written course of action, after receiving a notice pursuant to §
208-15D(3) and it is the third nuisance activity within a calendar year or
the sixth nuisance activity within a twelve-month period (per §
208-15B), then it shall become a verifiable event and shall become
billable according to § 208-16B. [Added 10-27-2009]
A. Each nuisance activity which is a verifiable event following issuance of
the notice provided pursuant to § 208-15B, and occurring within the
month or twelve-month period in which said notice is provided, shall
constitute a separate violation of this article.
B. Cost recovery. Upon notification from the Chief of Police that a chronic
nuisance property has been identified, the Village Clerk shall charge
any property owner found to be in violation of this article the costs of
police service to the property associated with abatement, including
administrative costs, in full or in part. Such costs shall be imposed as a
special charge pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats. Such costs shall be
due in full within 30 days. Pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., all costs so
charged and not paid when due are a lien upon such property and may
be assessed and collected as a special charge on the next property tax
bill if not paid within the thirty-day period. Interest at 1% per month
shall be assessed on any unpaid balance. The Village shall establish a
reasonable charge for the costs of administration and enforcement
imposed hereunder.
§ 208-15 ELM GROVE CODE § 208-17
193:226
consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the Village, the Board may
affirm, reverse, or modify the Police Chief's initial decision.
§ 208-17 MOTELS § 208-17
193:227
Chapter 212
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 106.
Sewers — See Ch. 232.
Water control — See Ch. 325.
§ 212-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Plumbing Code of the Village of Elm
Grove" and will be referred to hereinafter as "this chapter."
§ 212-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, property, health and
sanitation by regulating and providing for the inspection of the installation
and use of plumbing and drainage systems and fixtures in and serving
buildings and structures hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered,
repaired, moved or converted to other uses and to regulate use of applicable
equipment.
§ 212-3. State regulations adopted. [Amended 3-28-2016]
Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the provisions and
regulations of Ch. 145, Wis. Stats., and Chapters SPS 380 through 387 of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code are hereby made a part of this chapter
by reference and shall extend over and govern all plumbing installed,
altered or repaired in the Village.
§ 212-4. Applicability.
No person shall install, cause to be installed or use any type of plumbing
fixture, material, apparatus, piping or any other part of the plumbing that
is in any way connected to the plumbing within the Village which is not
specifically mentioned in or permitted by this chapter until it has first
been approved in writing by the Plumbing Inspector. For approval,
manufacturer's specifications, instructions for installation and complete
test data plus a letter of approval from the State Board of Health shall be
submitted to the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 212-5. Definitions. [Amended 3-28-2016]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PLUMBING — Includes the provisions of § 145.01(10)(a) and (br), Wis.
Stats., and shall also include the construction, connection to or alteration
§ 208-17 ELM GROVE CODE § 212-5
193:228
of any drain, soil or waste pipe to carry domestic sewage, stormwater or
industrial waste from a point three feet outside of the foundation walls of
any building to the sewer lateral at the curb or other disposal terminal,
including the private sewage disposal or treatment plant. This definition
does not include minor repairs to faucets, valves, pipes and appliances and
the removal of stoppages in soil or waste pipes.
§ 212-6. Plumbing Inspector.
A. Office of Plumbing Inspector. The Village Board shall appoint a
Plumbing Inspector upon recommendation of the Village Manager
pursuant to § 54-3C who shall be a state-certified plumbing inspector.
The Plumbing Inspector shall perform such inspections and other duties
as directed from time to time by the Village Manager.
B. Powers and duties.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector to see that the
construction, reconstruction and alterations of all plumbing,
drainage and plumbing ventilation hereafter installed in all of the
buildings in the Village shall conform to the laws and ordinances
and the rules laid down by the State Board of Health of the State of
Wisconsin and the Village of Elm Grove and to make all inspections
required thereby and in the manner set forth.
(2) The Plumbing Inspector shall have authority to enter all buildings
in the Village in the performance of his or her duties during
reasonable hours in the discharge of his or her official duties.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
acquisition of an inspection warrant in accordance with §§ 66.122
and 66.123, Wis. Stats. and § 12-4 of the Village of Elm Grove Code
of Ordinances, nor shall it be construed to prohibit access by way of
property owner and/or tenant consent.
(3) The Plumbing Inspector is authorized to withhold approval of an
application for a plumbing permit to any person who has not
complied with a lawful order of the Plumbing Inspector. The person
refused a permit may appeal such refusal as provided herein.
(4) Whenever any work is ready for inspection, the Plumbing Inspector
shall be notified in advance by the plumber in charge or persons
receiving the permit, specifying the permit number of the work
which is being done. The Inspector shall then proceed to make the
inspection. Unless otherwise permitted by the Inspector, all work
shall be left uncovered for examination until examined and
approved by the Inspector.
(5) Records. There shall be kept by the Plumbing Inspector a complete
record of all applications and permits, regularly numbered in the
order of their issue, of all inspections made and other official work
§ 212-5 MOTELS § 212-6
193:229
§ 212-7. Reports of violations.
Whenever it shall be reported to the Village Manager that any plumbing
is contrary to the ordinances of the Village of Elm Grove or is of faulty
construction, the Village Manager shall direct the Plumbing Inspector to
examine such plumbing and report his or her findings, in writing, to the
Village Manager, suggesting such changes as are necessary to put the
same in proper condition. The Village Manager thereupon shall direct such
changes to be made as he or she deems necessary and shall fix the time for
doing the same.
§ 212-8. Bonds and insurance.
§ 212-9. Permit required; application.
performed under the provisions of this chapter, so arranged as
promptly to afford information concerning all such work.
C. Compensation. The Plumbing Inspector shall be compensated from a
portion of the fees provided as established by the Village Board.
A. Bond required. Before a permit may be issued for excavating in any
public street or way, the person applying for such permit shall have
executed unto the Village and deposited with the Village a corporate
surety bond in a sum as determined by resolution of the Board of
Trustees, conditioned that he or she will perform and fully complete all
work with due care and in accordance with the laws, rules and
regulations of this chapter. Such bond shall remain in force and must be
executed for a period of one year, except that on such expiration it shall
remain in force as to all penalties, claims and demands that may have
accrued thereunder prior to such expiration.
B. Public liability insurance. Before a permit may be issued for plumbing
in any public way, the person applying for such permit shall provide the
Village with a certificate of public liability insurance in a solvent
company of at least $1,000,000 for injury to one person, $2,000,000 for
injury to more than one person in any accident and $1,000,000 for
injury to property. Such insurance shall indemnify and save harmless
the Village against all damages, costs, expenses, outlays and claims of
every nature arising in connection with such plumbing.
A. Permit required. No plumbing shall hereafter be done in the Village
unless a permit therefor shall first be obtained.
B. Application for permit. Application for a plumbing permit shall be made
in writing upon blank forms furnished by the Village. When necessary,
plans showing the work to be done in detail may be requested by the
Plumbing Inspector.
§ 212-6 ELM GROVE CODE § 212-10
193:230
§ 212-10. Permit fees.
Plumbing permit fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
§ 212-11. Term of permit; revocation.
§ 212-12. Inspections and tests.
§ 212-13. Appeals.
Any person feeling himself or herself aggrieved by any order or ruling of
the Plumbing Inspector or Village Manager may appeal from such ruling
to the Public Works/Utilities Committee within 20 days after written notice
of such ruling or order shall have been delivered to him or her. Such
appeal shall be in writing, setting forth the order appealed from and the
respects in which said person feeling himself or herself aggrieved claims
that said order or ruling is erroneous or illegal. The notice of appeal shall
be filed with the Village Clerk, who shall thereupon notify the Plumbing
Inspector and Village Manager of said appeal, and the appeal shall be heard
A. Term of permit. A plumbing permit shall remain in force for 24 months
after the date of issuance. In the event that all plumbing work is not
completed within said time, new permits shall be obtained in a manner
consistent with the provisions of § 106-3F(3).
B. Revocation of permit. A plumbing permit may also be revoked at any
time during the twenty-four-month period if the plumber does not
comply with all provisions of this chapter.
C. All fees are nonrefundable.
A. Request for inspection. Whenever any work is ready for inspection, the
Plumbing Inspector shall be notified in advance by the plumber in
charge or persons receiving the permit, specifying the permit number
of the work which is being done. The Inspector shall then proceed to
make the inspection. Unless otherwise permitted by the Inspector, all
work shall be left uncovered for examination until examined and
approved by the Inspector.
B. Tests and accessibility of work. The plumber in charge or the owner
shall make such arrangements as will enable the Inspector to reach all
parts of the building readily and shall have present the proper
apparatus and materials and perform all labor necessary for making
such tests as are required by the Plumbing Inspector.
C. Final inspection. When the plumbing work is completed the plumber in
charge shall request a final inspection. Any person, firm or company or
corporation who or which fails to notify the Plumbing Inspector that the
work for which the permit has been procured is ready for inspection
within five working days of completion of such work shall be deemed in
violation of this chapter.
§ 212-10 MOTELS § 212-13
193:231
at the next meeting of said Public Works/Utilities Committee, which, after
consideration thereof, shall affirm, reverse or modify said ruling. The ruling
or order of the Inspector or Village Manager shall be enforced until changed
by said Public Works/Utilities Committee.
§ 212-14. Excavations.
A. Openings not allowed. Street openings will not be allowed when in the
opinion of the Public Works Director said openings would be left open
over a weekend or a holiday period.
B. Closing off streets. Openings in public ways shall not be made in a
manner that impedes the flow of traffic. One traffic lane shall be
maintained at all times, and such lane shall at no time be blocked by the
excavating equipment or material. However, where it is deemed
impossible to install a sewer lateral in any public way without
completely closing said way to traffic, the Public Works Director may
grant permission, stating a time limit. If such permission is obtained,
the plumber must place adequate warning devices, barricades and
detour signs before work starts in such a manner as to provide the least
amount of inconvenience for the public. Detour routes shall be
determined by the Public Works Director with consultation from the
Chief of Police.
C. Timbering of trenches. All trenches and excavations in excess of three
feet in depth shall be adequately and securely timbered and protected
as provided for in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter IND 6,
Trench, Excavation and Tunnel Construction.
D. Cutting and replacing street surfaces.
(1) When opening any public way, all material must be placed where it
will cause the least inconvenience to the public and will admit free
passage of water along the ditches.
(2) All openings made in public ways shall be properly barricaded, and
warning lights shall be maintained upon the same at night. All
other necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public
against accidents from the beginning to the completion of the work.
Sewers and drains may be laid only on condition that the excavator
or plumber is insured as hereinbefore mentioned for all damages
that may result from his or her neglect of necessary precaution
against all accidents to persons or property of others.
(3) When any excavation is made for private sewer laterals in the area
traveled by vehicles, the excavated material must be removed
immediately and such excavation, including the shoulder, entirely
backfilled with aggregate slurry backfill consisting of No. 1 and No.
2 coarse aggregate Class C concrete mix with one bag of cement
per cubic yard. The character of the backfill material used shall be
approved and authorized by the Public Works Director or his or her
§ 212-13 ELM GROVE CODE § 212-14
193:232
§ 212-15. Water pumps and wells.
§ 212-16. Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District Rules adopted.
The rules and regulations of the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District
as to connections to sewer mains, sewer laterals and inside plumbing are
adopted by reference.
§ 212-17. Connection of buildings to sanitary sewers.
designee. Any tunnels dug under gravel roads or pavements shall
be backfilled with concrete subject to approval of the Public Works
Director or his or her designee.
(4) If the replacement of materials is not accomplished in a timely or
satisfactory manner, the applicant under Subsection E shall be
given notice to correct all deficiencies no later than 30 days from
the mailing of notification by the Public Works Director. If all
necessary corrective work is not accomplished within the thirty-day
notification period, all funds under this section shall be forfeited
and the applicant shall be liable for any repair or completion costs
incurred by the Village, including the cost of collection. If the
replacement of materials is done in a workmanlike and timely
manner, the applicant shall be refunded all but $100 of the amount
submitted under Subsection E.
E. Public way disturbance application. Any work allowed under this
section must first be preceded by the completion and filing of a public
way disturbance application by a financially responsible party
accompanied by a fee as determined by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
A. All water pumps and wells shall be installed and constructed in
accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 812, Well
Construction and Pump Installation, and said code is made by reference
a part of this chapter.
B. Well and pump permits required. No well may be dug nor pump
installed without first having obtained a permit for such work. A permit
must be obtained by the well driller for the drilling of the well, and a
permit must be obtained by the water pump installer for the installation
of the water pump.
C. Well log and test results. The well driller shall be required to furnish to
the Plumbing Inspector a copy of the well drilling log for filing in the
Village office, together with a copy of the test of the well as to safety
and fitness for use as certified by the State Board of Health.
A. Connection required. The owner or owners of any building which has
access to the sewer system of the Village shall connect to such system
within one year from the time that such sewer facilities become
§ 212-14 MOTELS § 212-17
193:233
§ 212-18. Drain junction.
No persons except licensed plumbers shall be permitted to tap or make
connections to the sewerage system. Such information as the Village may
have with regard to the location of sewer junctions or slants will be
furnished to plumbers, the Village assuming no risk as to the accuracy of
the same. When in accordance with the measurements furnished by the
Village the junction is not found, or if the main sewer or any part thereof
is damaged in the course of excavation or construction, connection thereto
or repair thereof shall be as directed by the Plumbing Inspector. Additional
pipe shall not be laid until the Plumbing Inspector approves the connection.
§ 212-19. Record of connections.
The Director of Public Works shall keep a record of all sewer connections,
showing location of the same and position of all house drains, connections,
junctions and other data necessary for the efficient services of his or her
office.
§ 212-20. Future connection.
When at the time of the issuance of a plumbing permit there is no sanitary
sewer available for such premises, adequate provisions in the installation of
plumbing connections shall be made so as to provide for future connection
with a sanitary sewer which may be constructed to serve the premises at a
future date.
available for connection. The Village shall notify such owners in writing
by certified mail of the availability of sewer facilities.
B. Procedure after failure to make connection.
(1) If any person shall fail to comply with the above-mentioned
provision, the Village Board may cause such sanitary sewer
connection to be made. The expense thereof shall be assessed as a
special tax against the premises and shall be spread upon the first
tax roll which is delivered to the Village Treasurer after such work
has been completed.
(2) The owner of such premises may, within 10 days after the
completion of the work, file with the Village in writing a statement
that he or she cannot pay the special tax in one sum and requests
that the special tax be collected in equal annual installments, not to
exceed five in number, together with interest thereon at the rate of
6% per annum. In such case, there shall be spread upon the first
tax roll which is delivered to the Village Treasurer the first
installment, together with interest upon the unpaid amount of the
special tax at the rate of 6% per annum computed to the 31st day of
December. Subsequent installments and interest shall be spread on
the tax roll in succeeding years.
§ 212-17 ELM GROVE CODE § 212-21
193:234
§ 212-21. Soil, waste and vent pipes.
§ 212-22. Construction and installation of sewer and drain pipes.
§ 212-23. Installation of sump pit and pumps.
All sump pumps discharging clear water shall discharge at least three feet
out from the building. The sump discharge pipe preferred location shall be
to the front of the building. Where it is not practicable to discharge to the
front of the building, all discharge shall terminate not less than the greater
of 15 feet or one half the distance from any adjacent property line and
shall not be directed to impact any adjacent property in a manner which
unreasonably restricts its overall use. All sump pits shall have a minimum
diameter of 20 inches, and all inlets shall be not less than 12 inches above
the bottom of the sump.
A. State code adopted. Fixture unit valve and minimum size soil, waste and
vent pipes shall be according to state code.
B. Quality, weight and installation of materials. All building sewers shall be
constructed of four-inch extra-heavy cast-iron pipe or four-inch PVC. All
soil and waste stacks shall have a cleanout near their base. The
diameter of the building sewer shall be equal to or greater than that of
the building drain.
A. Construction.
(1) A four-inch cast-iron cleanout shall be brought to the surface of the
ground for every 75 feet of outside sewer.
(2) All conduits or other piping must be protected from injury, frost or
settling to the satisfaction of the Plumbing Inspector.
B. Old pipes or drains. Whenever necessary to disturb a drain or sewer in
actual use, the same shall not be obstructed or disconnected without
special permission of the Plumbing Inspector. It shall be unlawful to
make any new connections with or extensions to any old drain without
permission of the Plumbing Inspector. No existing drain or sewer shall
be reconstructed or relaid without a permit.
C. Obstructions to installation of sewers and drains. In all cases where the
course of any sewer or drain is obstructed by pipes or conduits, the
question of passing over or under such obstruction or the raising or
lowering thereof so as to permit the construction and installation of the
sewer or drain shall be determined by the Plumbing Inspector.
D. Sewers and drains to be sealed during construction. The ends of all
sewer and drain pipes of buildings under construction shall be securely
sealed to prevent drainage of clear water, earth or other material into
the sewer system at the time of the connection of such building to the
system.
§ 212-21 MOTELS § 212-24
193:235
§ 212-24. Abandonment of septic tanks.
In the event that a septic system in the Village is abandoned because
of the connection of the premises served by such system to the sanitary
sewer system, the septic tank shall be thoroughly cleaned. The plumbing
connections to the sump pump shall be examined and approved by the
Plumbing Inspector and evidence presented to him or her of the cleaning of
the septic tank. If the septic tank is of approved concrete construction, the
system may be used for the elimination of water from downspouts, footing
drains and swimming pools and air-conditioning units using water. If the
septic tank is not of approved concrete construction, it shall be filled in the
approved manner.
§ 212-25. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 217
PROPERTY, ABANDONED, UNCLAIMED OR SEIZED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 128.
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 147.
Fireworks — See Ch. 153.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 208.
A. Conditions.
(1) The issuance of a permit shall not be deemed or construed to be a
permit for or an approval of any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or
cancel the provisions of this chapter shall be valid, except insofar
as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful.
(2) The issuance of a permit shall not prevent the Plumbing Inspector
from thereafter requiring the correction of errors or from
preventing plumbing operations being carried on thereunder when
in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Village.
B. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
install any plumbing or drainage in the Village contrary to any or all
provisions of this chapter or to intentionally, willfully or maliciously
injure or obstruct any sewer, house, drain, catch basin or any plumbing
fixture or apparatus, pipes or other parts of any plumbing in actual use
or any sewer, water or gas pipes or any parts or apparatus connected
therewith laid or constructed in the public ways of the Village.
C. Penalties. Any plumber, property owner or other person who shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall install any
plumbing or drainage in the Village contrary to the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
[Amended 10-28-2008]
§ 212-24 ELM GROVE CODE § 212-25
193:236
§ 217-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize procedures, in accordance with
Wisconsin statutes, for the disposition of abandoned, unclaimed or seized
property in the possession of the Chief of Police.
§ 217-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Property in which it appears the owner has
intentionally relinquished all right, title, claim, and possession with the
intention of not reclaiming it or resuming ownership, possession or
enjoyment.
SEIZED PROPERTY — Property in possession of the Chief of Police taken by
police officers performing their duties of law enforcement.
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY — Property in which it may appear that someone
has rights but which rights have gone unclaimed after a reasonable effort
by the Chief of Police to discover and notify the possessor of such rights.
§ 217-3. Disposition of property in custody of Chief of Police.
A. Abandoned or unclaimed property.
(1) The Chief of Police may, by any lawful means, safely dispose of
abandoned or unclaimed flammable, explosive or incendiary
substances, materials or devices in his or her custody posing a
danger to life or property in their storage, transportation or use
immediately after taking possession of such substances, materials
or devices.
(2) The Chief of Police may dispose of firearms or ammunition in the
custody of the Chief of Police which have been abandoned or
remain unclaimed for a period of 12 months after the taking of
possession of such property by the Chief of Police, by return to the
rightful owner, destruction or transfer to the State Crime
Laboratory.
(3) The Chief of Police may dispose of all other personal property in his
or her custody which has been abandoned or remains unclaimed
for at least 30 days after the taking of possession of such property
by the Chief of Police by any lawful means.
B. Seized firearms or ammunition.
(1) Seized firearms or ammunition posing a danger to life or property
or constituting contraband. If firearms or ammunition seized by the
Chief of Police are not required for evidence or further
§ 212-25 MOTELS § 217-3
193:237
§ 217-4. Records of disposed property and proceeds from sale.
[Added 12-11-2000]
investigation but pose a danger to life or property in their storage,
transportation or use or constitute contraband, the Chief of Police
may safely dispose of such firearms or ammunition by any lawful
means immediately.
(2) Seized firearms or ammunition which do not pose a danger to life or
property or constitute contraband. If firearms or ammunition
seized by the Chief of Police are not required for evidence or
further investigation or do not appear to be or are not reported
stolen and have not been disposed of pursuant to court order at the
completion of a criminal action or proceeding or in accordance with
Subsection B(1) above and the rightful owner has not requested
their return within 12 months after the taking of possession of such
firearms or ammunition by the Chief of Police, such firearms or
ammunition may be shipped by the Chief of Police to the State
Crime Laboratory for disposition under § 968.20(3)(a), Wis. Stats.
(3) Seized firearms or ammunition which appear to be or are reported
stolen. If firearms or ammunition seized by the Chief of Police
appear to be or are reported stolen but are not required for
evidence or further investigation and have not been disposed of
pursuant to court order at the completion of a criminal action or
proceeding or in accordance with Subsection B(1) above, and the
rightful owner has not requested their return within 12 months
after the taking of possession of such firearms or ammunition by
the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police may ship such firearms or
ammunition to the State Crime Laboratory for disposition under
§ 968.20(3)(a), Wis. Stats., after the Chief of Police shall have made
a reasonable effort to notify the rightful owner and the rightful
owner shall not have requested their return within 30 days
following receipt of such notification. If, after a reasonable effort,
the Chief of Police is unable to notify the rightful owner, the Chief of
Police may ship such firearms or ammunition to the State Crime
Laboratory for disposition under § 968.20(3)(a), Wis. Stats.,
provided that not less than 15 months shall have elapsed since the
taking of possession of such firearms or ammunition by the Chief of
Police.
C. Seized property other than firearms or ammunition. If property other
than firearms or ammunition is seized by the Chief of Police and is not
required for evidence or investigation, and such property poses a
danger to life or property in its storage, transportation or use, or
constitutes contraband, the Chief of Police may safely dispose of such
property by any lawful means immediately.
A. For all property disposed of under this chapter by means other than a
sale open to the public, the Chief of Police shall maintain an inventory of
such property and record the date and method of disposal, the
§ 217-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 217-4
193:238
Chapter 220
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 106.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 134.
Plumbing — See Ch. 212.
Trees and vegetation — See Ch. 266.
§ 220-1. Legislative findings.
The Village Board hereby finds that the lack of maintenance of buildings
and structures within the village is likely to substantially affect the health,
safety and general welfare of the citizens of this community. To prevent
or correct the existence of such adverse conditions and to achieve and
maintain such levels of building environmental quality as will protect and
promote the health and safety and general welfare, it is declared that there
is a need for the establishment of standards relating to the maintenance
and repair of buildings, structures and surrounding areas in the village. It
is further declared that failure to maintain buildings or other structures
in a reasonable state of repair or to keep the exterior or buildings in
a reasonably attractive condition affects the value of other properties in
the area, and adversely affects the environment and living conditions in
the area, and that each of the aforesaid conditions may create a public
nuisance.
§ 220-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to assist in preventing property
deterioration and the creation of unsafe conditions in all buildings.
§ 220-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to the maintenance of
all buildings and structures and areas surrounding the same, irrespective of
when or under what condition or conditions such buildings were originally
constructed.
consideration received for the property (if any), and the name and
address of the person taking possession of the property. Such inventory
shall be kept as a public record for a period of not less than two years
from the date of disposal of the property.
B. If the disposal of any personal property is in the form of a sale, all
receipts from the sale after deducting the necessary expenses of
keeping the property and conducting the sale shall be paid into the
Village Treasury.
§ 217-4 MOTELS § 220-4
193:239
§ 220-4. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Elm Grove Property
Maintenance Code."
§ 220-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings assigned to them in this section. Words and phrases
not herein otherwise defined shall have the meanings accepted by common
usage.
APPROVED — Approved by the local authority having such administrative
authority.
BASEMENT — That portion of any structure which is below grade, or which
is partly below and partly above grade but so located that the vertical
distance from the grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance
from the grade to the ceiling.
BLIGHTING INFLUENCE — A condition having an adverse effect on the
health, safety, welfare or economic value of surrounding properties or the
Village of Elm Grove in general or which endangers life and property by
fire or other causes. In determining whether a condition has an adverse
effect on the economic value of surrounding properties or the Village of Elm
Grove in general, the professional opinion of the Village Assessor as to the
economic impact, if any, a condition has on surrounding properties shall be
deemed to be relevant evidence.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
equipment, machinery or materials.
DEBRIS — Broken concrete, bricks, blocks or other mineral matter; bottles,
porcelain and other glass or crockery; boxes; lumber (new or used), posts,
sticks, or other wood; tree branches, brush, yard trimmings, grass
clippings, and other residues; paper, rags, cardboard, excelsior, rubber,
leather, plastic, wire, tin and metal items; discarded household goods or
appliances, junk lawn mowers, tar paper, residues from burning or any
similar materials which constitute health, fire or safety hazards or which
contribute to a blighting influence upon the immediate or surrounding area.
DETERIORATION — The condition or appearance of a building or structure
or part thereof, characterized by breaks, holes, rot, crumbling, cracking,
peeling, rusting, inadequate paint or other evidence of decay or neglect.
HABITABLE — Suitable, and zoned for, occupancy by human beings with
reasonable comfort and safety.
JUNK — Any old scrap metal, metal alloy, synthetic or organic material
or waste, or any abandoned, junked, ruined, dismantled or wrecked motor
vehicle, recreational vehicle, boat, or machinery, or any part thereof,
whether salvageable or not, or any discarded household goods or
§ 220-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 220-5
193:240
appliances. An unlicensed motor vehicle shall be construed to be a junked
motor vehicle as set forth in Chapter 335, Zoning.
PREMISES — Lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon or any part thereof.
REASONABLY TIGHT — That the item so described shall fit so as to exclude
wind, rain or moisture or vermin, pests, bugs, insects, rodents or other
similar items.
REFUSE — All solid waste (pustrescible and nonputrescible, combustible
and noncombustible), including garbage, ashes and solid material and
industrial wastes including, but not limited to, rubbish and junk.
RUBBISH — Any combustible or noncombustible waste material or debris
as defined in this section except refuse, including, but not limited to, cans
and metal items, leaves and grass clippings, except when being composted,
or any similar materials.
YARD — An open space at grade on the same lot as the building or structure
located between such building or structure and the adjoining lot line and/or
street line.
§ 220-6. Enforcement.
The Building Inspector and the Zoning Administrator of the Village of Elm
Grove shall each have authority to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and are hereby authorized and directed to make inspections
when probable cause exists to believe that a violation exists. The Building
Inspector or Zoning Administrator, with the aid of the Village Attorney, shall
enforce the provisions of this chapter by forfeiture action and/or injunction.
§ 220-7. Notice of inspections.
The Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator shall provide reasonable
notice under the circumstances to the owner, operator, or occupant of a
building or structure in the village of the date and time for any inspection.
§ 220-8. Entrance into property.
For the purpose of making inspections, the Building Inspector or Zoning
Administrator is authorized to enter, examine and survey all buildings,
structures or premises within the Village of Elm Grove. In the event the
Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator is denied access to a building,
structure or premises, the Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator may
apply to the Municipal Court or Circuit Court for a special inspection
warrant.
§ 220-9. Minimum standards for equipment.
All dwellings and dwelling units in the village shall be equipped with the
following, which shall be in working order and which shall be in compliance
with all applicable state, federal or village codes and regulations:
§ 220-5 MOTELS § 220-9
193:241
§ 220-10. Minimum standards for garbage and refuse containers.
[Amended 10-27-2009]
§ 220-11. Minimum standards for light, heat and ventilation.
The following constitute the minimum standards for light, heat, and
ventilation for buildings and structures in the village:
A. Adequate plumbing kept in good working condition, which includes:
(1) Kitchen sink.
(2) Toilet and lavatory sink (no multiple use shall be permitted).
(3) Privacy for toilet, tub or shower.
(4) Water supply.
(5) Hot water.
(6) Toilet and bathroom floors which are:
(a) Constructed and maintained to be leakproof and sanitary; and
(b) Kept clean.
B. Two means of exit from each dwelling unit.
C. Handrails on all stairways.
A. All buildings shall have garbage and refuse containers which:
(1) Have an adequate container space per dwelling unit;
(2) Shall be kept covered and maintained; and
(3) Shall be emptied regularly; and
(4) Shall be kept upon a hard surface; and
(5) Shall be screened from casual view.
A. Habitable rooms and toilet rooms shall have reasonably adequate
ventilation.
B. Electric service shall be maintained in operable condition in all
habitable buildings in the village and shall include the following:
(1) An adequate number of receptacles having sufficient capacity for
their use.
(2) Lights in all of the following:
(a) Habitable rooms;
(b) Hallways;
§ 220-9 ELM GROVE CODE § 220-11
193:242
§ 220-12. Landscaping of premises.
The landscape of all premises within the village shall be maintained as
follows:
§ 220-13. Minimum standards for maintenance. [Amended
12-11-2000]
All buildings, structures and property in the village shall be maintained as
follows:
(c) Stairways; and
(d) Bathrooms.
C. To provide protection from insects, all habitable buildings shall be
equipped with screen windows and screen doors which shall be
maintained in good repair.
D. To provide protection from rodents, all buildings and structures in the
village shall be maintained to provide reasonably tight floors, walls,
foundation and roof and broken basement windows shall be repaired.
E. All habitable buildings in the village shall be equipped with all of the
following to ensure adequate heating facilities:
(1) Furnace in good repair.
(2) Reasonably tight windows.
A. Graded and maintained to prevent water from accumulating.
B. Graded to prevent runoff damage to adjacent properties.
C. Landscaped to prevent a blighting influence upon the neighborhood.
D. Maintained such that refuse or debris does not accumulate or blow onto
neighboring properties.
E. Maintained such that there is no accumulation of refuse or debris
except such items which are scheduled for pickup and disposal within a
reasonable period of time.
F. No outdoor storage of equipment or materials that unreasonably
detracts from, or has a blighting influence upon, the neighborhood.
G. Removal of excavated dirt piles within a reasonable time period to be
determined by Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator, taking into
consideration the nature of the project involved and seasonal weather
conditions.
A. Floors, walls, foundations and roofs shall be weathertight and kept in
good repair.
§ 220-11 MOTELS § 220-13
193:243
§ 220-14. No discontinuance of service.
Except during the course of repair or replacement work or due to
emergency, the following services shall be maintained without interruption
or discontinuation of service for each habitable building in the village:
§ 220-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
Chapter 225
SOLID WASTE
B. Exteriors shall be maintained by painting or otherwise protected to
prevent deterioration or a blighting influence upon neighboring
properties.
C. Stairs and porches shall be kept in good repair and free from refuse and
debris.
D. Buildings shall be equipped so as to provide adequate roof drainage to
protect the building and shall be kept in good repair so as not to detract
from neighborhood and oriented so that discharge does not create
problems on adjacent public property.
E. Chimneys and smoke pipes shall be kept clean and in good repair.
F. No construction equipment, maintenance equipment, or maintenance
implement shall be stored or remain in the street, yard or public rightof-
way except during such time that construction or maintenance
activities are in progress.
A. Electrical supply.
B. Water supply and heater.
C. Gas supply and equipment for dwelling units where gas is used for
heating or cooking purposes.
§ 220-13 ELM GROVE CODE § 220-15
193:244
ARTICLE I
Garbage, Refuse and Yard Waste Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 9-28-2015]
§ 225-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation, removal and
disposal of garbage, refuse, recyclables and yard waste from Village-plotted
lots with one-, two- and three-dwelling residences.
§ 225-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COMMERCIAL — Refers to business enterprises and activities associated
therewith, including churches, public and parochial educational
institutions, charitable organizations and Village-plotted lots with four or
more dwelling units.
CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste, materials and debris from building
construction, alterations, demolitions or repairs and earth from excavation.
CONTRACTOR — An individual or business entity which, in the course of
performing work for payment, creates, collects or transports construction
waste, refuse, recyclable material, garbage or yard waste.
GARBAGE — Waste, spoiled food, and or any plant matter incidental to and
resulting from the use, preparation and storage of food but does not include
items when sealed in containers of a noncombustible nature.
PREMISES — One or more lots upon which any building or group of
buildings may be located and shall include more than one building located
upon a lot or lots under a single ownership or management.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials as defined by state law, rules and
regulations, a list of which will be maintained by the Department of Public
Works.
REFUSE — All residential solid waste, putrescible and nonputrescible;
combustible materials, including garbage, ashes and solid materials, but
excluding construction waste and yard waste.
YARD WASTE — Organic waste resulting from the growing, trimming or
removal of plants and parts thereof from Village-plotted lots.
VILLAGE — The Village of Elm Grove or any solid waste contractor acting
on its behalf.
§ 225-3. Restrictions on yard waste and construction waste.
A. No person shall dump, place or cause to be placed on any part of the
right-of-way of any public roadway any yard waste, construction waste,
§ 225-1 MOTELS § 225-3
193:245
§ 225-4. Preparation, storage and disposal of refuse and recycling.
garbage, refuse or other litter of any kind except as hereinafter
specifically permitted.
B. Refuse, construction waste, garbage or yard waste created, collected,
or transported by a contractor shall not be collected by the Village or
dumped, abandoned, deposited or placed at the Village Public Works
facility. The collection and disposal of the same shall be the
responsibility of the property owner where such items originated.
C. Yard waste limitations. Residents in one-, two- or three-family dwelling
units may dispose of yard waste through the methods listed hereunder.
(1) Branches, tree limbs, brush and logs can be collected by the
Village's Department of Public Works on a scheduled basis,
provided that the following requirements are met:
(a) Branches, tree limbs and brush shall not exceed six feet in
length and shall not exceed six inches in diameter.
(b) Logs shall not exceed three feet in length and 30 inches in
diameter.
(c) Branches, tree limbs, brush and logs shall be placed with the
cut ends pointed in one direction, laying parallel to the
roadway at the roadside, with logs stacked separately from the
brush.
(d) Branches, tree limbs, brush and logs shall not be placed at the
roadside any earlier than the Friday preceding the scheduled
period pickup week and shall be so placed prior to 7:00 a.m. of
the Monday of the pickup week.
(2) Leaves will be collected in the fall by the Village's contracted refuse
hauler, provided they are placed at the roadside, contained in a
degradable bag, and have the proper sticker purchased from the
Village. Weather permitting, leaves will be collected in this manner
beginning in October through the end of November and at other
times as determined by the Village Board.
(3) Yard waste may be taken to the Department of Public Works facility
as provided under § 225-6.
A. Refuse and recyclable materials, unless specifically excluded, shall be
collected by the Village's refuse contractor in a manner that is
regulated by the Village.
B. Preparation of materials for disposal.
(1) All liquid producing refuse must be well-drained and wrapped for
disposal. At all times, refuse must be contained in such a way as to
prevent blowing materials. All sharp objects likely to protrude
§ 225-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 225-4
193:246
§ 225-5. Special refuse and brush collection.
§ 225-6. Department of Public Works facility.
through any container or packaging and cause injury must be
placed in a sturdy container prior to disposal.
(2) Those recyclable-material items which contained food must be
rinsed clean. Recyclable materials must be separated from other
refuse as according to state law and placed in a separate recycling
container provided by the Village. Recyclable materials must be
contained in such a way as to prevent blowing materials at all
times.
(3) Residential pickup may be declined when the refuse or recycling
container contains unacceptable materials.
C. Refuse containers shall be furnished by the resident and shall not
exceed 40 gallons in size or be filled to exceed 60 pounds when full. Any
refuse container in a deteriorated or unsanitary condition must be
cleaned, restored or replaced by the resident.
D. Recycling containers shall be dispensed by the Village and must stay
with the property for which they were issued. Any recycling container
in a deteriorated or unsanitary condition may be replaced by the
Village.
E. Refuse and recycling containers must be out and available for pickup by
7:00 a.m. the day of scheduled pickup.
F. Refuse and recycling containers shall be returned, by the property
owner, to their point of storage before dawn the day after pickup.
Refuse and recycling containers must be screened from casual view.
A. Large appliances or bulky materials will only be picked up by special
pickup scheduled in advance through the Village's contracted waste
hauler. Items to be picked up shall be placed as required by the Village's
waste hauler.
B. Residents may request to have their branches, tree limbs, and brush
picked up on days other than the regular neighborhood pickup upon
payment of a fee in advance. That fee shall be established by the Village
Board. The manner in which brush is picked up shall be the same as
provided under § 225-3C.
A. Allowable usage. Use of the Village Public Works facility is restricted to
Village residents and Village property owners. Village business owners,
tax exempt property owners and Village employees are allowed usage
of the facility, provided that they obtain a facility use permit. Use of and
access to the facility is allowed only as posted.
§ 225-4 MOTELS § 225-6
193:247
§ 225-7. Fees.
§ 225-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this code shall be subject to a
violation for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued or permitted,
and, upon conviction for any such violation, such person shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
B. Termination of usage. Any Village resident, Village property owner,
Village business owner, tax exempt property owner or Village employee
who engages in any form of abusive behavior, either toward facility
personnel or in a manner detrimental to the operation of the facility,
may be disallowed use of the facility, for a period of time determined by
the Village Manager, subject to an appeal to the Public Works
Committee filed within 10 calendar days of the restriction.
C. Allowable materials. A list of materials acceptable to be placed at the
facility will be maintained by the Village. Materials must be prepared as
specified on said list. Materials without proper preparation may be
rejected. Root balls, stumps and shrubs with root balls, are not
accepted at the Public Works facility. Failure to comply may result in
disallowance of facility use.
A. A fee for garbage, refuse, recycling or yard waste collection shall be
placed on the property tax bill as a special charge. Said fee shall be
determined by a resolution of the Board of Trustees.
B. A fee for a permit for the use of the Public Works facility for tax exempt
properties, Village business owners and Village employees shall be
determined by a resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 225-6 ELM GROVE CODE § 225-8
193:248
Chapter 232
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 106.
Plumbing — See Ch. 212.
Land division — See Ch. 305.
Water control — See Ch. 325.
Zoning — See Ch. 335.
§ 225-8 MOTELS § 225-8
193:249

ARTICLE I
Sewer District
[Adopted 11-14-1955; as amended through 8-9-1993]
§ 232-1. Consolidation of districts.
Sanitary District No. 1 and Sewerage District No. 2 of the Village of Elm
Grove are consolidated into one sewer district to be known as "Elm Grove
Sewer District," which action is to be effective as of May 1, 1975.
§ 232-2. Construction and maintenance costs.
The costs of constructing and maintaining the public sewers, which shall
include mains, intercepting and all extension sewers, manholes, outfalls,
and all other sewer construction and facilities, shall be paid out of the funds
of such Village Sewer District, except that said costs may be paid out of
other Village funds (including funds made available by the use of general
obligations or revenue bonds) of the Village of Elm Grove upon the express
resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Elm Grove to this effect.
§ 232-3. Sewer District management. [Amended 3-23-2004]
A. Management, powers and duties; report.
(1) The affairs of such Village Sewer District shall be managed by the
Public Works/Utilities Committee established under § 80-3.
(2) General powers and duties; report to Trustees.
(a) The Public Works/Utilities Committee shall administer routine
functions in maintaining the local sanitary sewer system, shall
make pertinent recommendations to the Board of Trustees as
to maintenance and rehabilitation of such system and shall
administer and implement all present and future ordinances
enacted by the Board of Trustees relating to the Village
sanitary sewer system.10
(b) A formal report of the activities of the Public Works/Utilities
Committee shall be made each month to the Board of Trustees
and a representative of the Public Works/Utilities Committee
shall attend each regular meeting of such Board of Trustees to
present such report.
B. In addition to its other powers, the Public Works/Utilities Committee is
hereby authorized to locate and define the boundaries and areas of
excessive clear water infiltration or flowage into the sanitary sewer
system.
10.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (a)(2)(b), regarding budgeted expenditures, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 12-11-2000.
§ 232-1 MOTELS § 232-3
193:251
§ 232-4. Annual budget. [Amended 3-23-2004]
The Village Public Works/Utilities Committee shall cooperate with the
Finance Committee and the Village Manager in the preparation of an annual
budget for the sewer system for consideration by the Village Board of
Trustees. All of such budgets shall be subject to the approval of the Village
Board of Trustees.11
§ 232-5. Deleterious discharge prohibited.
No substance or amount of any substance prohibited by the regulation
of the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District periodically as amended
shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. Any person found to be
responsible for the discharge of any substance into the sewer system which
causes damage to the sewer system or treatment facility shall, in addition to
a forfeiture, pay the amount of damages incurred by the Village and, upon
order of the Village, remedy the condition resulting in the discharge.
(1) The Public Works/Utilities Committee may designate certain
inspectors to investigate and check all buildings within an area
suspected to be a clear water infiltration area. Such inspectors
shall have the power, after reasonable notice, to enter such
premises for the purpose of any inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing deemed necessary by said
inspectors to ensure compliance with this article. If, however, any
inspector is denied entry after presentation of his or her
identification, he or she may procure a special inspection warrant
in accordance with § 66.122, Wis. Stats. If such inspectors deem
such evidence or findings are inconclusive or if the property owner
makes such a request, an outside test shall be made by pouring a
colored dye mixed with water into a hole drilled a short distance
from the outside wall of the building and then checking the nearest
downstream manhole to such premises to determine if the colored
water is flowing into the manhole.
(2) Such inspectors shall report their findings to the Public Works/
Utilities Committee and the Public Works/Utilities Committee shall
then have the power to direct such property owners to disconnect
any downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, sump
pumps, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater which
discharge clear water, directly or indirectly, into the sanitary
extension sewer system of the Village.
11.Editor's Note: Former Sections 5 and 6, regarding the taxing district status and funds of
the former sanitary and sewerage districts, which immediately followed this section, were
deleted 12-11-2000.
§ 232-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 232-6
193:252
§ 232-6. Grease interceptor permit required. [Added 4-10-2000;
amended 8-26-2003; 3-23-2004; 6-27-2016]
Any property owner, or property owner’s agent or lessee, who is required
by Wisconsin Administrative Code Section SPS 382.34, or any amendment
thereto, to install and maintain a grease interceptor, shall obtain a grease
interceptor permit from the Village.
A. Application. Application for a permit shall be made on forms provided
by the Village, disclosing therein the following:
(1) The name(s) and telephone number(s) of the person(s) responsible
for the maintenance of the grease interceptor;
(2) The means by which the captured material is to be disposed;
(3) The name of any currently licensed waste disposal firms contracted
to dispose of the captured material; and
(4) The record of dates and means of disposal of all captured material
during the previous permit years.
B. Inspection. Upon receipt of an application, the Village Plumbing
Inspector shall make, or shall cause to be made, an inspection of the
grease interceptor to assure that the permitted premises and the
grease interceptor are in compliance with Wisconsin Administrative
Code Section SPS 382.34. Inspections shall be made at least once every
two years, and at such other times as the Village Plumbing Inspector
shall deem necessary.
C. Fee. The applicant shall pay an investigation and compliance fee to
cover the Village's cost of administrating this compliance program. This
fee relates solely to the inspection and monitoring described in this
section and is separate from all other fees charged by the Public Works/
Utilities Committee. The fee, which shall be established by the Village
Board by resolution from time to time, shall be paid at the time the
applicant makes application.
D. Expiration; renewal; transfer. Grease interceptor permits shall expire
on June 30 of every other year. Renewals shall be handled in the same
manner as original applications. Permits issued under this section are
personal and may not be transferred.
E. Revocation of permit. Permits issued under this section may be
revoked, or withheld, by the Village Plumbing Inspector whenever the
Village Plumbing Inspector determines that the permit holder has
violated any provision of Wisconsin Administrative Code Section SPS
382.34, including but not limited to allowing deleterious waste material
to be introduced into the Village sewer. Continued operation under a
revoked permit shall constitute a violation of § 232-9 of this article.
§ 232-6 MOTELS § 232-6
193:253
§ 232-7. Clear water flow into sanitary sewer system. [Amended
3-8-1999]
§ 232-8. Maintenance of sewer laterals. [Added 12-14-1998]
F. Appeals. Appeals from any order or decision of the Village Plumbing
Inspector under this section shall be made pursuant to Chapter 212,
Plumbing, § 212-13.
G. The penalty provision contained in § 232-9B shall be applicable to any
violation of this § 232-6.
A. No roof downspout, cistern, swimming pool or water-chilled air
conditioner, exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, sump pump or
other source of surface runoff, stormwater, surface water, clear water
waste, or groundwater shall be allowed to flow, directly or indirectly,
into the Village sanitary sewer system.
B. The Board of Trustees finds that direct or indirect discharge of any
surface runoff, stormwater, surface water, clear water waste or
groundwater into the Village sanitary sewer system is a significant
factor in causing sanitary sewers to overflow and thereby contributing
to sewage backup into basements. Therefore, any such direct or
indirect flow of such waters into the Village sanitary sewer system is
hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and violations of this
section may be prosecuted in the manner provided for in Chapter 823 of
the Wisconsin statutes, as amended from time to time, as well as by any
other means provided under this article or any applicable law.
A. The Village of Elm Grove shall maintain the sewer service main within
the Village limits.
B. The owner of any property receiving sewer service through any lateral
connections ("properly owner") shall maintain the sewer lateral from
the point of connection to the main sewer to the structure receiving
service, including but not limited to all connective fittings such as wye
joints. This shall include payment of all expenses associated with the
cleaning, maintenance or repair or replacement of the lateral line,
restoration of lawn or other landscaping improvements, which at the
discretion of the Village may be undertaken, and repair of the street, if
necessary, in accordance with Village of Elm Grove road cut
specifications.
C. The property owner must notify the Village in writing prior to initiating
work on any lateral other than routine cleaning. It shall be the property
owner's responsibility to keep the sewer service lateral free from
obstruction or defective conditions at all times.
D. Disturbance and abandonment. [Added 12-17-2002]
(1) If an existing building is razed, or remodeled in any manner
resulting in the disturbance of an existing lateral, there must be a
§ 232-6 ELM GROVE CODE § 232-8
193:254
§ 232-9. Violations and penalties.
§ 232-10. Liability of violator.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be liable to the
Village for any expense, loss, or damage which the Village may suffer as a
result of such violation, and said amounts shall be assessed by the Court
at the time of sentencing under § 232-9 and nonpayment of such expenses
shall result in imprisonment in the Waukesha County Jail.
complete replacement of the existing lateral with a new PVC lateral
entirely at the expense of the property owner.
(2) An exception to the replacement of an existing lateral may be
granted by the Village Director of Public Works if satisfactory
evidence is submitted timely demonstrating that the existing
lateral is of PVC construction or the existing lateral has been lined,
and the existing lateral has been televised demonstrating that it is
entirely free from major defects.
(3) In the event of abandonment, the lateral shall be severed from the
main and a permanent seal, of a method and material approved by
the Director of Public Works, shall be placed at the main connection
so as to permanently seal the main from infiltration. The
abandonment shall be inspected and tested to the satisfaction of
the Director of Public Works. The permanent seal shall be installed
by the property owner at the owner's sole expense. All inspection
costs shall be the responsibility of the property owner and will be
charged in accordance with § 30-3 of the Village Code.
A. Any person found violating the provisions of this article shall be
provided written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing
a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for the correction of the
violation.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the aforesaid time
limit provided in a written notice of violation shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code, except that the forfeiture
shall not be less than $100. [Amended 7-26-2005]
§ 232-8 MOTELS § 232-10
193:255

ARTICLE II
Sewer Rates
[Adopted 12-18-1978; amended 12-11-2000]
§ 232-11. Purpose.
The wastewater of the Village of Elm Grove is collected and treated in
whole or in part by the wastewater system operated by the Milwaukee
Metropolitan Sewerage District (MMSD). The purpose of this article is to
enable the Village of Elm Grove to establish and collect from users within
the Village of Elm Grove those charges which represent the proportionate
contribution by such users both to the cost of operating and maintaining the
system, and that part of the cost of capital improvements in the system not
defrayed by an ad valorem tax on real property.
§ 232-12. Incorporation of provisions by reference; definitions and
word usage.
A. The following section and related appendixes of MMSD District Rules
and Regulations, promulgated by the District, are hereby incorporated
by reference and shall be in full force and effect as though set forth in
their entirety.
B. In addition to words and terms elsewhere defined in this article, the
following words and terms as used in this article shall have the
following meanings, unless some other meaning is plainly intended:
COLLECTION SEWER SYSTEM — The system of public sewers whose
primary purpose is to collect wastewater from individual point source
discharges.
COMMERCIAL MAN-HOUR — One hour spent on duty in a commercial
establishment by one employee.
CONNECTION OR SERVICE CONNECTION — Each physical
connection to the municipal or District sewer system.
LOCAL USER CHARGE — That portion of the total wastewater service
charge which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for
the cost of operation, maintenance, and replacement of the collection
system.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE — All expenditures during the
useful life of the sewer collection system for materials, labor, utilities
and other items which are necessary for managing and maintaining the
collection system to achieve the capacity and performance for which
such system was designed and constructed.
REPLACEMENT — Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during
the useful life of the collection system to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The
term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement.
§ 232-11 MOTELS § 232-12
193:257
§ 232-13. General rules.
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — Any building exclusively
accommodating one, two, three, or four residential units.
STANDARD METHODS — The latest edition of Standard Methods of
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the
American Public Health Association, the American Water Works
Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
C. Words importing a singular number shall include the plural number and
vice versa unless the context shall otherwise indicate.
A. Municipal transfer of data. The Village of Elm Grove shall provide
MMSD, upon request, that data required to prepare wholesale bills,
including number of residential units; number of residential structures;
total water consumption of noncertified commercial users; total number
of noncertified commercial connections; individual water consumption
for each certified commercial user; and individual number of service
connections for each certified commercial user. This data will be
submitted to MMSD in accordance with the schedules published in the
current Cost Recovery Procedures Manual. Any change in such
schedules by the Village of Elm Grove will be submitted to MMSD in
advance for approval.
B. Discharge volume. [Amended 3-23-2004; 2-26-2013]
(1) The volume of wastewater discharged by a user is deemed to be
equal to the volume of water consumed by said user from all
sources, as modified by applicable discharge factors.
(2) Commercial unmetered. The Village of Elm Grove will estimate the
volume of water consumed from unmetered sources by commercial
users in accordance with the domestic equivalency factors
published in the current MMSD Cost Recovery Procedures Manual.
(3) Commercial metered.
(a) Commercial properties shall install meters in accordance with
the applicable MMSD rules and regulations, as amended from
time to time. At any time a current user meets the usage for
which MMSD requires a meter, such meter shall be installed
within 60 days of notification by the Village.
(b) Meters must be installed and maintained by the user at his/her
expense of a type and in a manner satisfactory to the Public
Works/Utilities Committee. Such installed meters will require
annual maintenance and calibration by the owner due to the
poor water quality in the Village of Elm Grove. The results
must be reported to the Village of Elm Grove by March 1 of
each calendar year. If at any time the owner has knowledge of
the meter working incorrectly, the Village must be notified
§ 232-12 ELM GROVE CODE § 232-13
193:258
immediately and the meter must be repaired or replaced
within 60 days.
(c) All meters must be installed outside of the building or have an
exterior remote reader and must be readily accessible by
Village of Elm Grove personnel. Meters must be installed
within 60 days of notification by the Village.
(4) Failure to abide by these rules will result in the Village using an
estimate for discharge for the current period and all future billing
periods until the user rectifies the problem and additional charges
shall be applied as provided in § 232-15F(7).
C. User transfer of data. Each commercial user of the wastewater system
shall submit pertinent data to the Village of Elm Grove Sewer District or
MMSD to verify this data.
D. Discharge factor certification. Commercial users may apply to MMSD
for a certified discharge factor as provided for in the current Cost
Recovery Procedures Manual.
E. Verification.
(1) The Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District shall have the right
to monitor wastewater discharges as provided in the current
District Rules and Regulations.
(2) The Village of Elm Grove shall have the right to monitor all water
meters. At any time, Village of Elm Grove personnel bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, and testing
in order to carry out the provisions of this article. In the event there
is a denial of such permission to enter, the Village of Elm Grove
personnel shall make application for a special inspection warrant
under the provisions of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
(3) In the event a user fails to supply water meter data or in the event a
user's data or statement is materially inaccurate or in the event
there has been a substantial change in data since the date of the
user's last report, the Village of Elm Grove shall notify the user that
the Village shall redetermine the proper charge due in order that a
bill for the deficiency may be sent. This deficiency billing shall be
retroactive to the date or dates when the bills based upon the
inaccurate data or statement were originally due and additional
charges shall be applied to each deficiency as provided in
§ 232-15F(7). [Amended 2-26-2013]
F. Audit control of user connections. Whenever there is a change in the
use of a building housing a certified commercial user, the owner must,
within 30 days of the change, notify the Village of Elm Grove and
MMSD. This notification shall be submitted in accordance with the
§ 232-13 MOTELS § 232-13
193:259
§ 232-14. Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District user charge
system. [Amended 3-3-2004]
The purpose of user charges is to ensure that users of the wastewater
system pay for the use of the system. User charges of each user shall
consist of that portion of the cost of operation and maintenance of the
wastewater system allocable to such user. The Milwaukee Metropolitan
Sewerage District shall bill the Village of Elm Grove for the user charges
attributable to users located within the Village of Elm Grove.
§ 232-15. Local user charge system.
procedures established by MMSD in the current Cost Recovery
Procedures Manual.
G. Appeal provision. Any user that believes there may be an error in an
action taken by MMSD pertaining to charges may appeal the action,
provided that the user first submits payment for the charge in question.
The appeal shall be filed with MMSD in accordance with the procedures
set forth in the current Cost Recovery Procedures Manual and is
exclusive; no appeal is permitted to the Village of Elm Grove Public
Works/Utilities Committee. Resolution of the appeal shall be conclusive,
subject to appeal in the manner prescribed by law. [Amended
3-23-2004]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the local user charge system is to generate
adequate annual revenues to pay costs of annual operation and
maintenance, including replacement, associated with financing the
collection sewer system which the Village of Elm Grove may by
ordinance designate to be paid by the local user charge system. That
portion of the total local user charge which is designated for operation
and maintenance, including replacement of the collection system, shall
be established by this article.
B. Local user charge billing basis. There is hereby imposed a charge on
each user in the Village of Elm Grove who discharges wastewater,
directly or indirectly, into the wastewater system operated by MMSD.
Such charge shall be in the amount specified below for the various
classes of users and shall be prorated for part-year users.
(1) Residential users shall be calculated as follows: Number of
residential units times (x) the residential occupancy factor x ERU
rate x number of days in billing period divided by 1,000 x
volumetric rate, plus local connection charge.
(2) Noncertified commercial users. The noncertified commercial user
charge shall be calculated as follows: Estimated or actual annual
commercial wastewater discharge x volumetric rate, plus local
connection charge.
§ 232-13 ELM GROVE CODE § 232-15
193:260
(3) Discharge certified commercial users. The discharge certified
commercial user charge shall be calculated as follows: Wastewater
discharge x MMSD certified discharge factor x volumetric rate,
plus local connection charge.
C. Local connection charge. There shall be collected from each residential
and each commercial user an annual local sewer connection charge.
The local sewer connection charge is in addition to the MMSD sewer
connection charge.
D. Review of user charge. The Village of Elm Grove will review the local
user charge system at least every two years, and revise local user
charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generated
adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance
including replacement costs among users and user classes.
E. User notification. The Village of Elm Grove will post at least annually
the rate being charged for operation and maintenance including
replacement of the collection system. This notification will display
separately MMSD treatment charges and local operation, maintenance
and replacement rates. [Amended 4-22-2008]
F. Billings and penalties.
(1) All commercial users with a meter must report the meter reading
within 10 days of receiving notice of such meter reading from the
Village of Elm Grove. [Added 2-26-201312]
(2) User charges for residential users shall be billed on an annual
basis. All commercial users shall be billed on a quarterly basis.
Payment of commercial bills shall be made within 25 days of
mailing by the Village of Elm Grove. In the event that such bill is
not paid when due, a penalty of 1.5% per month on the unpaid
balance shall be added thereto. All bills shall be payable at the
office of the Village Treasurer, 13600 Juneau Boulevard, Elm Grove,
Wisconsin 53122. [Amended 2-26-2013]
(3) In the event a user fails to certify data or in the event a user's
certification is materially inaccurate or in the event there has been
a substantial change in the data since the date of the user's last
certification, MMSD or the Village of Elm Grove shall notify the
user that the verification data determined by MMSD or the Village
of Elm Grove pursuant to MMSD District Rules and Regulations
shall be used to determine the charge due for the current billing
period and all future billing periods until the user submits a new
certified statement.
(4) Should inspection or verification by MMSD or the Village of Elm
Grove reveal that any statement certified by a user is materially
12.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
F(1) through (6) as Subsection F(2) through (7), respectively.
§ 232-15 MOTELS § 232-15
193:261
inaccurate, MMSD or the Village of Elm Grove shall redetermine
the proper charge due and forward the new computation to the
municipality in order that a bill for the deficiency may be sent to
the user in order that the deficiency may be paid. This deficiency
billing shall be retroactive to the date or dates when the bills
based upon the inaccurate certification were originally due and
interest charges shall be applied to each deficiency as provided in
Subsection F(2) above. [Amended 2-26-2013]
(5) Unpaid user charges shall be a lien upon the property served and
shall be enforced as provided in § 66.076(7), Wis. Stats.
(6) The Village of Elm Grove shall pay MMSD in full the wholesale bill
as set forth in the current MMSD Rules and Regulations.
(7) Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to
comply with any action required pursuant to MMSD Rules and
Regulations or any provision of this article shall forfeit not less than
$50 nor more than $500 for each offense, together with the cost of
prosecution. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. Such fines are in addition to the user
charges due the Village of Elm Grove. [Amended 3-23-2004;
2-26-2013]
§ 232-15 ELM GROVE CODE § 232-15
193:262
Chapter 234
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
§ 234-1. Purpose and intent.
The Village finds and declares that sex offenders are a serious threat
to public safety. When convicted sex offenders re-enter society, they are
much more likely than any other type of offender to be re-arrested for
a new sexually based crime. Given the high rate of recidivism for sex
offenders, and that reducing opportunity and temptation is important to
minimizing the risk of re-offense, there is a need to protect children where
they congregate or play in public places in addition to the protections
afforded by state law. The Village finds and declares that, in addition to
schools and day-care centers, children congregate or play in a number of
public places, including public parks and other facilities for children. It
is the intent of this chapter to serve the Village's compelling interest to
promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and welfare of Village
citizens by creating areas around locations where children regularly
congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders are
prohibited from entering or establishing residency.
§ 234-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIME AGAINST CHILDREN — Any of the following offenses set forth
within the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, or the laws of this or any other
state or federal government, having like elements necessary for conviction,
respectively:
§ 940.225(1) First Degree Sexual Assault
§ 940.225(2) Second Degree Sexual Assault
§ 940.225(3) Third Degree Sexual Assault
§ 940.22(2) Sexual Exploitation by Therapist
§ 940.30 False Imprisonment - Victim was Minor and Not the
Offender's Child
§ 940.31 Kidnapping - Victim was Minor and Not the Offender's
Child
§ 944.02 Rape (prior statute, see now § 940.225)
§ 944.06 Incest
§ 944.10 Sexual Intercourse with a Child (prior statute, see now
§ 948.02)
§ 944.11 Indecent Behavior with a Child (prior statute, see now
§ 948.02)
§ 232-15 MOTELS § 234-2
193:263
§ 944.12 Enticing Child for Immoral Purposes (prior statute, see
now § 948.07)
§ 948.02(1) First Degree Sexual Assault of a Child
§ 948.02(2) Second Degree Sexual Assault of a Child
§ 948.025 Engaging in Repeated Acts of Sexual Assault of the
Same Child
§ 948.05 Sexual Exploitation of a Child
§ 948.055 Causing a Child to View or Listen to Sexual Activity
§ 948.06 Incest with a Child
§ 948.07 Child Enticement
§ 948.075 Use of a Computer to Facilitate a Child Sex Crime
§ 948.08 Soliciting a Child for Prostitution
§ 948.095 Sexual Assault of a Student by School Instructional
Staff
§ 948.11(2)(a)or(am)Exposing a Child to Harmful Material felony sections
§ 948.12 Possession of Child Pornography
§ 948.13 Convicted Child Sex Offender Working with Children
§ 948.30 Abduction of Another's Child
§ 971.17 Not Guilty by Reason of Mental Disease or an Included
Offense
§ 975.06 Sex Crime Law Commitment
RESIDENCE — A place where a person sleeps, abides, lodges, or resides
either on a permanent or temporary basis. For purposes of this chapter,
a "permanent residence" means a place where the person sleeps, abides,
lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days, and a "temporary
residence" means a place that is not a permanent residence and is a place
where the person sleeps, abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more
days in the aggregate during any calendar year or four or more days in any
month. A residence may be mobile or transitory.
SEX OFFENDER — A person who has been convicted of, or has been found
delinquent of, or has been found not guilty by reason of disease or mental
defect of a sexually violent offense and/or a crime against children.
SEXUALLY VIOLENT OFFENSE — Shall have the meaning as set forth in
§ 980.01(6), Wis. Stats. as amended from time to time.
SAFETY ZONE — Any real property that supports or upon which there
exists any facility used for or that supports a school for children, a public
park, park facility, pathway or a day-care center.
§ 234-3. Residency restrictions.
A. A sex offender shall not reside within 1,500 feet of any real property
that supports or upon which there exists any of the following uses:
§ 234-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 234-3
193:264
§ 234-4. Safety zones.
(1) A school for children.
(2) A public park, park facility or park pathway.
(3) A day-care center.
B. The distance shall be measured from the closest boundary line of the
real property supporting the residence of a sex offender to the closest
boundary line of the real property that supports or upon which there
exists any of the uses enumerated in Subsection A above.
C. It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof with the
knowledge that it will be used as a residence by a sex offender if such
place, structure, or part thereof is located within 1,500 feet of any of
the uses enumerated in Subsection A above. A person letting or renting
a place or structure shall be deemed to have such knowledge if, at least
10 days prior to letting or renting the place, the sex offender's name
appears on the Wisconsin Department of Corrections sex offender
registry and the person letting or renting the place knew the sex
offender would be residing at the subject place or structure.
D. Residency restriction exceptions. A sex offender residing within 1,500
feet of any real property that supports or upon which there exists any of
the uses enumerated in Subsection A above does not commit a violation
of this chapter if any of the following apply:
(1) The sex offender established, reported and registered a residence
pursuant to § 301.45, Wis. Stats., prior to the effective date of this
chapter.
(2) The use enumerated in Subsection A above is commenced after the
sex offender established a residence and reported and registered
that residence pursuant to § 301.45, Wis. Stats.
(3) The convicted sex offender is a minor or ward under guardianship.
A. A sex offender shall not enter upon or be present upon or within a safety
zone.
B. Safety zone exceptions. A sex offender who enters upon or who is
present upon or within a safety zone does not commit a violation of this
chapter if any of the following apply:
(1) The property also supports a church, synagogue, mosque, temple
or other house of religious worship, subject to all of the following
conditions:
(a) The sex offender's entrance and presence upon the property
occurs only during hours of worship or other religious
program/service as posted to the public; and
§ 234-3 MOTELS § 234-4
193:265
§ 234-5. Violations and penalties.
(b) The sex offender shall not participate in any religious
education programs that include individuals under the age of
18.
(2) The property also supports a use lawfully attended by a sex
offender's natural or adopted child(ren), which child's use
reasonably requires the attendance of the sex offender as the
child's parent upon the property, subject to the following condition:
(a) The sex offender's entrance and presence upon the property
occurs only during hours of activity related to the use as posted
to the public.
(3) The property also supports a polling location in a local, state or
federal election, subject to all of the following conditions:
(a) The sex offender is eligible to vote;
(b) The property is the designated polling place for the sex
offender; and
(c) The sex offender enters the polling place property, proceeds to
cast a ballot with whatever usual and customary assistance is
available to any member of the electorate, and vacates the
property immediately after voting.
(4) The property also supports a school lawfully attended by a sex
offender as a student, under which circumstances the sex offender
may enter upon the property supporting the school at which the sex
offender is enrolled, for such purposes and at such times as are
reasonably required for the educational purposes of the school.
(5) The property also supports a court, government office or room for
public governmental meetings, subject to all of the following
conditions:
(a) The sex offender is on the property only to transact business at
the government office or place of business, other than a public
library, or attend an official meeting of a governmental body;
and
(b) The sex offender leaves the property immediately upon
completion of the business or meeting.
A. Forfeitures. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter
or any regulation, rule or order made herein shall be subject to a
forfeiture as set by resolution and amended from time to time. Each day
a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Neither the
issuance of a citation nor the imposition of forfeiture hereunder shall
preclude the Village from seeking or obtaining any or all other legal and
equitable remedies to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter.
§ 234-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 234-5
193:266
Chapter 238
SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 204.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 208.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 243.
B. Injunction. If an offender establishes a residence in violation of § 234-3
above, or enters or is present upon or within a safety zone in violation of
§ 234-4 above, the Village Attorney may bring an action in the name of
the Village in Circuit Court to permanently enjoin any such violation as
a public nuisance. [Amended 10-27-2009]
§ 234-5 SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN § 234-5
238:267

ARTICLE I
Snowmobiles
§ 238-1. State snowmobile regulations adopted.
The term "Wisconsin statutes," whenever used in this chapter, shall mean
the Wisconsin statutes as amended. The provisions in such statutes
describing and defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles in the
following enumerated sections of the statutes are hereby adopted and
by reference made a part of this chapter as if set forth herein. Any act
required to be performed or prohibited by any statutes incorporated herein
by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter.
350.01 Definitions
350.02 Operation of snowmobiles on or in the vicinity of highways
350.03 Right-of-way
350.04 Snowmobile races, derbies, and routes
350.045 Public utility exemption
350.047 Local ordinance to be filed
350.05 Operation by youthful operators restricted
350.07 Driving animals
350.08 Owner permitting operation
350.09 Head lamps, tail lamps and brakes, etc.
350.10 Miscellaneous provisions for snowmobile operation
350.101 Intoxicated snowmobiling
350.102 Preliminary breath screening test
350.1025 Application of intoxicated snowmobiling law
350.103 Implied consent
350.104 Chemical tests
350.106 Report arrest to department
350.107 Officer's action after arrest for operating a snowmobile
while under influence of intoxicant
350.11 Penalties
350.12 Registration of snowmobiles
350.13 Uniform trail signs and standards
350.135 Interferences with uniform trail signs and standards
prohibited
350.15 Accidents and accident reports
350.155 Coroners and medical examiners to report; require blood
specimen
350.17 Enforcement
§ 238-1 SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN § 238-1
238:269
350.19 Liability of landowners
350.99 Parties to a violation
§ 238-2. Limited use of snowmobiles.
No person shall operate a snowmobile within the Village of Elm Grove
except upon his or her own property or upon other private property with the
consent of the owner, or upon such portions of village property as are from
time to time designated by the Village Board.
§ 238-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of § 238-1 of this article
shall be subject to a forfeiture as set forth in § 350.11, Wis. Stats., as
amended from time to time. Any person convicted of violating the provisions
of § 238-2 of this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of
this Code.
§ 238-1 ELM GROVE CODE § 238-3
238:270
ARTICLE II
All-Terrain Vehicles
§ 238-4. Definitions.
The definitions set forth in § 23.33(1), Wis. Stats., and Wisconsin
Administrative Code Section NR 64.02 are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference into this article as if fully set forth herein.
§ 238-5. Registration.
The provisions of § 23.33(2)(a) and (b), Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference into this article as if fully set forth herein.
§ 238-6. Rules of operation.
The provisions of § 23.33(3), Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference into this article as if fully set forth herein.
§ 238-7. Operation of all-terrain vehicles within village.
§ 238-8. Age restrictions.
The provisions of § 23.33(5), Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference into this article as if fully set forth herein.
§ 238-9. Equipment requirements.
All-terrain vehicles shall conform with the requirements set forth in
§ 23.33(6), Wis. Stats., which is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference into this article as if fully set forth herein.
A. Subject to the exceptions provided for in § 23.33(4)(d), Wis. Stats., no
person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle within the Village of Elm
Grove except upon his or her own property or upon other private
property with the consent of the owner, or upon such portions of village
property or roadways as are from time to time designated by the Village
Board as all-terrain vehicle routes or trails under § 23.33(8), Wis. Stats.
If an all-terrain vehicle is operated adjacent to the highway, the
operator shall adhere to the regulations set forth in § 23.33(4)(e), Wis.
Stats.
B. This article shall not apply to an operator of an all-terrain vehicle owned
by the village, an agency of the State of Wisconsin, an agency of the
government of the United States, or a public utility while the operator is
engaged in emergency operations, or in operations directly related to
the functions of the village, State of Wisconsin, government of the
United States, or a public utility.
§ 238-4 SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN § 238-10
238:271
§ 238-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any rule or
regulation made under this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 238-10 ELM GROVE CODE § 238-10
238:272
Chapter 241
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 208. Transient merchants — See Ch. 262.
§ 241-1. Preamble.
The Village of Elm Grove hereby determines that, as it is necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of persons and property within the
Village of Elm Grove, special events and related activities shall be
regulated.
§ 241-2. Definitions.
The following terms are hereby defined:
PERSON — Any individual natural human being, partnership, corporation,
firm, company, association, limited-liability company, society or group.
SPECIAL EVENT — An outdoor assemblage of 200 or more persons at
any one time on public or private property for a performance, celebration,
commemoration, display and/or sale of goods or other type of social
gathering open to the public for free or upon payment of some kind of
consideration; it includes, but is not limited to, whether for profit or not,
outdoor festivals, flea markets, fun runs, bicycle races, walkathons,
marathons, outdoor gatherings on nonresidential property involving the use
of temporary structures, and other similar-type activities that do not require
a permanent site or business location and do not compromise public health,
safety or welfare. Events which are approved annually by resolution by the
Village Board of Trustees are exempt.
§ 241-3. Permit; when required.
Prior to application, no person shall allow or conduct a special event unless
a permit has first been issued.
A. Applications for special event permits shall be made to the Village
Clerk, on forms provided by the Village of Elm Grove, and shall include
at a minimum all of the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all of the partners,
if the applicant is a partnership;
(3) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all of the officers
and directors if the applicant is a corporation, or members if the
applicant is a limited-liability company;
§ 238-10 SPECIAL EVENTS § 241-3
241:273
(4) The location at which the event is to be conducted;
(5) Details related to the nature of the event, including:
(a) Whether or not music will be provided;
[1] Music for special events shall terminate at 9:00 p.m. if the
event is held Sunday through Thursday and at 11:00 p.m. if
the event is held on a Friday, Saturday or holiday weekend.
(b) Whether or not alcoholic beverages will be served;
(c) The anticipated number of event attendees;
[1] Events anticipated to exceed 300 persons in attendance
require review and approval by the Village Board of
Trustees in accordance with § 241-5 of this chapter.
(d) Hours and/or days of operation for the special event;
[1] All special events as defined by this chapter shall cease
operation no later than 10:00 p.m. Sunday through
Thursday and no later than 12:00 midnight on Friday,
Saturday, or a holiday weekend.
(e) An event site plan that documents the location of:
[1] Vendors of consumable food or beverages;
[2] Generators;
[3] Parking accommodations (both off- and on-site); and
[4] Proposed road closures, if any.
(f) The Village Manager, in consultation with Village department
heads, may include specific conditions which require cleanup
of public and private property in the vicinity of the location of
the special event that may be littered. A cash deposit, to be
determined by resolution by the Village Board of Trustees from
time to time, may be required as a condition to assure such
cleanup is satisfactorily accomplished within 24 hours. Said
sum shall be used by the Village to off set any costs which it
may incur in completing the cleanup and the balance of the
deposit, if any, should be refunded upon final inspection. In the
event insufficient funds are available to offset costs, the Village
reserves the right to seek reimbursement through any means
available to the Village. There will be no reissuance or new
issuance of special events permits to the applicant or his or her
organization until such payments are made.
(6) A contact person who will be available at all times during the
special event and that person's cell phone number which must be
accessible throughout the special event;
§ 241-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 241-3
241:274
§ 241-4. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Village Manager pursuant to this
chapter is able to appeal solely to the Board of Trustees. Any appeal to the
Board of Trustees under this chapter shall be made within 10 business days
of the date that the Village Manager issued the decision being appealed
from. The Board shall consider the matter at the next available regular
Board of Trustees meeting. Based upon testimony provided by both the
applicant and the Village Manager, and after consideration of impacts
generated by the special event related to the health, safety and welfare of
the Village, the Board may affirm, reverse, or modify the Village Manager's
initial decision.
(7) Applicant to deliver notice to property owners within a fivehundred-
foot radius of the special event site at least three weeks
prior to the special event (property owner list to be provided by the
Village); applicant must provide evidence of mailing, such as an
affidavit, and a copy of the notice to the Village Clerk;
(8) Proof of insurance, subject to Village Manager approval, based on
potential degree of risks posed by the special event;
(9) Signage and proposed location for such signage (to the extent
allowed by § 335-42);
(10) Such other information as may be required to process the
application.
B. Completed applications shall be submitted to the Village Clerk at least
60 days prior to the scheduled date of the special event.
C. Notwithstanding the requirements of § 241-3B, the Village Manager
may accept an untimely or inadequately submitted application if the
Village Manager determines that there is reasonably sufficient time to
review the application and any supplemental information, and process
the application. Said discretion shall apply to applications submitted in
accordance with § 241-7, Permit reissuance.
D. Upon receipt of a completed special event permit application, the
Village Clerk shall refer said application to the Village Manager for his
or her review.
(1) The Village Manager shall instruct all potentially affected Village
departments to review the completed special event permit
application and provide a report with recommendations concerning
all phases of the proposed special event.
E. Should the application be deemed consistent with the requirements of
this chapter, the Village Manager shall authorize the Village Clerk to
issue the special event permit. Any application that is denied by the
Village Manager shall be processed in accordance with § 241-4.
§ 241-3 SPECIAL EVENTS § 241-5
241:275
§ 241-5. Board of Trustees review required for certain special
events.
All special events applications that anticipate more than 300 attendees shall
be referred to the Board of Trustees for review and approval. Based upon
testimony and submissions provided by both the applicant and the Village
Manager, and after consideration of potential impacts and submissions
stemming from the special event on the health, safety and welfare of the
Village, the Board may approve the application as presented, approve the
application with conditions or deny the application.
§ 241-6. Permit expiration.
All permits approved under this chapter are effective for only the times
and dates specified within the application and further shall expire upon the
cessation of event activities as identified on the approved special events
permit application, unless said permit is reissued under the terms of § 241-7
or terminated under the terms of § 241-8.
§ 241-7. Permit reissuance.
Special event permits previously approved under this chapter may be
reissued by the Village Manager, provided that the proposed special event
does not materially differ from the special event previously approved and
provided that all requirements of this chapter are met. Requests to reissue
special event permits shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk
on an application form provided by the Village accompanied by the fee
or any reimbursement that may be established by the Village Board. Said
reissuance application shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to the start
date of the event.
§ 241-8. Termination of event permit.
A special event permit for an event in progress may be terminated by the
Chief of Police, the Fire Chief, or the respective designee of each if public
safety is compromised or threatened by activities generated during the
event, if the participants engage in violent, riotous, disorderly or destructive
behavior causing injury to persons or damage to property, or if there is a
violation of the conditions of the permit such that conditions of issuance are
no longer met.
§ 241-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 241-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 241-9
241:276
Chapter 243
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 101.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 220.
Trees and vegetation — See Ch. 266.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 275.
Land division — See Ch. 305.
§ 241-9 SPECIAL EVENTS § 241-9
241:277

ARTICLE I
Florence Drive
[Adopted 4-13-1992]
§ 243-1. Obstruction of northern entrance.
The Village hereby obstructs the northern entrance of Florence Drive where
Watertown Plank Road and Sunny Slope Road intersect so as to restrict
vehicular access from the north and to protect members of the public as a
whole. The portion of the roadway which is obstructed is legally described
as follows:
Commencing at the Southeast corner of the Northeast 1/4 of Section 26;
thence due West along the South line of the Northeast 1/4 of Section 26,
and the center line of Wisconsin Avenue, 30.00 feet; thence North 00° 15
00 West, 40.00 feet to the intersection of the Northerly right-of-way line
of Wisconsin Avenue with the Westerly right-of-way line of Sunny Slope
Road; thence continuing North 00° 15 00 West, along the Westerly rightof-
way line of Sunny Slope Road and the Easterly line of Block 4 in "Elm
Grove Terrace Subdivision," a recorded plat, 302.25 feet to the place of
beginning of the parcel of land hereinafter described; thence North 78°
41 55 West, along the Northerly line of said Block 4, 40.16 feet to the
Northwest corner of said Block 4, said point lying on the Easterly right-ofway
line of Florence Drive; thence North 01° 11 58 West, 220.82 feet, to
the Northeast corner of Block 3, "Elm Grove Terrace Subdivision"; thence
North 83° 11 00 East along the Southerly line of Watertown Road extended,
43.29 feet thence South 00° 15 00 East, parallel and 30.00 feet West of
the center line of Sunny Slope Road, 233.78 feet to the place of beginning
containing 9,355.83 square feet (0.2148 acres).
§ 243-2. Creation of berm.
Florence Drive will be obstructed or closed so as to prevent vehicular traffic
by the creation of a grassy berm area at the northern entrance to Florence
Drive.
§ 243-3. Access permitted by open entrance only.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit any person from driving
a vehicle upon Florence Drive, provided that the entrance which is open to
vehicular traffic is used to gain access.
§ 243-4. Posting of signs.
The Village shall post the appropriate signs so that members of the public
have notice that the right-of-way for vehicular traffic is restricted and to
provide notice to the public that the right-of-way remains open to pedestrian
traffic.
§ 243-1 SPECIAL EVENTS § 243-5
241:279
§ 243-5. Maintenance of closed portion by Village.
The Village retains the right to maintain the portion of Florence Drive which
is closed or obstructed pursuant to the provisions of this article.
§ 243-6. Removal of obstruction or reopening of street.
The Village retains the right to remove the obstruction of or reopen
Florence Drive if, at any time in the future, the Village would determine that
it is no longer in the best interests of the public as a whole to retain the
obstruction.
§ 243-7. Filing of article.
The Village shall duly record this article in the office of the Waukesha
County Register of Deeds.
§ 243-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 243-7
241:280
ARTICLE II
Posting of Building Numbers at Private Drive Entrances
[Adopted 4-23-2002]
§ 243-8. Findings; purpose; definitions.
§ 243-9. Posting requirement.
Owners of privately owned buildings located on private drives shall
cooperate with the Village in the placement of a sign by the Village that
identifies the street number(s) of such buildings within the public right-ofway
abutting such private drives.
§ 243-10. Sign specifications. [Amended 6-24-2002]
Any street number sign required under § 243-9 shall meet the following
requirements, except where, for reasons of potential confusion, uniqueness
of location or other compelling public safety reasons, the Village Board
authorizes a variance from the requirements of Subsection A, B or E (only
in regard to compliance with the design criteria for Exhibit A13), provided
the owners of all buildings accessed by the private drive have, by a majority
vote where a legally recognized homeowner's association does not exist,
made a timely request for a variance, in writing. If a homeowner's
association exists, a vote consistent with the governing documents for the
homeowner's association shall control.
A. Findings. The Village Board of Elm Grove finds that buildings located on
privately owned roads and driveways within the Village do not have
clearly posted street numbers that are clearly visible from the public
right-of-way. The Village Board of Elm Grove further finds that the lack
of clearly posted street numbers for buildings presents the potential for
confusion as to the location of such buildings by an emergency response
team.
B. Purpose. It is hereby declared necessary in the interest of public safety
and welfare that the Village place signage within the public rights-ofway
identifying the street numbers of privately owned buildings located
on abutting private roads and driveways adjacent thereto.
C. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PRIVATE DRIVE — Includes private access roads and private drives
used to reach privately owned buildings where one or more lots
serviced by such private access road or private drive does not have a
street yard (as defined in § 335-94 of this Code) that fronts entirely on
a public right-of-way.
13.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Village offices.
§ 243-8 SPECIAL EVENTS § 243-10
241:281
§ 243-11. Sign maintenance.
The owner(s) of private drives shall notify the Village if the posted sign
has become unreadable, in disrepair, in need of replacement, or has been
removed from its originally installed location.
A. The sign must identify the street numbers of all buildings located on the
abutting private drive. The numerals posted on the sign shall be at least
2 1/2 inches but not more than four inches in height.
B. When a sign identifies the building address numbers for multiple
buildings, the sign shall have each building address number listed in
numerical order except when the sign pertains to a condominium in
which case only the lowest and highest building address may be used.
C. The sign shall be placed within the public right-of-way at the
intersection of the private drive to such public right-of-way at a location
proximate to that intersection such that the sign is clearly legible from
the public highway. Owners of any building identified by the sign may
make a recommendation to the Village concerning the actual point of
installation.
D. The sign shall bear the words "private drive."
E. The building owner(s) may choose the configuration of the sign, subject
to the specifications set forth in this section and attached Exhibit A,14 of
all the buildings on a private drive. At the time of the initial installation
of a sign under this article, a majority of the owner(s) of all the
buildings on a private drive, where a legally recognized homeowner's
association does not exist, may elect to place a "drive name" on the sign
by making a written request to the Village. If a homeowner's association
exists, a vote consistent with the governing documents for the
homeowner's association shall control.
14.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Village offices.
§ 243-10 ELM GROVE CODE § 243-11
241:282
ARTICLE III
Street Numbering; Posting of Signs on All Primary Structures
[Adopted 9-10-200115]
§ 243-12. Street numbers; signs required.
A. Every owner of a house or building, commercial or residential, shall
place, or cause to be placed, a street number sign on or around such
structure in accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. All lots and houses on the south and west sides of all streets within the
Village shall be numbered with odd numbers and lots and houses on the
north and east side of all streets within the Village shall be numbered
with even numbers. Numbers shall advance in ascending order from an
easterly to westerly and/or southerly to northerly direction(s). Where a
building has more than one door serving separate occupants, a
separate number shall be assigned to each occupant's door; provided,
however, that if entrances are not more than 10 feet apart, the next
consecutive number shall be marked fractionally or use the suffix "A,"
"B," "C," etc. as may be required. Buildings fronting on two or more
streets shall have a sequential number assigned only to the main
entrance, unless other entrances serve different occupants. Where only
one number can be assigned to a house or building, the owner,
occupant, or agent of the house or building desiring distinctive
numbers for the upper and lower portion of the house or building, or for
any part of the house or building fronting on any street, shall use the
suffix "A," "B," "C," etc. as may be required.
C. The Village Clerk, in consultation with the Zoning Administrator, shall
be responsible for determining, in the Clerk's reasonable discretion, the
proper street number for every lot or property within the Village.
D. The numerals used shall be at least 2 1/2 inches in height. The number
sign shall be conspicuously placed so that the numbers are easily visible
and legible from the nearest public right-of-way or private drive as
defined in § 243-8C of this Code.
E. The cost of the numbers, and any needed replacements, shall be paid
for by the property owner.
15.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it take effect 3-11-2002.
§ 243-12 SPECIAL EVENTS § 243-12
241:283

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 3-22-2005]
§ 243-13. Duty to remove.
The owner, occupant or person in charge of each and every building or
property abutting on any sidewalk as identified in the Snow Removal
Property Inventory, which may by resolution be amended from time to time
by the Village Board of Trustees, shall keep such sidewalk free from snow
and ice and shall remove any snow or ice from the sidewalk within 24 hours
after the termination of any snowfall, or snow or ice accumulation. When
ice or snow has formed on any sidewalk such that it cannot be immediately
removed, said sidewalk shall be sprinkled with salt, sand or some other form
of acceptable deicing material. For purposes of this section, the keeping of a
sidewalk free from snow and ice shall mean the entire width of the sidewalk.
§ 243-14. Notice. [Amended 4-22-2008]
The Village shall annually notify, through posting, all owners or persons in
possession of property identified on the Snow Removal Property Inventory,
as referenced in § 243-13, to keep such sidewalks free from snow and ice
and to remove the same within 24 hours after every fall or accumulation of
snow or ice. Said notice shall further provide that if the owner or person
in possession fails to remove the snow or ice within 24 hours of the falling
or accumulation thereof, that the Village may cause said snow or ice to be
removed and charge the cost to the abutting property.
§ 243-15. Removal and disposal of snow and ice.
The property owner, person in possession, or person removing snow or ice
from any sidewalk, public or private driveway, parking lot or parking area
shall dispose of accumulated snow and ice upon such property as follows:
§ 243-16. Removal by Village; costs.
If the owner or person in possession of property fails to remove the snow
or ice from the sidewalks within the time specified in § 243-13, the Village
may have the snow or ice removed and charge the cost thereof against the
abutting property each time the snow or ice is removed. If the expense
of such removal is not paid forthwith it shall be a tax upon the premises
A. Snow or ice removed from private property shall not be deposited onto
any fire hydrant, mailbox, or upon any paved right-of-way, public
sidewalk, or other public place.
B. Snow and ice shall be deposited so as not to obstruct or interfere with
the passage or vision of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
C. Snow and ice shall be removed from any portion of a sidewalk that leads
to the street and intersects with the curb at an intersection or corner.
§ 243-13 SPECIAL EVENTS § 243-16
241:285
bounded by such sidewalk(s), to be levied and assessed thereon and
collected as provided in § 66.0907, Wis. Stats.
§ 243-17. Failure to remove snow; violations and penalties.
[Amended 7-26-2005]
A. A property owner has a duty to remove or cause to be removed any
snow and/or ice from those sidewalks abutting their building and/or
property in accordance with the provisions of § 243-13. Failure to
comply with such provisions authorizes the Village to have such work
performed as provided for in § 243-16.
B. In addition to those charges identified in § 243-16, any person who shall
violate any provision of this article or any rule or regulation made under
this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this
Code.
§ 243-16 ELM GROVE CODE § 243-17
241:286
Chapter 249
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motels — See Ch. 193.
§ 243-17 SPECIAL EVENTS § 243-17
241:287

ARTICLE I
Room Tax for Hotels and Motels
[Adopted 1-12-1987; as amended through 4-11-1994]
§ 249-1. Definitions.
In this section, "transient," "hotel," and "motel" have the same meanings set
forth in § 77.52(2)(a)(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 249-2. Imposition and rate.
For the privilege of furnishing, at retail, rooms or lodging to transients
by hotel keepers, motel operators, or other persons furnishing
accommodations that are available to the public (hereinafter sometimes
referred to as "operators"), irrespective of whether membership is required
for use of the accommodations, a room tax is imposed upon the operators
at the rate of 7% of the gross receipts from the lease or rental of such
accommodations, rooms or lodging within the Village of Elm Grove on or
after April 30, 1994.
§ 249-3. Exemption from selective sales tax.
Any tax imposed as provided in § 249-2 herein shall not be subject to the
selective sales tax imposed by § 77.52(2)(a)(1), Wis. Stats., in conformity
with § 66.75(1m), Wis. Stats.
§ 249-4. Monthly report of gross receipts.
Each operator engaged in furnishing such accommodations, rooms, or
lodging as defined in this article shall submit a monthly report to the
Village Treasurer's office, showing the gross receipts from furnishing such
accommodations, rooms or lodging, along with a copy of that operator's
state sales tax report for the business, along with the seven-percent tax for
the gross receipts as reported on or before the 20th day of the succeeding
month for the receipts of the immediately preceding month.
§ 249-5. Unpaid tax; interest rate; late filing penalty.
A. Whenever the Village Treasurer has probable cause to believe that the
correct amount of room tax has not been assessed or that the tax return
is not correct, such village officer shall be permitted to inspect and
audit the financial records of any operator subject to the provisions of
this article which pertain to the furnishing of accommodations to
determine whether or not the correct amount of room tax is assessed
and whether or not any room tax return is correct.
B. All information obtained pursuant to Subsection A herein shall be used
solely for the purposes stated in Subsection A and shall otherwise be
maintained confidential except that such information may be used by
village employees and officers in the performance of their official duties
and where a duty has been imposed by law or an order of a court. Any
§ 249-1 SPECIAL EVENTS § 249-5
241:289
§ 249-6. Penalty for conduct intended to defeat or evade tax
imposed.
In the event of a failure to pay the tax as provided in § 249-2, a penalty of
not more than 25% of the tax due for the previous year or $5,000, whichever
is less, shall be imposed on any operator in addition to the tax interest and
late filing penalty. Such penalty shall be enforceable by a forfeiture action
in municipal court.
statistics published regarding room taxes shall be classified so as to
not disclose the identity of particular returns. Any person violating this
subsection shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100 and not
more than $500.
C. Any operator refusing to comply with a request to audit and inspect
financial records made pursuant to Subsection A herein shall be subject
to forfeitures of 5% of the total room tax due under § 249-2 or
Subsection D.
D. Failure to pay the room tax shall obligate the operator to pay the
amount of room tax determined by the Village Treasurer in his or her
best judgment to be due plus interest as provided in Subsection E.
E. All unpaid taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month on the
unpaid balance from the due date of the return. No refund or
modification of the tax payment determined by the Village Treasurer
may be granted until the operator files a correct room tax return and
permits the village to inspect and audit his/her financial records as
provided in Subsection A.
§ 249-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 249-6
241:290
ARTICLE II
Collection of Taxes
[Adopted 12-15-1956; as amended 8-14-1989]
§ 249-7. Responsibilities of Village Treasurer.
§ 249-8. Dates for payment of taxes, special assessments and
special charges.
General property taxes, special assessments, special charges and special
taxes collectible under Chapter 74 of the Wisconsin Statutes are payable as
follows:
§ 249-9. When payment not to be in installments.
If the total real property tax is less than $100, it shall be paid in full on or
before January 31 in the year after the taxes are levied.
A. The Village Treasurer shall collect the general property taxes, special
assessments, special taxes and special charges shown in the tax roll.
B. The Village Treasurer shall use the tax receipts furnished by Waukesha
County; and, if requested by the person to whom the tax bill is sent
under § 74.09(3)(g), Wis. Stats., the Village Treasurer shall mail a copy
of the tax receipt to the requestor.
C. The Village Treasurer shall settle for all collections as provided in
Chapter 74 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
D. Pursuant to the authority granted by § 70.67(2), Wis. Stats., the Village
Board hereby agrees and binds the Village of Elm Grove to pay, in case
the Village Treasurer shall fail to do so, all taxes of any land required by
law to be paid by the Village Treasurer to the County Treasurer.
A. Real property taxes. All taxes on real property shall be paid in one of the
following ways:
(1) In full on or before January 31 in the year after the taxes are levied.
(2) In two equal installments, unless subject to § 249-9, with the first
installment payable on or before January 31 in the year after the
taxes are levied and the second installment payable on or before
July 31 of that same year.
B. Special assessments, special charges and other taxes. All special
assessments, special charges and special taxes that are placed in the
tax roll shall be paid in full on or before January 31 in the year after the
taxes are levied.
C. Personal property taxes. All taxes on personal property shall be paid in
full on or before January 31 in the year after the taxes are levied.
§ 249-7 SPECIAL EVENTS § 249-10
241:291
§ 249-10. To whom payments made.
§ 249-11. Delinquent first installment.
If the first installment of taxes on real property is not paid on or before
January 31 in the year after the taxes are levied, the entire amount of the
taxes remaining unpaid is delinquent as of February 1 of that same year.
§ 249-12. Delinquent second installment.
If the second installment of taxes on real property is not paid on or before
July 31 in the year after the taxes are levied, the entire amount of the taxes
remaining unpaid is delinquent as of August 1 of that same year.
§ 249-13. Delinquent annual payment.
§ 249-14. Payment of delinquent payments, interest and penalty.
A. Payments made on or before January 31 in the year after the taxes are
levied shall be made to the Village Treasurer.
B. All other payments shall be made to the County Treasurer.
A. If all special assessments, special charges, special taxes and personal
property taxes due under § 74.11(3) or 74.11(4), Wis. Stats., are not
paid in full on or before January 31 in the year after the taxes are levied,
the amounts unpaid are delinquent as of February 1 of that same year.
B. If any special assessments, special charges and special taxes are
entered in the tax roll as charges against a parcel of property and are
delinquent under Subsection A, the entire annual amount of real
property taxes on that parcel which is unpaid is delinquent as of
February 1 in the year after the taxes are levied.
A. All real property taxes, special assessments, special charges and
special taxes that become delinquent shall be paid, together with
interest and penalties charged from February 1 in the year in which
delinquency occurs, to the County Treasurer.
B. All personal property taxes that become delinquent shall be paid,
together with interest charged from February 1 in the year in which
delinquency occurs, to the Village Treasurer.
C. Interest. The interest rate on delinquent general property taxes, special
charges, special assessments and special taxes included in the tax roll
for collection is 1% per month or fraction of a month.
D. All interest on payments of delinquent personal property taxes
collected by the Village Treasurer shall be retained by the Village
Treasurer on behalf of the village.
§ 249-10 ELM GROVE CODE § 249-15
241:292
§ 249-15. Payment priority.
If the Village Treasurer receives a payment from a taxpayer which is not
sufficient to pay all general property taxes, special charges, special
assessments and special taxes due, the Treasurer shall apply the payment
to the amounts due, including interest and penalties, in the following order
as prescribed by § 74.11(12), Wis. Stats.:
§ 249-16. Taxes paid in advance of levy.
A. Special charges.
B. Special assessments.
C. Special taxes.
D. General property taxes.
A. Village Treasurer shall accept. The Village Treasurer shall accept
payment of general property taxes, special assessments, special
charges and special taxes in advance of the tax levy, subject to the
following:
(1) General property taxes, special assessments, special charges and
special taxes may be paid in advance of the levy either by single
payment or payment in installments of not less than $100. The total
taxes paid in advance of the levy may not exceed the total taxes
previously levied against the property, as shown on the previous tax
roll.
(2) Except as provided in Subsection B, general property taxes, special
assessments, special charges and special taxes may be paid in
advance of the levy during the period from August 1 until the third
Monday in December.
(3) The Village Treasurer shall hold and deposit general property
taxes, special assessments, special charges and special taxes paid
in advance of the levy. Those taxes, assessments and charges are
subject to settlement under § 74.23, Wis. Stats. Any interest earned
prior to settlement under § 74.23, Wis. Stats., on general property
taxes, special assessments, special charges or special taxes paid in
advance of the levy accrues to the village. [Amended
12-11-2000]
(4) Upon receipt of the tax roll, general property taxes, special
assessments, special charges and special taxes which have been
paid in advance shall be credited against the general property
taxes, special assessments, special charges and special taxes of the
property shown in the tax roll. If the total paid general property
taxes, special assessments, special charges and special taxes paid
in advance exceed the total shown in the tax roll, the Village
§ 249-15 SPECIAL EVENTS § 249-16
241:293
Treasurer shall return the excess to the person who made the
advance payment.16
B. Advance payment when ceasing business. Personal property taxes on
property used in a commercial enterprise which is ceasing business
may be paid in advance of the tax levy at any time before the third
Monday in December of the year in which business ceases.
16.Editor's Note: Former Section 10b, Advance payment depositories, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 12-11-2000.
§ 249-16 ELM GROVE CODE § 249-16
241:294
Chapter 255
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 87.
Dance halls — See Ch. 123.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 208.
§ 249-16 SPECIAL EVENTS § 249-16
241:295

ARTICLE I
Cigarette License
[Adopted 2-16-1955; as amended through 6-8-1981]
§ 255-1. Adoption of statutory provisions. [Amended 12-11-2000;
5-23-2006]
The statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect
to the licensing, sale and distribution of cigarettes in §§ 134.65 through
134.66, Wis. Stats., as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby
adopted and by reference made a part of this article of the Village of Elm
Grove, with the same force and effect as though set forth herein verbatim.
§ 255-2. Licensed premises subject to rules of sanitation.
The rules and regulations made by the State Board of Health governing
sanitation of restaurants shall apply to all licenses issued under this article.
No such license shall be issued unless the premises to be licensed conform
to such rules and regulations.
§ 255-3. Revocation of license.
The license or permit of any person shall stand revoked without further
proceedings upon the conviction of such person for maintaining a disorderly
or riotous, indecent or improper house, or for permitting gambling in any
form upon or within the premises or any appendage thereto. The license
shall also stand revoked without further proceedings if the licensed
premises are vacated and no application for transfer of the license to
another premises has been made within 60 days after the licensed premises
have been vacated.
§ 255-4. License fee. [Amended 12-11-2000]
The fee for such license shall be $100 per year or fractional part thereof.
§ 255-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any rule or
regulation made under this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 255-1 SPECIAL EVENTS § 255-5
241:297

ARTICLE II
School Property
[Adopted 7-8-1991]
§ 255-6. Smoking on school premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts in
any school-owned or -rented building or on school grounds, contrary to a
prohibition duly adopted and posted by the Elmbrook School Board:
§ 255-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any rule or
regulation made under this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
A. Smoke or possess a lighted cigar, lighted cigarette, lighted pipe or
other lighted instrument with which to smoke tobacco.
B. Place any tobacco product in one's mouth.
C. Violate "no smoking" signs posted by the Elmbrook School Board.
§ 255-6 SPECIAL EVENTS § 255-7
241:299

ARTICLE III
Possession of Cigarettes or Tobacco Products by Minors
[Adopted 6-24-2008]
§ 255-8. Purchase or possession.
The statutory provisions describing and defining regulations as described in
§ 254.92, Wis. Stats., are adopted and are incorporated by reference as part
of this article.
§ 255-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any rule or
regulation made under this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 255-8 SPECIAL EVENTS § 255-9
241:301

ARTICLE IV
Smoking Ban
[Adopted 6-22-201017]
§ 255-10. State statutes adopted.
The provisions of Chapter 101.123 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended
by 2009 Wisconsin Act 12, relating to the prohibition of smoking in various
enclosed places are hereby adopted and made part of this Code by
reference.
§ 255-11. Local authority; outside smoking.
The person in charge of a restaurant, tavern, private club, or retail
establishment located in the Village of Elm Grove may designate an outside
area that is a reasonable distance from any entrance to the restaurant,
tavern, private club, or retail establishment where customers, employees,
or persons associated with the establishment may smoke.
§ 255-12. Smoking prohibited in certain outdoor areas.
On Village-owned property smoking is prohibited within 25 feet of an
entrance to the Village Hall, Police Department, Fire Department, Library,
pool house, and Public Works garage. Smoking is also prohibited in the pool
deck area and on the soft surface of the children's playground.
§ 255-13. Violations and penalties.
As prescribed by state statues, a warning notice shall be issued to the
"person in charge" for the first violation. Penalties for violation shall be as
provided in § 1-17C of the Village Code of Ordinances.
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 7-5-2010.
§ 255-10 SPECIAL EVENTS § 255-13
241:303
Chapter 259
TRAILERS AND CAMPING
§ 259-1. Use of trailers and similar vehicles restricted.
No trailer or vehicle susceptible to use for human residence or habitation,
including but not limited to motor homes, trailers, campers, recreation
vehicles or boats, shall be permitted to be set up, parked or used for human
residence, habitation or for any purpose other than for storage.
§ 259-2. Camping limitations.
No person not a resident of the village or guest of a resident of the village
shall be permitted to camp overnight in the village.
§ 259-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
Chapter 262
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 208.
§ 262-1. Registration required. [Amended 5-23-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in sales within the
Village of Elm Grove without being registered for that purpose as provided
herein.
§ 262-2. Definitions. [Amended 2-26-2002; 5-23-2006]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — As defined by §§ 440.41 and 440.42, Wis.
Stats.
CLERK — The Village Clerk for the Village of Elm Grove.
MERCHANDISE — Includes personal property of any kind, and shall include
merchandise, goods, or materials provided incidental to services offered or
sold. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the seller for
the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.
§ 255-13 ELM GROVE CODE § 262-2
259:304
PERMANENT MERCHANT — Any person who, for at least one year prior to
the consideration of the application of this chapter to said merchant:
SPECIAL EVENT — Any occasion designated as such by the Village Board,
including but not limited to concerts, farmers' market day(s), flea market
event, craft enthusiasts' gatherings, fairs, shows, exhibitions, and Villagewide
celebrations or festivals and taking place within a specifically defined
area of any Village of Elm Grove park or lands controlled by the Village.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any individual who engages in the retail sale
of merchandise at any place in this state temporarily and who does not
intend to become and does not become a permanent merchant of such
place. For purposes of this section, sale of merchandise includes a sale
in which the personal services rendered upon or in connection with the
merchandise constitutes the greatest part of value for the price received,
but does not include a farm auction sale conducted by or for a resident
farmer of personal property used on the farm, or the sale of produce or
other perishable products at retail or wholesale by a resident of this state.
VENDOR — Any person, entity or organization who exhibits, displays, sells,
or offers for sale such products from a stand, wagon, handcart, pushcart,
motor vehicle, table, display unit, or his or her person. A vendor includes
any street vendor or transient merchant.
§ 262-3. Exemptions. [Amended 5-23-2006]
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter:
Has continuously operated an established place of business in the local
trade area among the communities bordering the place of sale; or
A.
Has continuously resided in the local trade area among the
communities bordering the place of sale and now does business from
his/her residence.
B.
A. Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods
to regular customers on established routes.
B. Any person selling merchandise at wholesale to dealers in such
merchandise.
C. Any person selling agricultural products that the person has grown.
D. Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders at the
home of the buyer for merchandise regularly offered for sale by such
merchant within this county and who delivers such merchandise in his
or her regular course of business.
E. Any person who has an established place of business where the
merchandise being sold is offered for sale on a regular basis and in
which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested, a
home visit by said person.
§ 262-2 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 262-3
259:305
§ 262-4. Registration. [Amended 4-22-2003; 5-23-2006]
F. Any person who has had, or one who represents a company that has
had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer.
G. Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the
sale or offering for sale of merchandise.
H. Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court
and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
I. Any volunteer up to and through the 12th grade of a public or private
school who engages in direct sales for or on behalf of a charitable
organizations, provided that such charitable organization is registered
under § 440.41, Wis. Stats. All other charitable organizations, provided
that such organization is registered under § 440.41, Wis. Stats., shall be
regulated as provided in § 262-4.1 of this chapter. Any charitable
organization engaging in the sale of merchandise and not registered
under § 440.41, Wis. Stats., or which is exempt from that statute's
registration requirements, shall be required to register under this
chapter.
J. Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom
complaint has been made to the Village Clerk that such person is a
transient merchant, provided that there is submitted to the Village
Clerk proof that such person has leased for at least one year, or
purchased, the premises from which he/she has conducted business in
the market area for at least one year prior to the date the complaint was
made.
K. Any individual licensed by an examining board as defined in § 15.01(7),
Wis. Stats.
L. Transient merchants while doing business at special events authorized
by the Village Board.
A. Applicants for registration must complete and return to the Village
Clerk a registration form furnished by the Village Clerk which shall
require the following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary
address, if any.
(2) Date of birth, height, weight, and color of hair and eyes.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the transient merchant represents,
or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold.
(4) The address and telephone number from which business will be
conducted, if any.
§ 262-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 262-4
259:306
(5) The nature of the business to be conducted and a brief description
of the merchandise, and any services offered.
(6) Proposed methods of delivery of merchandise, if applicable.
(7) The make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by
the applicant in the conduct of his/her business.
(8) The three most recent cities, villages, or towns where the applicant
conducted his/her business.
(9) The place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven
days after leaving the Village of Elm Grove.
(10) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or ordinance violation related to the applicant's transient
merchant business within the last five years, the nature of the
offense and the place of conviction.
B. Applicants shall present to the Village Clerk for examination:
(1) A valid driver's license or other government-issued photo
identification.
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the Sealer of
Weights and Measures where the applicant's business requires use
of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities.
(3) Any transient merchant involved in the handling of food shall
present a temporary food establishment permit issued by a local
health department that has been granted agent status under
§ 254.69(2), Wis. Stats. Said temporary food establishment permit
must be valid through the date(s) of the event for which a permit is
requested.
C. At the time of registration, a nonrefundable fee, to be determined by the
Village Board of Trustees from time to time by resolution, shall be paid
to the Village Clerk, except charitable organization applicants shall be
exempt from the fee, provided that such organization is registered
under § 440.41, Wis. Stats.
D. The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the Village Clerk his/
her agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought
against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the
applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant,
in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served
personally.
E. Within seven business days of payment of the required fee and the
signing of said statement, the Village Clerk shall, subject to the
provisions of § 262-5B of this chapter, register the applicant as a
transient merchant and date the entry. Said registration shall be valid
for a period of six months from the date of entry and shall be subject to
§ 262-4 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 262-4
259:307
§ 262-4.1. Charitable organization registration. [Added 5-23-2006]
subsequent revocation under the provisions of § 262-9 of this chapter.
[Amended 4-22-2008]
F. All transient merchant permits shall include a photo and signature of
the applicant and the signature of the Village Clerk. The applicant must
appear before the Village Clerk or designee at the Village of Elm Grove
to have said photo taken and to provide an original signature. Failure to
do so within five business days after notification will result in the permit
being invalid. [Added 4-22-2008]
A. Permit required. Any charitable organization may solicit upon obtaining
a permit subject to the regulations and conditions herein provided. The
charitable organization must first provide proof that it is registered
under § 440.41, Wis. Stats. Applicants must complete and return to the
Village Clerk a registration form furnished by the Village Clerk which
shall require the following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary
address, if any.
(2) Date of birth, height, weight, and color of hair and eyes.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the organization that
the transient merchant represents or is employed by, or whose
merchandise is being sold.
(4) The address and telephone number from which business will be
conducted, if any.
(5) The nature of the business to be conducted and a brief description
of the merchandise, and any services offered.
(6) Proposed methods of delivery of merchandise, if applicable.
(7) The make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by
the applicant in the conduct of his/her business.
(8) The three most recent cities, villages, or towns where the applicant
conducted his/her business.
(9) The place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven
days after leaving the Village of Elm Grove.
(10) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or ordinance violation related to the applicant's transient
merchant business within the last five years, the nature of the
offense and the place of conviction.
(11) The applicant shall present to the Village Clerk a valid form of
government-issued photo identification.
§ 262-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 262-4.1
259:308
§ 262-5. Investigation. [Amended 5-23-2006]
§ 262-6. Appeal. [Amended 5-23-2006]
Any person refused or denied registration may appeal the denial through
the appeal procedure provided under the provisions of §§ 68.07 through
68.16, Wis. Stats.
§ 262-7. Regulation of transient merchants. [Amended 5-23-2006]
(12) The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the Village Clerk
his/her agent to accept service of process in any civil action
brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service
performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales
activities of the applicant, in the event the applicant cannot, after
reasonable effort, be served personally.
B. Processing and issuance. Within seven business days of receipt of
application, the Village Clerk shall, subject to the provisions of § 262-5
of this chapter, register the applicant as a transient merchant and date
the entry. Said registration shall be valid for a period not to exceed six
months. [Amended 4-22-2008]
C. All charitable organization transient merchant permits shall include a
photo and signature of the applicant and the signature of the Village
Clerk. The applicant must appear before the Village Clerk or designee
at the Village of Elm Grove to have said photo taken and to provide an
original signature. Failure to do so within five business days after
notification will result in the permit being invalid. [Amended
4-22-2008]
A. Upon receipt of each application, the Village Clerk shall cause to be
made and completed an investigation of the statements made in such
registration.
B. The Village Clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is
determined, pursuant to the investigation above, that the application
contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement;
complaints of a material nature have been received against the
applicant by authorities in the most recent cities, villages and towns,
not exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business;
the applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance
violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly
related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or the
applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of § 262-4B of
this chapter.
A. Prohibited practices.
(1) A transient merchant shall be prohibited from calling at any
dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00
§ 262-4.1 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 262-7
259:309
a.m., except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place
where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No
Solicitors," or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of
any dwelling place; or remaining on any premises after being asked
to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority
over such premises.
(2) A transient merchant shall not misrepresent or make false,
deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality,
quantity, or characteristics of any merchandise offered for sale, the
purpose of his/her visit, his/her identity or the identity of the
organization he/she represents. A charitable organization transient
merchant shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of
the merchandise being offered will actually be used for the
charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Said
portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the
merchandise.
(3) No transient merchant shall impede the free use of sidewalks and
streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from
vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
(4) No transient merchant shall make any loud noises or use any
sound-amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced
is capable of being plainly heard outside a one-hundred-foot radius
of the source.
(5) No transient merchant shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in
or around the area in which he/she is conducting business.
B. Disclosure requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to
a prospective customer, a transient merchant shall expressly
disclose his/her name, the name of the company or organization he/
she is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of merchandise or
services he/she offers to sell.
(2) If any sale of merchandise is made by a transient merchant, or any
offer for the later delivery of merchandise is taken by the seller, the
buyer shall have the right to cancel said transaction if it involves
the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25. In
accordance with the procedure set forth in § 423.203, Wis. Stats.,
the seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed
notice of that fact [§§ 423.203(1)(a),(b) and (c), and (3), Wis. Stats.].
(3) If the transient merchant takes a sales order for the later delivery
of merchandise, he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide
the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the
agreement; the amount paid in advance (whether full, partial, or no
advance payment is made); the name, address and telephone
number of the seller; the delivery or performance date; and
§ 262-7 ELM GROVE CODE § 262-7
259:310
§ 262-8. Records. [Amended 5-23-2006]
The Chief of Police shall report to the Village Clerk all convictions for
violation of this chapter, and the Village Clerk shall note any such violation
on the record of the registrant convicted.
§ 262-9. Revocation of registration. [Amended 5-23-2006]
§ 262-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005;
5-23-2006]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 262-11. Special event vendor application requirements. [Added
2-26-2002]
Any vendor wishing to conduct business at a special event shall:
whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms
thereof.
(4) A transient merchant must have the Village of Elm Grove transient
merchant identification card in plain view on the front of his/her
person with the name and photo unobstructed at all times. Failure
to do so will result in revocation of the permit in addition to
penalties set forth in § 262-10. [Added 4-22-2008]
A. Registration may be revoked by the Village Clerk if the registrant made
any material omission or materially inaccurate statements in the
application for registration; made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or
misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in
transient sales; violated any provision of this chapter; or was convicted
of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related
to the registrant's fitness to engage in selling. The permit may also be
revoked if the permittee conducts solicitation activities contrary to the
provisions contained in the permit or in such a manner as to create a
public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace or endanger the
health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
B. Written notice of such revocation, and the reason or reasons therefor,
shall be served personally or by mailing the same to the permit holder
at the named premises on the original application.
C. Appeal from revocation shall be made to the Village Board of Trustees
through the appeal procedure provided under the provisions of §§ 68.07
through 68.16, Wis. Stats.
A. Apply to the Village Manager or Village Clerk for a temporary vending
permit.
§ 262-7 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 262-11
259:311
§ 262-12. Temporary vending permits for special events. [Added
2-26-2002]
§ 262-13. Permit fee. [Added 2-26-2002]
The fee for temporary vending permits for special events shall be $25.
§ 262-14. Imposition of costs. [Added 2-26-2002]
The Village Manager shall be authorized to impose any extraordinary
expenses incurred by the Village associated with the vending activity of
the holder of a temporary vending permit as costs on such vendor.
B. Submit the application to the Village at least 15 working days prior to
the beginning of the event for which the permit is sought.
C. If required by an applicable Village's request for proposal (RFP), post a
bond or cash deposit. Bond proceeds or cash deposits shall be applied
to any added costs the Village may incur from vending activities
pursuant to § 262-14.
D. Disclose any instances where vendor was denied a permit or prosecuted
for any criminal or ordinance violation related to the sale of goods.
A. The Village Manager or Village Clerk may issue not more than a total of
five temporary vending permits for any single special event except
farmers' market day(s), flea market event or craft enthusiasts'
gatherings which shall have a maximum of 25 temporary vending
permits; or any number approved for any special event as may be
specifically authorized by resolution by the Village of Elm Grove Village
Board.
B. The temporary vending permit shall be valid only for the duration of the
specified special event.
C. Any vendor to whom a temporary vending permit is granted shall be
subject to the operating regulations set forth in § 262-4B(3) to the
extent applicable and § 262-7A of this chapter.
D. Any vendor to whom a temporary vending permit is granted shall
prominently display the permit during the special event.
E. Any vendor who will be selling or distributing food shall present a
temporary food establishment permit issued by a local health
department that has been granted agent status under § 254.69(2), Wis.
Stats., at the time of applying for a temporary vending permit. Said
temporary food establishment permit must be valid through the date(s)
of the event for which a permit is requested. [Amended 4-22-2003]
F. The Village of Elm Grove is exempt from all temporary vending permit
requirements for special events but shall comply with any applicable
Waukesha County temporary food establishment permit requirement.
§ 262-11 ELM GROVE CODE § 262-14
259:312
Extraordinary expenses may include but are not limited to those which the
Village incurs for the purpose of restoring the event grounds or premises to
the condition prior to the event, repair of any damage to the event grounds
or premises from vending activities or any cleanup/custodial services
necessitated by the special event(s).
Chapter 266
TREES AND VEGETATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 220.
Land division — See Ch. 305.
Zoning — See Ch. 335.
§ 266-1. Definitions. [Amended 4-26-2005]
As used in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context:
APPLICANT — The owner or representative of an owner of a lot, parcel, or
tract on which a Tree Impact Activity is sought.[Added 2-26-2013]
BRUSH — For the purposes of § 266-6D, any cut vegetative material,
regardless of size or condition.
CALIPER — The diameter of a Tree when measured at six inches above
grade. Caliper shall be the form of size measurements of trees four inches
and less in diameter.[Added 2-26-2013]
CONSTRUCTION — The act or process of building a permanent structure or
any process to enhance a permanent structure or any process to gain access
to or supply utilities to a permanent structure.[Added 2-26-2013]
CONTROLLED VEGETATION — Which is hereby declared to be non-native
invasive species and prohibited from being planted and consists of the
following:[Amended 5-28-2007]
A. Buckthorns, common and glossy.
B. Japanese barberry.
C. Honeysuckles, tartarian, morrows and bella.
D. Multifora rose.
E. Garlic mustard.
F. Spotted knapweed.
G. Crown vetch.
H. Teasels, cut leaved and common.
§ 262-14 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 266-1
259:313
DESTROY — The use of chemicals, cutting, tillage, or a combination thereof
to effectively prevent regulated vegetation from maturing.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of the trunk of a
Tree, stated in inches and measured at 4 1/2 feet above the existing grade
at the base of the Tree. DBH shall be the form of size measurement for Trees
greater than four inches in diameter.[Added 2-26-2013]
HAZARDOUS TREE —
LAND MANAGEMENT PLAN — A written plan relating to management
of a lawn or vacant lot, other than a wooded lot, which contains a legal
description of the property upon which the grass will exceed nine inches
in length, a statement of intent and purpose for the length of the grass,
a general description of the vegetation types, plants, and plant succession
involved, and the specific management and maintenance techniques to be
employed. The management plan must include provisions for cutting to
maintain a length not exceeding 18 inches in height and for a distance of
not less than four feet adjacent to neighboring property lines unless waived
by the abutting property owner on the side so affected.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or any
legal entity.
PUBLIC NUISANCE —
I. Dames rocket.
J. Wild parsnip.
K. Sweet clovers, white and yellow.
L. Reed canary grass.
M. Cattails.
Any Tree or Shrub, public or private, that may be injurious or
detrimental to the community by causing injuries to person or property
due to a defective, storm-damaged, nature-of-species, insect-infested or
diseased condition. [Amended 2-26-2013]
A.
Any Tree or Shrub that overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public
right-of-way in the Village in such a manner as to impede or interfere
with any public easement or traffic or travel on such pathway, street
or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, any Tree
or Shrub that obstructs street illumination or the vision of persons
traveling such pathway, street, or other public right-of-way.
B.
Any part of a Tree or Shrub that, due to disease, insect infestation or
any defective condition, is likely to fall and impair access to a public
right-of-way or place. [Amended 5-28-2007]
C.
Any Tree, Shrub, or part of, which by reason of its condition, interferes
with the use of any public area and/or is infected with a plant disease,
is infested with injurious insects or pests, is injurious to public
A.
§ 266-1 ELM GROVE CODE § 266-1
259:314
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Premises owned or controlled by the Village,
including without limitation because of enumeration, public sites, parks,
playgrounds, streets, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, and the terrace strip
between the lot line and the curb or improved portion of any public way.
PUBLIC TREE — Any Tree located on any Village-owned property, including,
without limitation, parkways, roads, parks and other rights-of-way.[Added
2-26-2013]
REGULATED VEGETATION — Which is hereby declared to be noxious,
consists of the following:
improvements or endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of persons
or property due to size, location and/or density of Trees or Shrubs.
B. Dutch elm disease.
Elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus
rufipes.
C.
D. Oak wilt disease.
Any living or standing elm Tree or part thereof infected with the Dutch
elm disease fungus or in a weakened condition which harbors any of the
elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes
(Marsh.).
E.
Any dead elm or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps or other
elm material from which the bark has not been Removed.
F.
Any elm firewood from which the bark has not been Removed or
sprayed with an effective elm-bark-beetle-destroying concentrate and
covered with a tarpaulin in such a way as to inhibit the escape or
entrance of said beetle.
G.
Any living or standing Tree or part thereof in the red oak group, such
as red, pin, scarlet and black oak, infected to any degree with the oak
wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum (Bretz) Hunt.
H.
Any living or standing Tree in the white oak group, such as white oak,
bur oak, and bicolor oak, that poses a threat of transmission of the oak
wilt fungus to other Trees of the same species through interconnected
root systems.
I.
Any dead oak or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps or other
oak material from which the bark has not been Removed.
J.
Any oak firewood from which the bark has not been Removed or
sprayed with an effective two-lined chestnut-borer-destroying
concentrate and covered with a tarpaulin in such a way as to inhibit the
escape or entrance of said beetle.
K.
L. A Tree that is a hazardous Tree defined herein.
M. Emerald Ash Borer. [Added 5-28-2007]
§ 266-1 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 266-1
259:315
REMOVE(D) or REMOVAL — The felling and/or destruction of a Tree, or
the effective destruction of a Tree through damage or otherwise.[Added
2-26-2013]
REPLACEMENT TREE — A Tree installed pursuant to a Tree Removal
Permit to replace a Significant Tree that an Applicant has been authorized
to Remove.[Added 2-26-2013]
SHRUB — A woody plant that is never tree-like in habit and produces
branches or shoots from or near the base.[Added 2-26-2013]
SIGNIFICANT TREE — Any Tree located on public property, other than
a Hazard Tree or Public Nuisance, having a DBH of six inches or
more.[Added 2-26-2013]
TOPPING — The severe cutting back of internodule branch parts of two
inches or greater in diameter, thereby as to Remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the Tree.
TREE — A self-supporting, woody plant, together with its root system, a
more or less well-defined crown, and a mature height of at least eight feet
or an ornamental Tree or shade Tree or Shrub of any variety.[Amended
2-26-2013]
TREE IMPACT ACTIVITY — Any construction activity on any lot that will or
is likely to involve the Removal of a Significant Tree.[Added 2-26-2013]
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — A permit issued by the Village Manager or his/
her designee authorizing the Removal of a Tree pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter.[Added 2-26-2013]
WOODED LOT — Any lot, whether developed or otherwise, which contains
a mature Tree cover of 50% or greater. A wooded lot is not subject to the
maintenance requirement of § 266-6D herein.
YARDS — Any unpaved open space on a lot together with the area between
the lot line and the curb or improved portion of any public way.
A. Thistle or Canada thistle.
B. Leafy spurge.
C. Field bindweed (Creeping Jenny).
D. Burdock.
E. Nettle.
F. Poison ivy.
G. Purple loosestrife.
Grass or weeds of any kind where height or length exceeds seven
inches, but not including grasses included as part of a land
management plan approved by the Village under this chapter.
H.
I. All other noxious weeds as specified in § 66.0407, Wis. Stats.
§ 266-1 ELM GROVE CODE § 266-2
259:316
§ 266-2. Jurisdiction of Public Works/Utilities Committee.
[Amended 3-23-2004]
The Public Works/Utilities Committee of the Village Board shall have
jurisdiction to monitor compliance with the provisions of this chapter. It may
employ a forester or designate a municipal employee to perform the duties
of forester under § 27.09, Wis. Stats., and exercise the powers granted by
the Board under this chapter.
§ 266-3. Dutch elm disease, Emerald Ash Borer, oak wilt control
and prevention, and elm bark beetles. [Amended 5-28-2007;
2-24-2014]
A. Intent and purpose of chapter: to declare Dutch elm disease, elm bark
beetles, Emerald Ash Borer, and oak wilt public nuisances.
(1) Whereas, the Village Board has determined that there are many
elm Trees growing on public and private premises within the
Village, the loss of which would substantially depreciate the value
of public and private property, impair the use and enjoyment of
public and private premises and erode the tax base of the Village.
The health and life of these Trees is threatened by a fatal disease
known as "Dutch elm disease," which is spread by the elm bark
beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes
(March). The Village Board hereby declares its intention to control
and prevent the spread of Dutch elm disease and the insect pests
and vectors that carry such disease and declares Dutch elm disease
and the elm bark beetles that carry such disease to be public
nuisances.
(2) Whereas, the Village Board has determined that there are many
oak Trees growing on public and private premises within the
Village, the loss of which would substantially depreciate the value
of public and private property, impair the use and enjoyment of
public and private premises and erode the tax base of the Village.
The health and life of these Trees is threatened by a fatal disease
known as "oak wilt disease," which is spread by Nitidulid beetles.
The Village Board hereby declares its intention to control and
prevent the spread of oak wilt disease and the insect pests and
vectors that carry such disease and declares that oak wilt disease
and Nitidulid beetles that carry such disease are public nuisances.
(3) Whereas, the Village Board has determined that there are many
ash Trees growing on public and private premises within the
Village, the loss of which would substantially depreciate the value
of public and private property, impair the use and enjoyment of
public and private premises and erode the tax base of the Village.
The health and life of these Trees is threatened by an extremely
aggressive exotic insect known as Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire or
Emerald Ash Borer. The Village Board hereby declares its intention
§ 266-2 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 266-3
259:317
to control and prevent the spread of Emerald Ash Borer by any
current method.
B. Abatement of Hazardous or Public Nuisances; duty of Forester.
(1) Whenever the Forester, after inspection, reasonably determines
that a public nuisance, as herein defined, exists on public property
in the Village, the Forester shall immediately abate or cause the
abatement of such nuisance in such manner as to destroy or
prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch elm disease, oak
wilt and any vectors which would carry these diseases and any ash
Trees with Emerald Ash Borer. [Amended 5-28-2007]
(2) When the Forester reasonably determines that a public nuisance
exists upon private premises, the Forester shall immediately serve
or cause to be served, personally or by registered mail, an
abatement notice. The abatement notice shall be served on the
owner of such property, if the owner can be found, or otherwise
upon the occupant thereof. If the owner or occupant cannot be
found, such notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village. The abatement notice shall be in
writing and shall: [Amended 5-28-2007; 2-26-2013]
(a) Describe the nuisance and recommended procedures for its
abatement; and
(b) State that the owner shall abate the nuisance, at the owner's
expense, within 14 days of the date of the notice unless, within
10 days of the date of the notice, the property owner requests a
hearing before the Director of Public Works to show that such
nuisance does not exist or does not endanger the health of elm
Trees, oak Trees or ash Trees in the Village.
(3) Should the property owner request a hearing before the Director of
Public Works to show that such nuisance does not exist or does not
endanger the health of elm Trees, oak Trees or ash Trees in the
Village, a hearing before the Director of Public Works shall be
scheduled, not less than 14 days after service of such written
notice, on the abatement action to be taken. The decision of the
Public Works Director may be appealed to the Public Works
Committee within 10 days of the Public Works Director’s decision.
Decisions of the Public Works Committee such appeal shall be final.
[Added 2-26-201318]
(4) If the Director of Public Works determines that a public nuisance
exists following a hearing under this section, the property owner
shall abate the nuisance as directed within 10 days after such
hearing. The Forester may extend the time allowed the property
owner for abatement work for not more than 10 additional days.
18.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
B(3) through (5) as Subsection B(4) through (6), respectively.
§ 266-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 266-3
259:318
§ 266-4. Regulation of hazardous Trees.
(5) If abatement does not occur in the time allotted, the Forester shall
proceed to abate the nuisance by means of a court order with the
assistance of the Village Attorney.
(6) Any person violating this chapter shall, in addition to performing
abatement, be subject to a forfeiture for each day of each violation.
C. Spraying or other treatment.
(1) Whenever the Forester shall determine that any elm Tree or part
thereof is infected with Dutch elm disease fungus, or is in a
weakened condition and harbors elm bark beetles, the Forester
may spray or otherwise effectively treat with an elm-bark-beetledestroying
concentrate all elm Trees within a one-thousand-foot
radius of the infected Tree.
(2) In order to facilitate the work and minimize the inconvenience to
the public of any spraying operation conducted under this chapter,
the Forester shall give advance public notice of such operation by
public media, public service announcements or other effective
means and shall post appropriate warning notices in the areas and
along the streets where Trees are to be sprayed at least 24 hours in
advance of spraying. When any residue or concentrate from
municipal spraying operations is likely to be deposited on any
public street, the Forester shall also notify the Chief of Police, who
shall take all necessary steps to make and enforce temporary
parking and traffic regulations on such streets as conditions
require. Temporary "No Parking" notices shall be posted in each
block of any affected street at least 24 hours in advance of spraying
operations.
(3) When warning notices and temporary "No Parking" notices have
been given and posted in accordance with Subsection C(2) of this
section, the Village shall disallow any claim for damages to any
vehicle caused by such spraying operations.
(4) When Trees on private property are to be sprayed, the Forester
shall notify the owner or occupant of such property and proceed in
accordance with the requirements of Subsection B of this section.
A. Legislative intent. The Village Board finds that Trees having a defective
or diseased condition, or are insect infested, within the Village are
hazardous and may result in injury to person or property. The Village
Board hereby declares its intention to locate and examine such Trees
and take appropriate steps for abatement of such hazardous conditions.
[Amended 5-28-2007]
B. Planting of Vegetation on Public Property. No Tree, or Shrub, woody
plant or herbaceous plant shall be planted in any of the public rights-ofway
or a public easement in the Village by a non-Village agent unless
§ 266-3 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 266-4
259:319
§ 266-5. Injury to Public Trees and Shrubs prohibited.
such Tree, Shrub, woody plant or herbaceous plant and the place
where such Tree, Shrub, woody plant or herbaceous plant is to be
planted has first been approved by the Village Public Works/Utilities
Committee upon the recommendation of the Forester of the Village.
There shall be a written agreement executed whenever planting by
any non-Village agent is allowed in a form satisfactory to the Village
Attorney. [Amended 2-26-2013]
C. Abatement of nuisances. The Forester shall follow the procedures
outlined in § 266-3B of this chapter in abating nuisances under this
section arising out of hazardous, diseased, or defective Trees. The
Village hereby declares that in assessing special charges under this
chapter, it is exercising its police power, and no damages shall be
awarded to any owner for the destruction of any Tree creating a hazard
due to a diseased or defective condition.
A. Damage to Public Trees. No person shall, upon public property without
permission from the Village Forester, do or cause to be done by others
any of the following acts:
(1) Secure, fasten, nail, or run any rope, wire, sign, or materials
around, into, or through a Tree or Shrub, or prune a Tree or Shrub,
except in emergencies such as storms or accidents. [Amended
2-26-2013]
(2) Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any Tree or Shrub or
permit any fire to burn where it will injure any Tree or Shrub.
(3) Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil or other injurious
substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon any Tree or Shrub or
their root zone.
(4) Remove any guard stake or other device or material intended to
protect a Public Tree or Shrub or close or obstruct an open space
about the base of a Public Tree or Shrub designed to permit access
of air, water or fertilizer.
(5) Topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person or
firm to top any street tree, park tree, or other Trees on public
property. Trees severely damaged by storm or other causes, or
certain Trees under utility wires or other obstructions where
standard pruning practices are impractical, are exempt from this
chapter.
(6) Trimming of public elms and oaks during growing season. No
person or firm shall, from April 15 until October 1, trim any public
elm or oak tree without permission of the Forester. Exceptions are
for storm-damaged Trees that were damaged in the current
growing season. Any emergency trimming of elms and oaks during
the growing season must have wounds treated with a wound
§ 266-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 266-5
259:320
treatment compound or nontoxic thick paint at the time of limb
Removal.
B. Excavation and construction. No person or entity shall excavate any
ditches, tunnels or trenches or install pavement within the drip line of
any Public Tree unless said plans have been noted and approved by the
Department of Public Works and have been reviewed and approved by
the Forester. In the process of obtaining street excavation permission
for the proposed work, the applicant shall indicate conflicts with and/or
disruption to, existing Public Trees resulting from said work. All Public
Trees near any excavation or construction of any building structure or
street work shall be sufficiently guarded and protected by those
responsible for such work to prevent an injury to said Trees.
C. Landscaping. Except for the Village Department of Public Works, no
person or entity shall, with or without intent, disturb or destroy existing
roots within the drip line of any Public Trees without first obtaining
permission of the Forester. No person or firm, with or without intent,
will increase soil depth to any existing grade within the drip line of any
Public Trees without permission of the Forester. Any soil added without
permission will be Removed at the offender's expense.
D. Tree Removal Permit Required. [Added 2-26-2013]
(1) No person shall Remove or damage any Public Tree as outlined in
§ 266-5. If, during Construction, a Public Tree will be impacted, a
Tree Removal Permit is required. Tree replacement obligations will
be incurred by the applicant.
(2) A Tree Removal Permit fee shall be established and reviewed or
amended by the Village Board. The fee shall be waived for local
units of government, school districts and for the Removal of a Tree
pursuant to the provisions of the Village Code of Ordinances
concerning the Removal of Hazardous Trees.
(3) A Tree Removal Permit shall require the protection of other Trees
located on, or adjacent to, the subject property.
E. Application for Tree Removal Permit. [Added 2-26-2013]
(1) A Tree Removal Permit application shall be submitted on a form
approved by the Village Manager or his/her designee along with a
Tree Removal Permit Fee.
(2) The Tree Removal Permit shall be issued by the Village Manager or
his/her designee upon determination that the application form has
been properly completed, that the applicable permit fee has been
paid, and the required replacement obligation, if any, has been
satisfied.
F. Application forms, fees, rules, and appeals. [Added 2-26-2013]
§ 266-5 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 266-5
259:321
(1) The Village Manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized to
establish any incidental rules or regulations that may be necessary
to implement the provisions of this chapter, including the
preparation of the application, permit, or other forms.
(2) In the event the applicant objects to a determination of the Village
Manager's designee in connection with a Tree Removal Permit or
Tree Removal Permit application under this chapter, an applicant
may appeal such determination by filing a written appeal with the
Village Manager within 10 days after the Village Manager's
designee's determination. The appeal shall set forth with
particularity the aspects of the Village Manager's designee's
determination from which the appeal is sought and the basis on
which the applicant believes the Village Manager's designee's
determination was inconsistent with the standards of this chapter.
The Village Manager shall notify, in writing, the person filing the
appeal of his/her decision regarding the appeal.
(3) The decision of the Village Manager may be appealed to the Village
Board of Trustees within 30 days of the Village Manager's decision.
The decision of the Village Board of Trustees shall be final.
G. Tree Replacement Obligations. Whenever a Tree Removal Permit is
subject to a Tree Replacement Obligation due to the Removal of a
Significant Tree, the Village Manager or his/her designee shall
determine what the tree replacement obligation shall be. The obligation
shall be based on the size of the Significant Tree(s) affected and subject
to the following terms: [Added 2-26-2013]
(1) The Village Manager or his/her designee shall require the applicant
to replace the Significant Tree(s) Removed with new Trees, each of
which shall have a minimum Caliper of not less than two inches.
The total Caliper of replacement tree(s) shall equal or exceed the
DBH of the tree(s) Removed, unless the Village Manager or his/her
designee determines that full replacement would result in
unreasonable crowding of Trees upon the right-of-way adjacent to
the Subject Property as administered per § 266-5H(4).
(2) The Village Manager or his/her designee shall have prior approval
of all species of Trees to be planted on the property when the
planting of replacement Trees is required.
(3) An applicant shall be required to replace any replacement Tree that
does not survive the second anniversary of its installation.
(4) If the adjacent Village property cannot accommodate the
replacement Trees, the applicant will pay a fee in lieu of planting
replacement Trees on Village property of $400 per Tree Removed.
The Village shall than use such funds to purchase and plant Trees
elsewhere on Village property.
§ 266-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 266-5
259:322
§ 266-6. Regulation of vegetation. [Amended 4-26-2005]
(5) Permit Revocation occurs when there is a violation of any provision
of this chapter and shall be grounds for revocation of any permit or
approval issued pursuant to this chapter.
A. Legislative intent. It is the intent of the Board of Trustees to regulate
the growth of certain regulated vegetation and to prohibit the planting
of controlled vegetation within the Village. In the exercise of its police
power and in recognition of further statutory authority conferred by
§ 66.96, Wis. Stats., the Board finds that attractive and well-maintained
property will enhance the neighborhoods and Village and will provide a
suitable environment for increasing physical and monetary value and
that the growth of certain regulated vegetation as defined herein:
(1) Attracts rodents;
(2) Invites unwanted dumping of grass clippings and other organic and
inorganic waste material on undeveloped or partly developed
parcels of land within the Village;
(3) Creates, under certain circumstances, fire hazards;
(4) At certain times of the year serves to adversely intensify the
pollution of the air substances which would affect persons with
allergenic producing hay fever or other allergenic-related illnesses;
(5) Gives an appearance of neglect which is inconsistent with
surrounding properties to the overall detriment of the Village; and
(6) Violates state public policy with respect to certain noxious weeds
which by statutory definition are per se an impermissible form of
vegetation.
B. Duty to destroy.
(1) Any person or legal entity owning, occupying or controlling land
located in Elm Grove and without regard to its level of development
shall destroy all regulated vegetation thereon; provided, however,
that grass or weeds regulated under Subsection H of the definition
of "regulated vegetation" in § 266-1 shall be brought into
compliance with the height requirements contained therein
through mowing or cutting.
(2) Persons owning property having controlled vegetation located
thereon are encouraged to Remove such controlled vegetation
whenever practicable.
C. Planting of controlled vegetation prohibited. No person shall plant any
controlled vegetation in the Village.
D. Maintenance of yards and lot areas.
§ 266-5 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 266-6
259:323
(1) Landscaping, plantings and other decorative surface treatments,
including common species of grass, shall be installed if necessary
and maintained to present an attractive appearance in all yards and
lot areas except a wooded lot. In the absence of an approved land
management plan from the Plan Commission pursuant to the
delegated authority of this chapter, grasses shall be maintained to a
height not to exceed seven inches in length. Plantings shall be
maintained so as not to present hazards to adjoining properties or
to persons or vehicles traveling on public ways and shall be
maintained so as to enhance the appearance and value of the
neighborhood and the Village.
(2) No person, or entity shall place brush on any public right-of-way or
any public property for the purpose of its Removal by the Village
Department of Public Works or any other entity any earlier than the
Friday preceding the first day of the week posted for municipal
brush pickup in the respective area where placed or more than 72
hours in advance of any contracted pickup time. Violators of this
provision shall be subject to a special charge per Village truckload
at the current rate of service, or fraction thereof, for Removal of
brush by the Village. [Amended 4-22-2008; 9-28-2015]
E. Authority of Fire Chief to abate fire threat. All yard areas and grass
areas shall be cut between June 30 and October 15 when the Fire Chief
so orders consistent with his or her professional determination that the
length of such yard or grass areas poses an unreasonable threat from
fire to the safety of the area in question or its surrounding
neighborhood.
F. Application for approval of land management plan. Any owner or lessee,
with the consent of the owner, of land in the Village may apply with the
Plan Commission for approval of a land management plan for a natural
lawn, one where the grasses exceed seven inches in height, as follows:
(1) Application requirements. Each application for a land management
plan shall be on a form provided by the Village Clerk. A copy of the
application shall be mailed by the applicant or given personally by
the applicant to each of the owners of record, as listed in the office
of the Village Assessor, who are owners of the property situated in
whole or in part within 200 feet of the boundaries of the properties
affected. The Village Clerk shall provide the list of the property
owners who are to be notified of the application. The applicant shall
certify, under oath, on a form to be furnished by the Village Clerk
that such owners have been duly notified and the manner in which
they have been notified. If, within 15 days of receipt of a copy of the
application, at least 51% of such property owners file written
objections to the application with the Village Clerk, then such
application shall be referred to the Plan Commission for public
hearing prior to decision. Such a hearing shall be noticed with a
Class 2 notice at the expense of the applicant.
§ 266-6 ELM GROVE CODE § 266-6
259:324
§ 266-7. Inspections.
(2) Application of appeal. The owner or lessee of land in the Village
may appeal from a decision of the Plan Commission refusing to
grant a land management plan. All appeals shall be to the Board of
Trustees, which shall hear such appeals. All applications for appeal
shall be submitted within 15 days of notice of denial of the land
management plan. [Amended 2-26-2013]
(3) Revocation of the land management plan. The land management
plan may be revoked for failure to comply with the requirements of
this chapter. Notice of intent to revoke a land management plan
shall be appealable to the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
delegated authority of this chapter. All applications for appeal shall
be submitted within 15 days of notice of intent to revoke a land
management plan. [Amended 2-26-2013]
G. Duty to comply with written order. In the event that any person or legal
entity owning, occupying or controlling land located in Elm Grove is
served with an order in writing by the Elm Grove Weed Commissioner
to destroy regulated vegetation or Remove and destroy newly planted
controlled vegetation (served by a type of delivery service of which the
delivery can be tracked or served in person) and fails to do so within
seven consecutive days of receipt of same or seven consecutive days of
the refusal of the receipt of such mailed order, such person or legal
entity shall be assessed a special charge against the property in
question, the cost of destroying the regulated vegetation pursuant to
§ 66.60(16), Wis. Stats. Such destruction shall occur at the direction of
the Weed Commissioner in consultation with the Village Manager.
[Amended 10-26-2010]
H. Public notice to destroy regulated vegetation. The President of the
Village Board shall compel the posting annually on or before May 15 by
the Village Manager for 14 days that every person or legal entity
owning, occupying or controlling land located in Elm Grove is required
by law to destroy all regulated vegetation. [Amended 4-22-2008]
I. Weed Commissioner.
(1) The Village President shall appoint a Weed Commissioner in
accordance with the provision of § 66.97, Wis. Stats.
(2) The Weed Commissioner and the Village Manager individually shall
be authorized pursuant to § 66.119(2), Wis. Stats., to issue a
citation for violation of this chapter in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 1, Article II, of the Code of the Village.
A. The Village Forester is authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected all
premises and places within the Village to determine whether any public
nuisance regulated under this chapter exists thereon. The Village
Forester shall also inspect or cause the inspection of any elm tree
§ 266-6 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 266-7
259:325
§ 266-8. Cost of public nuisance abatement and Tree care; special
charges.
reported or suspected to be infected with the Dutch elm disease or any
elm bark bearing material reported or suspected to be infested with
elm bark beetles. Furthermore, the Village Forester will inspect all oaks
reported or suspected to be infected with oak wilt or any oak wood
bearing material reported or suspected to be infested with Nitidulid.
The Village Forester will inspect all ash Trees reported or suspected of
containing Emerald Ash Borer. [Amended 5-28-2007]
B. The Village Forester may inspect Trees, alive or dead, fallen or
standing, for the purpose of determining whether such Trees are
contagiously diseased or defective such as to create a hazardous
situation. Such examinations shall include the right to take samples
from such Trees for laboratory testing purposes. Before having such
analysis made, the owner shall be contacted and afforded the
opportunity of securing private tests at his or her own expense, within a
period of 20 consecutive days thereafter, the results of which shall be
made available to the Village Forester.
C. The Forester and his or her agents shall request permission to enter
upon private property for the purpose of carrying out any of the
provisions of this chapter. In the event of refusal of entry, the Forester
or his or her agent shall be empowered to apply for an inspection
warrant pursuant to § 66.122, Wis. Stats.
D. Whenever reasonably necessary to determine the existence of Dutch
elm disease, elm bark beetles, oak wilt, Nitidulid beetles or Emerald
Ash Borer in any Tree, the Forester or his or her agent inspecting such
Tree shall Remove or cut specimens from the Tree in such manner as to
avoid permanent injury thereto and deliver such specimens to the
Forester who shall forward them to the Wisconsin Department of
Agriculture at Madison for analysis to determine the presence of a
public nuisance. Before Removal of any specimens under this
subsection, the owner shall be contacted and afforded the opportunity
of securing private tests at the owner's own expense, within a period of
20 days thereafter. The results of the tests shall be made available to
the Village Forester. [Amended 5-28-2007]
A. The Village shall pay the cost of abatement of public nuisances located
on public property.
B. Costs incurred by the Village for the abatement of public nuisances
located on private property shall be assessed against the property
owner as a special charge pursuant to § 66.60(16), Wis. Stats.
C. Special charges under this section:
§ 266-7 ELM GROVE CODE § 266-8
259:326
§ 266-9. Prohibited acts; violations and penalties. [Amended
4-26-2005; 7-26-2005]
(1) Shall be without prior notice as authorized in § 66.60(16)(a), Wis.
Stats., and shall be imposed for services performed, subject to
availability of Village resources;
(2) Shall be payable within 30 calendar days of the mailing of an
invoice from the Village;
(3) Shall not be payable in installments; and
(4) Shall become, if delinquent, a lien as provided in § 66.60(16)(a),
Wis. Stats.
A. Any person who does any of the following acts within the Village shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code, except that
the forfeiture shall not be less than $100:
(1) Transports any diseased wood on which the bark has not been
Removed for resale to any address in Elm Grove.
(2) Interferes with or prevents any acts of the Forester or his or her
agents or employees while they are engaged in the performance of
duties imposed by this chapter.
(3) Permits any public nuisance as defined in this chapter to remain on
any premises owned or controlled by him or her when ordered by
the Forester to abate such nuisance.
B. Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of § 266-6C, D, E or
F shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
[Amended 2-26-2013]
C. It shall be an offense for any person, property owner to do themselves,
or to employ or authorize or direct any third party or entity to Remove a
Public Tree without having first obtained a Tree Removal Permit, if so
required under the provisions of this chapter. [Added 2-26-201319]
D. It shall be an offense for any person to undertake a Tree Impact Activity
that is not undertaken in strict conformity with the terms and
conditions of a Tree Removal Permit. [Added 2-26-2013]
E. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed for each
Public Tree Removed without a Tree Removal Permit or in violation of a
Tree Removal Permit. [Added 2-26-2013]
F. Any person or legal entity owning, occupying or controlling land located
in the Village who shall fail to comply with an order of the Village Weed
Commissioner to destroy regulated vegetation thereon within five
19.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection C
as Subsection F.
§ 266-8 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 266-9
259:327
Chapter 275
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 101.
Snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles — See
Ch. 238.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 243.
Trailers — See Ch. 259.
§ 275-1. Adoption of statutory provisions. [Amended 12-11-2000]
§ 275-2. Speed limits.
No person shall drive a vehicle in excess of any speed limit established
pursuant to law by state, county or Village authorities and indicated by
official signs. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the
consecutive days of receipt of such order shall be subject, in addition
to a special charge for abatement, to a penalty as provided in § 1-16
of this Code for offenses within a twelve-month period. [Amended
2-26-2013]
A. State traffic forfeiture laws adopted. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, all provisions of Chapters 340 to 348 of the
Wisconsin Statutes describing and defining regulations with respect to
vehicles and traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, including
penalties to be imposed and procedure for prosecution, are hereby
adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute
incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this
chapter.
B. No driver of any motor vehicle shall cause, by excessive and
unnecessary acceleration, the tires of such vehicle to squeal and emit
unnecessary road noises or throw stone or gravel, nor shall such driver
cause to be made, by excessive and unnecessary acceleration, any road
or engine noise such as would disturb the public peace.
C. State Administrative Code Chapter TRANS 305 adopted. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all provisions of Chapter
TRANS 305 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code describing and
defining standards for motor vehicle equipment, including penalties to
be imposed, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or
prohibited by Chapter TRANS 305 incorporated herein by reference is
required or prohibited by this chapter. Any motor vehicle equipment
prohibited or required by Chapter TRANS 305 incorporated herein by
reference is prohibited or required by this chapter.
§ 266-9 ELM GROVE CODE § 275-2
259:328
following speed limits are hereby established in the Village of Elm Grove,
pursuant to § 349.11, Wis. Stats.:
A. Fifteen miles per hour in the following areas:
(1) All roads within the Village Community Center Grounds.
(2) Where children are present in the following designated locations,
where signs requiring a reduced speed of 15 miles per hour
effective "When Children Are Present" have been posted by the
Village pursuant to § 346.57(4)(a) or (i), Wis. Stats.:
Name of Street Location
Church Street Between Juneau Boulevard and
Marquette Avenue
Crescent Drive Between Juneau Boulevard and
Elmwood Road
Highland Drive Between 825 Highland Drive and Lata
Vista Drive
Hollyhock Lane Between Underwood River Parkway
and Legion Drive
Juneau Boulevard Between Church Street and Crescent
Drive
Juneau Boulevard Between Legion Drive and Elm Grove
Road
Legion Drive Between Juneau Boulevard and Brook
Avenue
Legion Drive Between 1685 Legion Drive and
Hollyhock Lane
Luther Lane Between 15240 Luther Lane and
Terrace Drive
Pilgrim Parkway [Added
4-23-2002]
Between Westover Road and 1194
Pilgrim Parkway
Terrace Drive Between 800 Terrace Drive and 1000
Terrace Drive
Underwood River
Parkway
Between 13625 Underwood River
Parkway and Hollyhock Lane
Wisconsin Avenue Between 14550 Wisconsin Avenue and
14635 Wisconsin Avenue
B. Thirty miles per hour on North 124th Street between the north limits of
the Village and Watertown Plank Road and also upon Pilgrim Parkway
in its entirety between the south limits of the Village and the west limits
of the Village north of Gebhardt Road.
C. Forty-five miles per hour on Bluemound Road or such other speed as
may be set thereon by the State of Wisconsin Highway Commission.
§ 275-2 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 275-2
259:329
§ 275-3. Through highways.
In the interest of public safety and pursuant to § 349.07, Wis. Stats., the
following streets or portions thereof are declared to be through highways,
and traffic signs or signals giving notice thereof shall be erected pursuant
to § 275-9 of this chapter:
Name of Street Location
Arrowhead Court [Added
3-9-1998]
Between 2040 Arrowhead Court and the
north Village limits
Bobby Lane [Added
12-17-2018]
North side between Hollyhock and Tosca
Court
Elm Grove Road From Watertown Plank Road to West
Bluemound Road
Elmhurst Parkway [Added
4-23-2002]
Between 12600 Elmhurst Parkway and
12530 Elmhurst Parkway
Fairhaven Boulevard [Added
4-23-2002; amended
6-25-2018]
From 1760 Fairhaven Boulevard to 2050
Fairhaven Boulevard
Gebhardt Road From the west Village limits to Highland
Drive
Gremoor Drive [Added
4-23-2002]
From 13335 Gremoor Drive through
Hollyhock Lane
Hawthorne Drive [Added
9-13-1999]
West of Highland Drive
Highland Drive From the north Village limits to
Watertown Plank Road
Hillside Road [Added
6-22-2004]
From 14225 Hillside Road through
Woodlawn Circle
Hillside Road [Added
6-22-2004]
From 14440 Hillside Road to 14350
Hillside Road
Hollyhock Lane [Added
8-22-2006]
Between 1940 Hollyhock Lane and 2015
Hollyhock Lane
Hollyhock Lane [Added
4-23-2002]
Between Legion Drive and 1860
Hollyhock Lane
Hollyhock Lane [Added
12-17-2018]
West side from Underwood River Parkway
north 300 feet
Juneau Boulevard From Highland Drive to Watertown Plank
Road
Juneau Boulevard [Added
4-23-2002]
From 14840 Juneau Boulevard to Lone
Tree Road
D. Twenty-five miles per hour on all other streets and highways.
§ 275-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 275-3
259:330
Name of Street Location
Katherine Drive [Added
4-23-2002]
From 1055 Katherine Drive to 1035
Katherine Drive
Legion Drive [Added
4-23-2002]
From 1700 Legion Drive to Hollyhock
Lane
Lone Tree Road From Juneau Boulevard to 1000 Lone
Tree Road
Marcella Street [Added
4-23-2002]
13955 Marcella Street through Lilly Road
North 124th Street [Added
4-23-2002]
From 955 North 124th Street to
Watertown Plank Road
North 124th Street From the north Village limits to
Watertown Plank Road
Oakdale Road [Added
4-23-2002]
From 14255 Oakdale Road to 14141
Oakdale Road
Pilgrim Parkway In its entirety from the south Village
limits to the west Village limits north of
Gebhardt Road
San Fernando Drive Between 1825 San Fernando Drive and
1855 San Fernando Drive
San Fernando Drive [Added
4-23-2002]
From 1995 San Fernando Drive to 2040
San Fernando Drive
Sunnyslope Road From Watertown Plank Road to West
Bluemound Road
Sunset Drive [Added
6-22-2004]
From 1650 Sunset Drive through Hillside
Road
Terrace Court From Terrace Drive to Woodland Avenue
Terrace Drive [Added
4-23-2002]
900 Terrace Drive through Terrace Court
Underwood River Parkway Between 13905 Underwood River
Parkway and 13645 Underwood River
Parkway
Walnut Road [Added
4-27-2004]
From 12700 Walnut Road to 12850
Walnut Road
Watertown Plank Road From the east Village limits to Pilgrim
Parkway
West Bluemound Road From the east Village limits to the west
Village limits
Wisconsin Avenue [Added 4-23-2002; repealed 6-22-2004]
Wisconsin Avenue [Added
4-23-2002]
From 14320 Wisconsin Avenue to 14220
Wisconsin Avenue
§ 275-3 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 275-3
259:331
Name of Street Location
Wisconsin Avenue [Added
4-23-2002]
From 14825 Wisconsin Avenue to 14635
Wisconsin Avenue
Woodlawn Circle [Added
6-22-2004]
From 14205 Woodlawn Circle to 1440
Woodlawn Circle
Wrayburn Road [Added
4-23-2002]
From 13645 Wrayburn Road to 13825
Wrayburn Road
§ 275-4. Parking, stopping and standing. [Amended 9-13-1999;
12-11-2000; 5-27-2003; 5-23-2006]
Notwithstanding the following restrictions, vehicles parked upon roadways
shall do so in compliance with § 346.54, Wis. Stats.
A. Limited time parking. When signs are erected by the Village on any
block or space giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for
longer than the period specified by such a sign at any time stated
thereon as follows:
(1) For no more than one hour, between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
except Sundays and holidays, on the north side of Watertown Plank
Road between Elm Grove Street and Legion Drive.
(2) For no more than one hour, on the north side of Wall Street, from a
point 40 feet west of the western edge of the bridge west to a point
195 feet west of the western edge of the bridge. [Amended
6-24-2008]
B. No-parking areas. There shall be no parking at any time in posted areas
unless otherwise designated on the sign. The following areas are
designated no-parking areas:
Name of Street Side Location
124th Street Both Between Watertown Plank Road
and West Grove Terrace
Bobby Lane [Added
4-22-2019]
South From Hollyhock Lane 75 feet east
Church Street East For a distance of 290 feet from
Juneau Boulevard south toward
Watertown Plank Road
Church Street West Between Watertown Plank Road
and Juneau Boulevard
Crescent Drive Both Between Watertown Plank Road
and Elmwood Road
§ 275-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 275-4
259:332
Name of Street Side Location
Crescent Drive [Added
7-25-2006]
West Beginning north of crosswalk on
Crescent Drive at Watertown
Plank Road to a point 200 feet
north on the west side of
Crescent Drive
Elm Grove Road Both Between (STH 18) Bluemound
Road and Watertown Plank Road
Elm Grove Street [Added
10-27-2009]
East From Watertown Plank Road to
Juneau Boulevard
Highland Drive West Between Watertown Plank Road
and Lata Vista Drive
Hollyhock Lane East Between Legion Drive and Bobby
Lane
Hollyhock Lane [Added
7-25-2006]
South Underwood River Parkway to
Gremoor Drive
Hollyhock Lane West From the stop sign at Hollyhock
Lane and Legion Drive to a point
50 feet north on Hollyhock Lane
Juneau Boulevard North Between the west edge of Church
Street and Watertown Plank Road
Juneau Boulevard [Added
8-22-2006]
North From Church Street West to
Woodlawn Circle
Juneau Boulevard South From the center line of Church
Street to a point 560 feet east of
Church Street
Knoll Road From the west property line of
1255 Knoll Road to the west edge
of 124th Street
Legion Drive Both From Watertown Plank Road to
Juneau Boulevard
Legion Drive East Between Lindhurst Drive and
Hollyhock Lane
Legion Drive [Added
7-25-2006]
West From Elmhurst Parkway to
Hollyhock Lane
Legion Drive West From the stop sign at Legion
Drive and Hollyhock Lane to a
point 50 feet south on Legion
Drive
Pilgrim Parkway [Added
7-25-2006]
East From Watertown Plank Road to
Gebhardt Road
§ 275-4 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 275-4
259:333
Name of Street Side Location
State Highway 18 (STH 18)
Bluemound Road
Both Including the median shoulder
areas from the east edge of Elm
Grove Road east to the corporate
limits of the Village of Elm Grove
and the Milwaukee/Waukesha
County boundary
Underwood River Parkway
[Added 7-25-2006]
South San Fernando to Hollyhock Lane
Village Park (13600 Juneau
Boulevard)
Along both sides of the entrance
drive from Legion Drive westerly
700 feet into the Village Park and
any nonroadway areas, paved or
unpaved, not specifically
designated as a parking area by
pavement markings or other
indicia
Wall Street Both In its entirety, with the exception
of limited parking signs that may
be posted to necessitate loading
zone areas
Watertown Plank Road Both Between Blue Ridge and Church
Street
Watertown Plank Road Both Between Pilgrim Parkway and
Terrace Drive
Watertown Plank Road North Between Shadow Lawn Drive and
Circle Drive
Watertown Plank Road
[Added 7-25-2006]
North From Terrace Drive to Highland
Drive
Watertown Plank Road South Between Meadow Lane and
Sunnyslope Road
Watertown Plank Road South From the easterly edge of Pilgrim
Parkway to a point 468 feet east
of Pilgrim Parkway
Watertown Plank Road South Between the west driveway
access of 13275 Watertown Plank
Road and the east property line of
said location
Watertown Plank Road South Between the east driveway
access of 13335 Watertown Plank
Road and the east edge of Elm
Grove Road
C. Temporary/special restricted parking.
§ 275-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 275-4
259:334
(1) No person shall park any vehicle upon Village property or on any
public right-of-way, street or highway within the Village where
official or "By Police Order" temporary no-parking signs have been
placed prohibiting parking to control heavy traffic or to promote
the orderly flow of traffic during special events.
(2) Parking shall be restricted to one side of any public right-of-way,
street or highway within the Village where necessary to allow for
an unobstructed roadway width of at least 12 feet opposite such
parked vehicle(s) for the free passage of emergency or other
vehicles.
(3) Towing. Vehicles found to be in violation of this section shall be
cited and may be towed for noncompliance where such vehicles are
determined by the Police Department to pose a traffic or safety
hazard.
D. Fire lanes.
(1) Permitted. The Village Board may establish a system of fire lanes
for the purpose of permitting access by the Fire Department to
buildings, other improvements and sources of water supply.
(a) The area immediately adjacent to the west side of the building
located at 945 North Terrace Drive, beginning at the southern
boundary of the parking area and extending in a northerly
direction to a point 160 feet south of the private driveway
access to Luther Lane.
(b) The area immediately adjacent to the west side of the building
located at 890 Elm Grove Road, beginning at the northwest
corner of the building and extending in a southerly direction
approximately half the length of the building to the main westfacing
entrance to the building.
(c) The area immediately adjacent to the north side of the building
located at 890 Elm Grove Road, beginning at the east end of
planter and extending to the east 70 feet.
(d) The private drive access along the east side of the building
area at 12700 West Bluemound Road, extending in a north and
south direction from the north edge of Bluemound Road to the
north end of the bridge giving access to 12650 West
Bluemound Road.
(e) The private drive access along the west side of the building
area at 12700 West Bluemound Road, extending in a north and
south direction from the north edge of the driveway easement
accessing 12800 West Bluemound Road to the south edge of
the parking area along the north side of the building area at
12700 West Bluemound Road.
§ 275-4 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 275-4
259:335
(f) The north side of the private drive along the south side of the
building area at 12700 West Bluemound Road, extending in an
east and west direction from the intersecting point with the
east side private drive at this location to the intersecting point
with the private drive easement accessing 12800 West
Bluemound Road.
(g) The private driveway easement accessing 12800 West
Bluemound Road, extending from the north edge of Bluemound
Road along the west line of the building area at 12700 West
Bluemound Road in a northwest direction and parallel to
Bluemound Road a distance of 356.83 feet.
(h) The private driveway access amid the building complex
encompassing 13320 to 13390 West Bluemound Road.
(i) The entire front access area along the south side of the
building area at 15280 West Bluemound Road extending from
the parking lanes on the east to the parking lanes on the west.
(j) The private driveway access extending in a north and south
direction along the west side of the building located at 15300
West Bluemound Road.
(k) The north side of the service road, extending in an east and
west direction, south of the building premises access from
15280 West Bluemound Road through 15300 West Bluemound
Road to the intersecting service road joining Bluemound Road
and Watertown Plank Road at the stated location.
(2) Parking prohibited. No vehicle shall be permitted to be parked
within the limits of such fire lanes at any time without the express
consent and permission of the Chief of the Fire Department or
other duly authorized officer thereof.
(3) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
Subsection D shall upon conviction forfeit not less than $50 nor
more than $300 and the costs of prosecution and shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in § 800.095, Wis. Stats.
E. Extended parking restrictions.
(1) No person shall park any vehicle upon Village property or on any
public right-of-way, street or highway within the Village for a period
of more than 10 consecutive hours, except when permission is
granted by the Village of Elm Grove Police Department.
(2) No person shall park any vehicle on any public right-of-way, street
or highway within the Village between 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
except when permission is granted by the Village of Elm Grove
Police Department.
F. Parking in snow emergencies.
§ 275-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 275-4
259:336
§ 275-5. Collection of forfeitures for nonmoving traffic violations.
[Amended 5-23-2006]
(1) No person shall park any vehicle or any part thereof upon Village
property or within the full limits of any highway during a snow
emergency. The Village Manager may declare a snow emergency in
the event he or she is advised that an anticipated snowfall of three
inches or more has been forecast for the area of the Village. Such
snow emergencies shall continue until plowing has been completed
on all roads or until terminated by the Village Manager. In the
absence of the Village Manager, the Public Works Director may
declare a snow emergency under the provisions of this subsection.
(2) Snow emergency signage. Notice of parking in snow emergencies
shall be given by the posting of standard signs giving notice thereof
at, or reasonably near, the corporate limits of the Village on all
state, county trunk or connecting highways as the latter are
defined in § 86.32, Wis. Stats.
G. Parking for physically disabled persons. Sections 346.503 through
346.56, Wis. Stats., and related penalties regulating physically disabled
parking are hereby adopted by reference as Village ordinances.
H. Parking in the Village Park on nonroadway areas.
(1) No person shall park any vehicle or any part thereof upon
nonroadway areas, paved or unpaved, within the Village Park
unless such nonroadway areas are specifically designated as a
parking area by pavement markings or other indicia.
(2) Vehicles found to be in violation of this subsection shall be cited
and may be towed for noncompliance where such vehicles are
determined by the Police Department to pose a traffic or safety
hazard.
A. Definition. A "nonmoving traffic violation" is any parking of a vehicle in
violation of a statute or an ordinance.
B. Statutes adopted. The procedures provided for in §§ 345.28 and 345.34
to 345.47, Wis. Stats., inclusive, are hereby specifically adopted and
shall be followed in actions to recover forfeitures for nonmoving traffic
violations, as defined in Subsection A above.
C. Costs assessed. The Elm Grove Police Department shall have the
authority to determine the administrative costs of enforcement in
collection of forfeitures for nonmoving traffic violations under this
section from time to time as may be necessary to adjust the same and
shall keep the Municipal Court informed of the same, which Court shall
assess the same against violators and cause such to be collected along
with stipulations, but in no event shall such costs be less than the
following:
§ 275-4 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 275-5
259:337
§ 275-6. Railroads.
§ 275-7. Limitations on turning and passing.
§ 275-8. Weight limits and heavy traffic routes.
(1) After 10 days: $25.
(2) After 28 days: $50.
(3) After the citation has been referred to the Department of
Transportation for a suspension of registration, as permitted by
Subsection B above: $100.
A. It shall be unlawful to stop any railroad train, locomotive or car upon or
across any highway or street crossing in the Village of Elm Grove or
leave the same standing upon such crossing longer than 10 minutes
except in cases of accident. Any conductor, engineer, brakeperson or
other person in charge thereof or responsible therefor who shall violate
this section shall be liable to a fine of not more than $100 together with
the costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment of such
forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county
jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed 15 days.
B. No person, firm or corporation owning or operating any railroad, nor
any of its employees, shall cause to be blown or sounded any horn or
whistle on any locomotive under its control within the limits of the
Village of Elm Grove at intersections protected by crossing gates.
Exception to this subsection is that such warning device may be
operated in event of emergency.
A. When signs are erected at any intersection giving notice thereof, no
person shall make a turn at such intersection within the period of time
during which such turns are prohibited by such sign.
B. Pursuant to § 346.09(3), Wis. Stats., those portions of the Village streets
designated by the Public Safety Committee of the Village Board as "No
Passing Zones" in the interest of public safety shall be marked and
enforced as such type of traffic zone. [Amended 12-11-2000]
A. Class "A" highways. Bluemound Road, Watertown Plank Road, Elm
Grove Road from Bluemound Road to Watertown Plank Road and North
124th Street from Watertown Plank Road to the north Village limits are
hereby designated Class "A" highways, and the weight limitations
established in § 348.15, Wis. Stats., shall be applicable thereto.
B. Class "B" highways. All other streets except those set out in Subsection
A of this section are hereby designated Class "B" highways, and the
weight limitations established in § 348.16, Wis. Stats., shall be
applicable thereto.
C. No trucking.
§ 275-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 275-8
259:338
§ 275-9. Official traffic signs and signals.
§ 275-10. Accident reports.
The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall, within five days
after such accident, file with the Village Police Department a copy of the
report required by § 346.70, Wis. Stats., if any. If the operator is unable to
make such report, any occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident
capable of making such report shall have the duty to comply with this
section. Such reports shall be subject to the provisions and limitations in
§§ 346.70(4)(f) and 346.73, Wis. Stats.
§ 275-11. Abandoned vehicles.
(1) No vehicle which is not equipped with pneumatic tires or has a
combined vehicle load weight exceeding 8,000 pounds, except a
motor bus, shall be operated or moved on any street not a part of
the heavy traffic route designated in Subsection D of this section
except for the purpose of picking up and delivering materials,
supplies or commodities, which pickups or deliveries originate
from or terminate within the Village. In no event shall the weight of
the vehicle and load in such case exceed the limitations of § 348.15
or 348.16, Wis. Stats., pertaining to Class "A" or "B" highways.
(2) The provisions of this section do not apply to any street upon which
season restrictions have been imposed under § 348.17, Wis. Stats.
(3) That part of Elm Grove Road, located in the Village of Elm Grove,
between Juneau Boulevard and Watertown Plank Road, shall have a
special weight limitation of 10,000 pounds. Authorized emergency
vehicles and state-, county- and municipality-owned vehicles are
exempt from this subsection. [Added 2-24-2009]
D. Heavy traffic route. Bluemound Road, from the east Village limits to the
west Village limits, is hereby designated a heavy traffic route.
A. Location of traffic signs. The Public Safety Committee of the Village
Board is hereby authorized and directed to procure, erect and maintain
appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings which are in
conformity with applicable state and federal statutes and regulations
and give notice of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Location of weight signs. Pursuant to § 348.17, Wis. Stats., the Public
Works/Utilities Committee of the Village Board is hereby authorized
and directed to procure, erect and maintain appropriate signs for
seasonal and other vehicular limitations of its own design and selection.
[Amended 3-23-2004]
C. Adequacy of signs. All other signs shall be erected in such locations and
manner as authorized by the Village Board as to give adequate warning
to users of the street or highway in question.
§ 275-8 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 275-11
259:339
A. Vehicle abandonment prohibited. No person shall leave unattended any
motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home on any public street
or highway or public or private property for such time and under such
circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have
been abandoned. When any such vehicle has been left unattended on
any Village street or highway or on any public or private property
within the Village without permission of the owner for more than 72
hours, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and constitutes a public
nuisance.
B. Removal and impoundment of abandoned vehicles. Any vehicle in
violation of this chapter shall be impounded until fully claimed or
disposed of under Subsection C, except that if the Police Chief or his or
her duly authorized representative determines that the cost of towing
and storage charges for the impoundment would exceed the value of
the vehicle, the vehicle may be junked by the Village prior to expiration
of the impoundment period upon determination by the Police Chief or
his or her duly authorized representative that the vehicle is not wanted
for evidence or other reason.
C. Disposal of abandoned vehicles.
(1) If the Police Chief or his or her duly authorized representative
determines that the value of the abandoned vehicle exceeds $100,
he or she shall notify the owner and lienholders of record by
certified mail that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned and
impounded by the Village and may be reclaimed within 15 days
upon payment of accrued towing, storage and notice charges and if
not so reclaimed shall be sold.
(2) In the event an abandoned vehicle determined to exceed $100 in
value is not reclaimed within the period and under the conditions
as provided above, it may be sold by auction or by sealed bids. The
description of the vehicle and the terms of sale shall be posted five
days before the sale. [Amended 4-22-2008]
(3) After deducting the expense of impoundment and sale, the balance
of the proceeds, if any, shall be paid into the Village treasury.
(4) Any abandoned vehicle which is determined by the Police Chief or
his or her duly authorized representative to have a value of less
than $100 may be disposed of by direct sale to a licensed salvage
dealer upon determination that the vehicle is not reported stolen.
D. Owner responsible for impoundment and sale costs. The owner of any
abandoned vehicle, except a stolen vehicle, is responsible for the
abandonment and all costs of impounding and disposing of the vehicle.
Costs not recovered for the sale of the vehicle may be recovered in a
civil action by the Village against the owner.
E. Notice of sale or disposition. Within five days after the sale or disposal
of a vehicle as provided in Section C(1) or (2), the Police Chief or his or
§ 275-11 ELM GROVE CODE § 275-11
259:340
§ 275-12. Play vehicle and motor vehicle operation prohibited on
Village Park pedestrian pathways and bicycle ways. [Added
8-28-2007]
§ 275-13. Neighborhood electric vehicles. [Added 8-28-200720]
her duly authorized representative shall advise the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation, Division of Motor Vehicles, of such sale
or disposition on a form supplied by the Division. A copy of such form
shall also be given to the purchaser of the vehicle. A copy shall also be
retained on file by the Village.
F. Penalty. Any person who shall abandon a vehicle in violation of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10 nor
more than $500, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default
of payment of the forfeiture and costs of prosecution may be imprisoned
in the county jail or have his or her driver's license suspended in the
manner provided for in Ch. 800, Wis. Stats.
A. No person may operate a play vehicle, as defined under § 340.01(43m),
Wis. Stats., an all-terrain vehicle as defined in § 340.01(2g), Wis. Stats.,
an electric personal assistive mobility device as defined in
§ 340.01(15pm), Wis. Stats., a snowmobile as defined in § 340.01(58a),
Wis. Stats., or motorized vehicle, as defined under § 340.01(35), Wis.
Stats., or motor bicycle as defined under § 340.01(30), Wis. Stats., when
the bicycle is propelled by motorized power, on any pedestrian pathway
or bicycle way, as defined in Village Ordinance § 101-1, on any Village
Park land.
B. Vehicles may operate on any Village Park roadway or parking lot, as
defined under § 340.01(54), Wis. Stats., as permitted by this chapter
and adopted state statutes.
C. This provision does not apply to personal assistive mobility devices used
by persons with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk, as
defined under § 340.01(43g), Wis. Stats.
D. This provision does not apply to any Village-owned vehicles, employees,
or subcontractors engaging in approved Village activities.
E. This provision does not apply to in-line skates, as defined under
§ 340.01(24m), Wis. Stats., and nonmotorized skateboards and
scooters.
A. Definition. "Neighborhood electric vehicle" means a self-propelled,
electrically powered motor vehicle that has successfully completed the
Neighborhood Electric Vehicle America test program conducted by the
federal Department of Energy, and has a maximum speed of 20 miles
per hour to 25 miles per hour as required for low-speed vehicles as
20.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 275-12 and 275-13 as §§ 275-14
and 275-15, respectively.
§ 275-11 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 275-13
259:341
§ 275-14. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
§§ 66.1221 and 345.20 to 345.53 and Ch. 299, Wis. Stats.
adopted in the federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed
vehicles under 49 CFR 571.3(b) and 571.500. "Neighborhood electric
vehicle" does not include a golf cart.
B. Neighborhood electric vehicles may be operated in the Village of Elm
Grove on roadways having speed limits of 25 miles per hour or less.
A. Stipulation of guilt or no contest. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may
be made by persons arrested for violations of this chapter in
accordance with § 66.12(1)(b),22 Wis. Stats., whenever the provisions of
§ 345.27 are inapplicable to such violations. Stipulations shall conform
to the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint
under § 345.11, Wis. Stats., and may be accepted within five days of the
date of the alleged violation. Stipulations may be accepted by the
Village Police Department.
B. Deposits. Any person stipulating guilt or no contest under Subsection A
of this section must make the deposit required under § 345.26, Wis.
Stats., or, if the deposit is not established under such statute, shall
deposit a forfeited penalty as provided in the schedule established by
the local municipal justice. Deposits may be brought or mailed to the
office of the Police Department as directed by the arresting officer.
Deposits for parking or nonmoving violations shall be mailed or brought
to the Village Police Department.
C. Notice of demerit points and receipt. Every officer accepting a forfeited
penalty or money deposit under this chapter shall receipt therefor in
triplicate as provided in § 345.26(3)(b), Wis. Stats. Every officer
accepting a stipulation under the provisions of this chapter shall comply
with the provisions of §§ 343.27,23 343.28, 345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2),
Wis. Stats., and shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of
notice in substantially the form contained on the uniform traffic citation
and complaint promulgated under § 345.11, Wis. Stats.
D. Forfeitures in treasury. Any officer accepting deposits or forfeited
penalties under this chapter shall deliver them to the Village Treasurer
within 20 days after receipt. Any officer authorized to accept deposits
under § 345.26, Wis. Stats., or this chapter shall qualify by taking the
oath prescribed by § 19.01, Wis. Stats., and filing an official bond in the
sum of $500 as described by § 19.01, Wis. Stats.
21.Editor's Note: Former § 66.12 was renumbered and amended by 1999 Act 150, except for
Subsection (1)(d), which was repealed. See now § 66.0114.
22.Editor's Note: Former § 66.12(1)(b) was renumbered and amended by 1999 Act 150. See
now § 66.0114(1)(b).
23.Editor's Note: Formner § 343.27 was repealed by 1989 Act 170, § 4, effective 4-21-1990.
§ 275-13 ELM GROVE CODE § 275-14
259:342
§ 275-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-2000;
5-23-2006]
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a forfeiture
as hereinafter provided, together with the cost of prosecution imposed as
provided in §§ 345.20 to 345.53, Wis. Stats.
Chapter 280
WATER CONNECTION FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 232. Water control — See Ch. 325.
§ 280-1. Purpose.
The Village of Elm Grove has caused to be installed certain infrastructure
facilities in order to facilitate water service to properties within the Village.
Water service will be provided by the City of Brookfield. In order to provide
funding for and to ensure a fair allocation of costs to properties benefiting
from these facilities, a water connection fee may be imposed on certain
properties in the Village.
E. Legibility of signs. No provision of this chapter shall be enforced unless
and until signs are erected and in place and sufficiently legible to be
seen by an ordinarily observant person.
A. Uniform offenses. Forfeitures for violation of any provision of Chs. 341
to 348, Wis. Stats., adopted by reference in § 275-1 and in § 275-4G of
this chapter, shall conform to forfeitures for violation of the comparable
state offense, including any variations or increases for second (or
subsequent) offenses.
B. Special local regulations. Any person found guilty of violating the
provisions of any section of this chapter for which a penalty is not
otherwise specifically provided shall be subject to a forfeiture of not
less than $5 nor more than $500 together with the costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, may be
imprisoned in the county jail or have his or her driver's license
suspended in the manner provided for in Ch. 800, Wis. Stats.
C. Parking. The forfeiture for violation of parking regulations in § 275-4 of
this chapter shall be as set forth in the Deposit Schedule for Municipal
Citations24 if paid within 10 days of issuance, otherwise court costs
shall be added, except where a statutory counterpart is provided for in
Subsection A.
24.Editor's Note: Said Deposit Schedule for Municipal Citations is on file in the Village
offices.
§ 275-14 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 280-2
259:343
§ 280-2. Water service subareas.
§ 280-3. Application of fees.
§ 280-4. Fees.
A. The Village may establish water service subareas in order to plan for
water infrastructure improvements and to provide for recovery of
capital costs, cost of money and administrative costs.
B. A water service subarea shall be a geographically defined area of the
Village that may require certain water system improvements. Each
water service subarea shall be defined by a map that shows the area
boundaries and properties contained within the subarea. Each water
service subarea map shall be approved by the Village Board and filed
with the Village Clerk or designee and incorporated by reference in this
article as if fully set forth.
A. The Village may establish separate water connection fees for each
designated water service subarea.
B. All properties within a designed water service subarea requesting to be
connected shall be subject to imposition of the water connection fees as
outlined in this section. All fees shall become due and payable at such
time as a water service connection is requested from the City of
Brookfield. Payment shall be made to the Village of Elm Grove within 30
days of connection. Any fees not paid in 30 days shall be placed on the
property tax bill as a special charge under § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
C. The water connection fee is separate and apart from any fees and
charges that may be imposed by the City of Brookfield as a condition for
service, and all such fees and charges shall be the responsibility of the
individual property owners.
D. Any delinquent water usage payments shall be placed on the tax bill,
with interest of 1% per month, per § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
A. Fees shall be based upon estimated annual water usage for each
property requesting water service. Each property shall be assigned a
residential equivalent connection (REC) factor. A residential equivalent
connection shall be defined as the estimated annual water usage
volume for a typical residential property using the methodology
identified in § 232-15 and used for sewer billing purposes.
B. For purposes of computing fees due, a REC factor shall be assigned to
each property at the time of request for water service, based upon the
volumes used in the most recent local sewer user charge billing
converted to an annual basis and divided by the defined volume for one
REC. All REC factors shall be rounded to the nearest 0.25 REC, and all
properties shall be assigned a minimum of 0.5 REC.
§ 280-2 ELM GROVE CODE § 280-4
259:344
§ 280-5. Violations and penalties.
C. To provide for a fair allocation of costs between residential and
commercial (nonresidential) properties and to reflect the fact that the
cost of providing water service to commercial areas is higher than that
for residential areas, the per-REC fees for commercial properties shall
be adjusted upward by a factor of 1.111 of that for residential
properties.
D. The water connection fees imposed shall include a portion of the
original connection expense which has been calculated to be $97.12 per
REC with the remainder of the fee to be equal to the assigned REC
factor for each property multiplied by the fee amount per REC as
follows:
(1) Properties in water service subarea 1 (initial service area):
(a) Residential properties (fee per dwelling unit):
[1] One-bedroom multifamily units (0.5 REC): $2,007.83.
[2] Two-bedroom multifamily units (0.75 REC): $3,011.75.
[3] Three or more bedroom multifamily units (1 REC):
$4,015.66.
[4] Single-family home (1 REC): $4,015.66.
(b) Commercial properties (per REC): $4,461.41.
(c) Interest rate compounded annually: 3%.
(2) Properties in Water Service Subarea 2 (760 feet west of Elm Grove
Road on Bluemound Road, including Carriage Hills Condominiums
and The Park Condominiums). [Added 6-28-2014]
(a) Three-or-more-bedroom multifamily units (1 REC): $2,605.26.
(b) The Park Condominiums (44 REC): $114,631.44.
(c) Carriage Hills Condominiums (32 REC): $83,368.32.
(d) The Park shall pay the total project costs of $197,999.76 at
time of connection. The Village shall refund to The Park
Condominiums $83,368.32, without interest, within 45 days of
receipt of connection fees from Carriage Hills.
(e) Interest rate compounded annually: 3%.
E. The fee amounts shall be increased on an annual basis as established by
this schedule, commencing January 1, 2014, at a rate established based
on the cost of monies. Water connection fees shall be updated on an
annual basis and kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 280-4 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 280-5
259:345
Chapter 283
WELL ABANDONMENT
§ 283-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent contamination of groundwater
and to protect public health, safety and welfare by assuring that unused,
unsafe or noncomplying wells, or wells which may serve as conduits for
contamination, or wells which have been illegally cross-connected to the
municipal water system, are properly abandoned.
§ 283-2. Applicability.
This chapter applies to all wells located on premises served by a municipal
water system.
§ 283-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM — A system for the provision to the public of
piped water for human consumption that is maintained and operated by a
Public Service Commission water utility.
NONCOMPLYING — A well or pump installation which does not comply with
the provisions of Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code, in effect at the time the
well was constructed, a contamination source was installed, the pump was
installed or work was done on either the well or pump installation.
PUMP INSTALLATION — The pump and related equipment used for
withdrawing water from a well, including the discharge piping, the
underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling
faucets and well seals or caps.
UNSAFE — A well or pump installation which produces water which is
bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with substances which
exceed the standards of Ch. NR 809 or 140, Wis. Adm. Code, or for which a
health advisory has been issued by the Department of Natural Resources.
UNUSED — A well or pump installation which is not in use or does not have
a functional pumping system.
A. Any person found violating the provisions of this article shall be
provided written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing
a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for the correction of the
violations.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the aforesaid time
limit provided in a written notice of violation shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code, except that the forfeiture
shall not be less than $100.
§ 280-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 283-3
259:346
WELL — An excavation or opening into the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods for the purpose of obtaining groundwater
for consumption or other use.
WELL ABANDONMENT — The filling and sealing of a well according to the
provisions of Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code,
§ 283-4. Abandonment required.
All wells located on premises connected to the municipal water system shall
be abandoned in accordance with the Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code, and
no later than one year from the date of connection to the municipal water
system, whichever occurs last, unless a well operation permit has been
obtained by the well owner from the Village of Elm Grove.
§ 283-5. Well operation permit.
The Village of Elm Grove may grant a permit to a private well owner
to operate a well for a period not to exceed five years, providing the
conditions of this section are met. An owner may request renewal of a well
operation permit by submitting information verifying that the conditions of
this section are met. Permit applications and renewals shall be made on
forms provided by the Village of Elm Grove. A permit fee will be paid for
well operation permit and each renewal for a permit. All applicable fees
shall be paid. The following conditions must be met for issuance or renewal
of a well permit:
§ 283-6. Abandonment procedures.
A. The well and pump installation meet or are upgraded to meet the
requirements of Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code, in effect at the time the
well was constructed;
B. The well and pump installation have a history of bacteriologically safe
water as evidenced by at least one sampling. No exception to this
condition may be made for unsafe wells unless the Department of
Natural Resources approves, in writing, the continued use of the well;
C. There are no cross-connections between the well and pump installation
and the municipal water system;
D. The well and pump installation are connected only to exterior hose bibs
or exterior irrigation systems.
A. All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this chapter or rule shall
be abandoned according to the procedures and methods of Ch. NR 812,
Wis. Adm. Code. All debris, pumps, piping, unsealed liners and any
other obstruction which may interfere with sealing operations shall be
removed prior to abandonment.
B. The owner of the well, or the owner's agent, shall submit to the Village
of Elm Grove verification that the well has been abandoned.
§ 283-3 TRAILERS AND CAMPING § 283-7
259:347
§ 283-7. Violations and penalties.
Part III, Land Use Legislation
Chapter 305
LAND DIVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 106.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 134.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
Plumbing — See Ch. 212.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 220.
Sewers — See Ch. 232.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 330.
Zoning — See Ch. 335.
A. Any person found violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
provided written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing
a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for the correction of the
violations. If any person fails to comply with this section after receiving
written notice of the violation, the Village of Elm Grove may impose a
penalty and cause the well abandonment to be performed and the
expense to be assessed as a special tax against the property per
§ 66.027, Wis. Stats.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the aforesaid time
limit provided in a written notice of violation shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code; except that the forfeiture
shall not be less than $50. Each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 283-7 ELM GROVE CODE § 283-7
305:348
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 305-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of the Village of Elm Grove, and these regulations are
designed to lessen congestion in the streets and highways; to further the
orderly layout and use of land; to secure safety from fire, panic and other
dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding
of land; to avoid undue concentration of population and levels of usage;
to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, parks,
playgrounds and other public requirements; and to facilitate the further
resubdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. These regulations
are made with deliberate consideration, among other things, of the
character of the Village of Elm Grove with a goal of conserving the value of
the buildings placed upon land of the surrounding neighborhood, providing
the best possible environment for human habitation, and for encouraging
the most appropriate use of land throughout the Village of Elm Grove.
§ 305-2. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the Village of Elm Grove and shall not be deemed a limitation or
repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 305-3. Jurisdiction.
§ 305-4. Land suitability.
No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable for the proposed
use by the Board of Trustees, after review and recommendation by the
A. Any division of land, other than a subdivision, within the village for
which a plat has not been approved and recorded shall be surveyed and
a certified survey map of such division shall be submitted to the Board
of Trustees, following recommendation by the Plan Commission as
required by § 305-7 of this chapter and Wisconsin Statutes § 236.34.
Upon obtaining the approval of the Board of Trustees, the certified
survey map shall be recorded.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order;
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or easements;
(3) The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of
adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the
lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by
this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances.
§ 305-1 LAND DIVISION § 305-4
305:349
Plan Commission, for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse soil
or rock formation, unfavorable topography, for reasons stated in § 335-12
of the Code of the Village of Elm Grove, or for any other reason likely
to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents of
the proposed land division or of the community or feature. The Board of
Trustees, in applying the provisions of this section, shall in writing recite
the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not
suitable for the proposed use and afford the subdivider an opportunity to
present evidence regarding such unsuitability if the subdivider so desires.
Thereafter, the Board of Trustees may affirm, modify or withdraw its
determination of unsuitability.
§ 305-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 305-4
305:350
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 305-5. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions and the definitions
contained in § 236.02, Wis. Stats., shall apply:
CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP — A certified map prepared by a registered
surveyor of a division of land other than a subdivision as defined in
§ 236.02(8), Wis. Stats.
LAND DIVISION — A partition of real property whereby one or more new
lots is created.
PLAT — A map of a subdivision
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A map showing the salient features of a proposed
subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary
consideration.
STREET — Every highway within the corporate limits of the village except
alleys. "Highway" means all public ways and thoroughfares and bridges on
the same. It includes the entire width between the boundary lines of every
way open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of
vehicular travel. It includes those roads or driveways in the state, county
or municipal parks and in state forests which have been opened to the use
of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel and roads or driveways
upon the grounds of public schools, as defined in Section 115.01 (1) of the
Wisconsin Statutes, and institutions under the jurisdiction of the County
Board of Supervisors but does not include private roads or driveways as
defined in sub. (46).
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm or corporation, or any agent thereof,
dividing or proposing to divide land resulting in a subdivision or replat.
SUBDIVISION — A division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the owner
thereof or the owner's agent. The act of division creates:
Arterial streets and highways are used or intended to be used primarily
for through traffic. Arterial streets and highways shall include freeways
and expressways as well as parkways.
A.
Collector streets collect traffic from local streets and convey it to
arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets
of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a
development.
B.
Secondary streets are those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
C.
Marginal access streets are secondary streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to primary streets and highways and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
§ 305-5 LAND DIVISION § 305-5
305:351
Five or more parcels or building sites of 1/2 acre each or less in area;
or
A.
Five or more parcels or building sites of 11/2 acres each or less in area
created by successive divisions within a period 5 years.
B.
§ 305-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 305-5
305:352
ARTICLE III
Review and Approval of Plats and Certified Survey Maps
§ 305-6. Preliminary consultations.
Prior to filing a preliminary plat or certified survey map, the subdivider may
consult the Plan Commission for advice and assistance.
§ 305-7. Preliminary and final plat.
§ 305-8. Certified survey maps.
Certified survey maps shall be submitted to the Plan Commission and
reviewed in the manner set forth for preliminary plats under § 305-7.
A. The subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat and such copies thereof
as shall be required to the Zoning Administrator, who shall forthwith
forward the plat to the Plan Commission for initial consideration and
shall forward copies thereof to the state agencies as required by
Section 236.12 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. After initial review of the preliminary plat and negotiations with the
subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of
public improvements which will be required, the Plan Commission shall
refer the preliminary plat to the Board of Trustees, together with its
recommendation concerning approval or objection.
C. Within 90 days of submission of the preliminary plat to the Zoning
Administrator, the Board of Trustees shall approve, approve
conditionally or reject the preliminary plat unless the time is extended
by agreement with the subdivider. The subdivider shall be notified in
writing of any conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection. In
accordance with the provisions of § 236.11, Wis. Stats, failure of the
Board of Trustees to act on a preliminary plat within the 90 days, or
extension thereof, constitutes an approval of the preliminary plat.
D. Approval of the preliminary plat shall entitle the subdivider to final
approval of the final plat if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The final plat conforms substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved and any conditions of that approval have been met;
(2) All local plans and ordinances have been complied with; and
(3) The final plat is submitted to the Board of Trustees within six
months of the last required approval of the preliminary plat.
E. The Board of Trustees shall approve or reject the final plat within 60
days of its submission, unless the time is extended by agreement with
the subdivider.
§ 305-6 LAND DIVISION § 305-8
305:353

ARTICLE IV
Submittal Requirements for Plats and Certified Survey Maps
§ 305-9. Submittal requirements for preliminary consultation.
The following information shall be provided at the time of the preliminary
consultation or upon filing the preliminary plat or certified survey map if no
preliminary consultation is held:
§ 305-10. Submittal requirements for preliminary plats and
certified survey maps.
A. Information including data on existing covenants, land characteristics
and available community facilities and utilities; and information
describing the land division proposal such as number of residential lots,
typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas, playgrounds,
park area and other public areas, tree location, proposed protective
covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements.
B. A location map showing the relationship of the proposed land division to
existing community facilities which serve or influence it. Include
development name and location; elementary and high schools; scale;
North arrow; and date.
C. A sketch plan showing the proposed layout of streets, lots and other
features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a
sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey.
A. The preliminary plat or certified survey map shall be drawn with
waterproof nonfading black ink on paper of good quality on a scale of
not more than 100 feet to an inch. Twenty copies of the preliminary plat
or certified survey map shall be provided. The preliminary plat or
certified survey map shall include the following information:
(1) Date, scale and North point.
(2) The proposed land division name, which shall not duplicate the
name of any plat previously recorded in Waukesha County.
(3) The name and address of the owner, the subdivider and the
engineer or surveyor preparing the plat.
(4) Location of the land division by government lot, quarter-quarter
section, section, township, range and county.
(5) A small scale drawing of the section or government subdivision of
the section in which the land division lies, with the location of the
subdivision indicated thereon.
(6) The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision.
§ 305-9 LAND DIVISION § 305-10
305:355
(7) Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of
adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land.
(8) Zoning on and adjacent to the land division.
(9) Location, widths and names of all existing and platted streets,
alleys or other public ways and easements, railroad and utility
rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage ditches,
permanent structures, bridges and other pertinent data as
determined by the Plan Commission.
(10) The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of
the survey and the approximate high-water and low-water
elevations of such lakes or streams. All elevations shall be referred
to some permanent established datum plane.
(11) If the land division borders a lake or stream, the distances and
bearings of a meander line established not less than 20 feet back
from the ordinary high-water mark of the lake or stream.
(12) Layout, width and approximate grades of all new streets and rightsof-
way, such as alleys, highways, easements for sewers, water
mains, and other public utilities.
(13) Direction and distance to nearest sewer mains.
(14) Approximate dimensions of all lots, together with proposed lot and
block numbers.
(15) Proposed building lines.
(16) Approximate radii of all curves and length of tangents.
(17) Approximate location and area of property proposed to be
dedicated for public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for use
of all property owners in the land division with the conditions, if
any, of such dedication or reservation.
(18) Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet or at more
frequent intervals, if required by the Plan Commission for land of
unusual topography.
B. Testing. The Village Engineer may require that borings and soundings
be made in specified areas to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and water
conditions, including depth to bedrock and depth to groundwater table.
C. Platting in a floodplain area. When receiving a preliminary plat or
certified survey map, all or part of which lies in any floodplain area, the
Board of Trustees, after review and recommendation by the Plan
Commission, may, prior to rendering a decision thereon:
(1) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph,
or a plan certified by a competent technician, which accurately
locates the floodplain proposal with respect to the floodplain
§ 305-10 ELM GROVE CODE § 305-10
305:356
§ 305-11. Submittal requirements for final plat.
district limits, channel of stream, existing floodplain developments,
together with all pertinent information such as the nature of the
proposal; fill limits and elevations; building flood elevations; and
floodproofing measures.
(2) Transmit one copy of the information which may be required herein
to the Department of Natural Resources with a request, where
deemed necessary, to have that agency provide expert technical
assistance in evaluating the effects of the proposed project upon
flood heights, velocities, and floodplain storage areas and the
determination of flood protection levels.
(3) Require the applicant to furnish such of the following additional
information as is deemed necessary by the Board of Trustees, after
review and recommendation by the Plan Commission, for the
evaluation of the effects of the proposal upon flood flows and
floodplain storage and to render a decision on the proposed
floodplain use:
(a) A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the
stream, the floodplain adjoining each side of the channel,
cross-sectional area to be occupied by the proposed
development, and high-water information.
(b) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing
structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water
supply, sanitary facilities, and soil types and other pertinent
information.
(c) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream.
(d) Specifications for structure construction and materials, filling,
dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials,
water supply and sanitary facilities.
D. Affidavit. The registered land surveyor preparing the preliminary plat
or certified survey map shall certify on the face of the plat or certified
survey map that it is a correct representation of all existing land
divisions and features and that he/she has fully complied with the
provisions of this chapter.
E. Statement. A supplementary written statement shall be submitted by
the subdivider along with the preliminary plat or certified survey map
briefly describing improvements, such as grading, paving, tree
planting, installation of utilities, and improvements to park and
recreation areas, which the subdivider proposes to make and when he/
she intends to make them.
§ 305-10 LAND DIVISION § 305-11
305:357
A. A final plat of subdivided land shall comply with the requirements of
Section 236.20 of the Wisconsin Statutes which is hereby adopted by
reference.
B. The affidavits and certificates required by Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin
Statutes shall be lettered or printed legibly with black, durable ink or
printed legibly on the final plat.
§ 305-11 ELM GROVE CODE § 305-11
305:358
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 305-12. General requirements.
The proposed land division shall conform to:
§ 305-13. Streets.
A. The provisions of Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes;
B. All applicable ordinances of the village;
C. The Official Map;
D. The rules of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and Waukesha
County relating to safety of access and the preservation of the public
interest and investment in the streets if the subdivision or any lot
contained therein abuts on a state trunk highway or connecting street.
A. General considerations. The streets shall be designed and located in
relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions
and natural terrain features such as streams and existing tree growth,
to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to
the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
B. Conform to Official Map. The arrangement, width, grade and location of
all streets shall conform to the Official Map of the village, if any exists.
C. Arrangement.
(1) Arterial streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of major streets and highways.
(2) Collector streets shall be properly related to the mass transit
system, to special traffic generating from facilities such as schools,
churches and shopping areas, to population densities, and to the
primary streets into which they feed.
(3) Secondary streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible
to topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit
efficient drainage and sewer systems, and to require the minimum
amount of street necessary to provide convenient, safe access to
property.
(4) Railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. Where a land
division borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited
access highway right-of-way, the Plan Commission may require a
street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-ofway,
at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land as for park purposes in residential districts or for
commercial or industrial purposes in other districts.
§ 305-12 LAND DIVISION § 305-13
305:359
(5) Access onto arterial and collector streets. Where a land division
borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector
street, the Plan Commission may require that marginal access
streets be provided, that the backs of lots abut the primary or
collector street and be provided with screen planting contained in a
nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, and that other
provisions be made for the adequate protection of residential
properties and the separation of through and local traffic.
(6) Width. The right-of-way and roadway of all streets shall be of the
width specified on the Official Map or Master Plan or, if no width is
specified there, they shall be not less than the width specified
below:
Road Type
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Roadway
(feet)
Arterial street 80 48
Collector street 60 36
Secondary and marginal
access streets
60 30
(7) Grades. The grade of major and collector streets shall not exceed
6%, unless necessitated by exceptional topography and approved
by the Plan Commission. The grade of all other streets shall not
exceed 10%. The minimum grade of all streets shall be 0.3%.
(8) Horizontal curves. A minimum sight distance with clear visibility,
measured along the center line, shall be provided of at least 300
feet on major streets, 200 feet for collector streets and 100 feet on
minor streets.
(9) Vertical curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected by
vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to 15 times the
algebraic difference in the rate of grade for major streets and
collector streets and 1/2 of this minimum length for all other
streets.
(10) Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced
between reverse curves on major and collector streets.
(11) Street names. New street names shall not duplicate the names of
existing streets, but streets that are continuations of others already
in existence and named shall bear the name of the existing streets.
(12) Cul-de-sac or dead-end streets. Streets designed to have one end
permanently closed shall not exceed 500 feet in length and shall
terminate with a turnaround of not less than 100 feet in diameter of
right-of-way and a roadway turnaround of 80 feet in diameter.
§ 305-13 ELM GROVE CODE § 305-13
305:360
§ 305-14. Easements.
§ 305-15. Lots.
(13) Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in the
village under conditions approved by the Plan Commission.
(14) Half-streets. Where a half-street is adjacent to the subdivision, the
other half of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider.
(15) Intersections.
(a) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and
not more than two streets shall intersect at one point unless
approved by the Plan Commission.
(b) Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a
radius of 15 feet or of a greater radius where the Plan
Commission considers it necessary.
(c) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment
shall be continuous.
A. Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities where required by the Plan Commission and shall
be at least 10 feet wide.
B. Where a land division is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the
drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and
adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow.
A. General. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for
the location of the land division and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
B. Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of
the underlying zoning district.
C. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street
service and parking facilities required by the type of use and
development contemplated.
D. Residential lots, fronting on major streets and highways, should be
platted with extra depth to permit generous distances between the
structures and such traffic ways.
§ 305-13 LAND DIVISION § 305-15
305:361
E. Access to public street. Every lot shall front or abut on a public street.
Lots with an access only to private drives or streets shall be permitted
only with Plan Commission approval.
F. Lots at right angles. Lots at right angles to each other should be
avoided wherever possible, especially in residential areas.
G. Lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
H. Large lots. In case a tract is subdivided into parcels containing two or
more acres, such parcels shall be arranged to allow the resubdivision of
any parcels into normal lots in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
I. Municipal boundaries. Lots shall follow municipal boundary lines
whenever practicable, rather than cross them.
J. Double frontage. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be
avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages
of topography and orientation.
§ 305-15 ELM GROVE CODE § 305-15
305:362
ARTICLE VI
Public Sites and Open Spaces
§ 305-16. Consideration of public sites and open spaces.
In the design of the plat, due consideration shall be given by the subdivider
and the Plan Commission to the reservation of suitable sites of adequate
area for future schools, parks, playgrounds and other public purposes.
Consideration shall be given to the preservation of stands of existing trees,
lakes, ponds and watercourses.
§ 305-16 LAND DIVISION § 305-16
305:363

ARTICLE VII
Required Improvements
§ 305-17. Development agreement.
Before final approval of a plat, the subdivider shall install street and utility
improvements as hereinafter provided. If such improvements are not
installed as required at the time that the final plat is submitted for approval,
the subdivider shall, before the approval of the plat, enter into a
development agreement with Elm Grove agreeing to install the required
improvements and file, as a condition of execution of said developer's
agreement, a bond in the amount of 110% of the estimated cost of the
improvements and in form meeting the approval of the Village Attorney or
a certified check in an amount equal to 110% of the estimated cost of the
improvements. This estimate is to be made by the Village Engineer, as a
guaranty that such improvements will be completed by the subdivider or his
subcontractors not later than one year from the date of recording of the plat
and as a further guaranty that all obligations to subcontractors for work on
the development are satisfied.
§ 305-18. Village Engineer's approval of contractors and
subcontractors.
Contractors and subcontractors who are to be engaged in the construction
of street and utility improvements on dedicated street rights-of-way shall be
subject to the approval of the Village Engineer.
§ 305-19. Monuments.
The subdivision shall be monumented as required by Section 236.15 of the
Wisconsin Statutes which is hereby adopted by reference.
§ 305-20. Streets and utilities.
A. Before the final plat of a subdivision located within the village limits will
be approved, the subdivider shall provide the following facilities, give
satisfactory proof that he/she has contracted to install such facilities, or
file a performance bond insuring that such facilities will be installed
within the time required by the Board of Trustees:
(1) Water and sanitary sewer mains, and laterals to the lot line, where
connection to existing systems can be reasonably provided.
(2) Streets graded to full width and the roadway graded to subgrade.
After installation of the water and sewer facilities, the roadway
shall be surfaced with six inches of crushed gravel and a seal coat
applied.
(3) Adequate facilities to provide surface water drainage. The
adequacy of such facilities shall be subject to approval of the
Village Engineer.
§ 305-17 LAND DIVISION § 305-21
305:365
§ 305-21. Electronic files.
Within 10 days of final approval of a final plat or certified survey map,
subdividers shall provide the Village Engineer with an electronic file of
the final plat or certified survey map in a format compatible with the
village's digital parcel mapping and Geographic Information System (GIS)
as specified by the Village Engineer.
§ 305-21 ELM GROVE CODE § 305-21
305:366
ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 305-22. Variance or waiver of provisions.
When, in the judgment of the Board of Appeals, it would be inappropriate
to apply literally a provision of this chapter because extraordinary hardship
would result, it may waive or vary such provisions so that substantial justice
may be done and the public interest secured, provided that in no event shall
the requirement of filing and recording the plat or survey map be waived.
§ 305-22 LAND DIVISION § 305-22
305:367

ARTICLE IX
Fees
§ 305-23. Administrative and other fees.
A. Application and processing fees. The subdivider shall pay the village all
application and processing fees as required by the Board of Trustees.
Such fees shall be set by the Board of Trustees and may be revised
periodically.
B. Inspection fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to
the village for such inspection as the Village Engineer deems necessary
to assure that the construction of the required improvements is in
compliance with the plans, specifications and ordinances of the village
or any other governmental authority.
C. Planning and engineering review fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee
equal to the actual cost to the village for all plan review and
engineering work incurred by the village in connection with the plat.
Planning and engineering review work shall include review of plans by
consultants engaged by the village. Engineering work shall also include
the preparation of construction plans and standard specifications. The
Village Engineer may permit the subdivider to furnish all, some or part
of the required construction plans and specifications, in which case no
engineering fees shall be levied for such plans and specifications.
D. Additional administrative or legal fees. The subdivider shall pay a fee
equal to the cost of any additional legal, administrative or fiscal work
which may be undertaken by the village in connection with the plat.
Legal work shall include the drafting of contracts between the village
and the subdivider.
§ 305-23 LAND DIVISION § 305-23
305:369

ARTICLE X
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 305-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2005]
Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
In addition, the remedies provided by Sections 236.30, 236.31 and 236.335
of the Wisconsin Statutes shall be available to the village.
§ 305-24 LAND DIVISION § 305-24
305:371
Chapter 325
WATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 106.
Plumbing — See Ch. 212.
Sewers — See Ch. 232.
Land division — See Ch. 305.
§ 305-24 ELM GROVE CODE § 305-24
305:372
ARTICLE I
Construction Site Erosion Control
[Adopted 8-10-1987]
§ 325-1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to require erosion control practices that will
reduce the amount of sediment and other pollutants leaving construction
sites during land development or land disturbance activities. This article
applies to all land disturbing construction activities.
§ 325-2. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted under the authority granted by § 61.354, Wis. Stats.
§ 325-3. Findings and purpose.
§ 325-4. Applicability.
This article applies to land disturbing and land developing activities on
lands within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village. All state-funded
or state-conducted construction is exempt from this article.
§ 325-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL LAND USE — Use of land for planting, growing,
cultivating and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption and
pasturing or yarding of livestock.
COMMERCIAL LAND USE — Use of land for the retail or wholesale sale of
goods or services.
CONSTRUCTION SITE CONTROL MEASURE — A control measure used to
meet the requirements of § 325-8B.
CONTROL MEASURE — A practice or combination of practices to control
erosion and attendant pollution.
A. Findings. The Village of Elm Grove finds that runoff from construction
sites carries a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to
the waters of the state and this Village.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to preserve the natural
resources; to protect the quality of the waters of the state and the
Village; and to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the
people, to the extent practicable, by minimizing the amount of sediment
and other pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from construction
sites to lakes, streams and wetlands.
§ 325-1 LAND DIVISION § 325-5
305:373
CONTROL PLAN — A written description of the number, locations, sizes
and other pertinent information of control measures designed to meet the
requirements of this article submitted by the applicant for review and
approval by the Public Works Director.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
LAND DEVELOPING ACTIVITY — The construction of buildings, roads,
parking lots, paved storage areas and similar facilities.
LAND DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made change
of the land surface, including removing vegetation cover, excavating, filling
and grading but not including agricultural land uses such as planting,
growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops, growing and tending of
gardens, harvesting of trees and landscaping modifications.
LANDOWNER — Any person holding title to or having an interest in land.
LAND USER — Any person operating, leasing, renting or having made other
arrangements with the landowner by which the landowner authorizes use
of his or her land.
RUNOFF — The rainfall, snow melt or irrigation water flowing over the
ground surface.
SET OF ONE-YEAR DESIGN STORMS — The following rain intensities
and rain volumes or corresponding values specific to the community for
the storm durations of 0.5, one, three, six, 12 and 24 hours that occur
approximately once per year.
Storm Duration
(hours)
Average Rain
Intensity
(inches/hour)
Total Rain
(inches)
0.5 1.8 0.9
1 1.1 1.1
3 0.7 1.3
6 0.5 1.5
12 0.2 2.0
24 0.1 2.3
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land disturbing or land development activity is proposed in the
permit application.
§ 325-6. Design criteria, standards and specifications for control
measures.
All control measures required to comply with this article shall meet the
design criteria, standards and specifications for the control measures based
§ 325-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-6
305:374
on accepted design criteria, standards and specifications identified by the
Public Works Director.
§ 325-7. Maintenance of control measures.
All sedimentation basins and other control measures necessary to meet
the requirements of this article shall be maintained by the applicant or
subsequent landowner during the period of land disturbance and land
development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate
performance and to prevent nuisance conditions.
§ 325-8. Control of erosion and pollutants during land disturbance
and development.
A. Applicability. This article applies to the following sites of land
development or land disturbing activities: [Amended 3-8-1999]
(1) Those requiring a subdivision plat approval or the construction or
demolition, as that term is defined in Chapter 106, Building
Construction, § 106-12A of the Village Code, of any house or
commercial, industrial or institutional buildings.
(2) Those requiring a certified survey approval or the construction of
houses or commercial, industrial or institutional buildings on lots of
approved certified surveys.
(3) Those involving grading, removal of protective ground cover or
vegetation, excavation, land filling or other land disturbing activity
affecting a surface area of 4,000 square feet or more.
(4) Those involving excavation or filling or a combination of excavation
and filling affecting 40 cubic yards or more of dirt, sand or other
excavation or fill material. [Amended 2-24-2009]
(5) Those involving street, highway, road or bridge construction,
enlargement, relocation or reconstruction.
(6) Those involving the laying, repairing, replacing or enlarging of an
underground pipe or facility for a distance of 300 feet or more.
B. Erosion and other pollutant control requirements. The following
requirements shall be met on all sites described in Subsection A:
(1) Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by
temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters, upslope
chambers, hydro-cyclones, swirl concentrators or other
appropriate controls designed and used to remove particles of 100
microns or greater for the highest dewatering pumping rate. If the
water is demonstrated to have no particles greater than 100
microns during dewatering operations, then no control is needed
before discharge, except as determined by the Public Works
§ 325-6 LAND DIVISION § 325-8
305:375
Director. Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes
erosion of the site or receiving channels.
(2) Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building
materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater,
toxic materials or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed
and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel or
storm sewer system.
(3) Tracking. Each site shall have graveled roads, access drives and
parking areas of sufficient width and length to prevent sediment
from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment
reaching a public or private road shall be removed by street
cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday.
(4) Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets shall be protected with
a straw bale, filter fabric or equivalent barrier meeting accepted
design criteria, standards and specifications.
(5) Site erosion control. The following criteria [Subsection B(5)(a)
through (d)] apply only to land development or land disturbing
activities that result in runoff leaving the site:
(a) Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through the
site shall be diverted around disturbed areas, if practical.
Otherwise, the channel shall be protected as described below
in Subsection B(5)(c)[3]. Sheet flow runoff from adjacent areas
greater than 10,000 square feet in area shall also be diverted
around disturbed areas unless shown to have resultant runoff
velocities of less than 0.5 feet per second across the disturbed
area for the set of one-year design storms. Diverted runoff shall
be conveyed in a manner that will not erode the conveyance
and receiving channels.
(b) All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical
sequence to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any one
time.
(c) Runoff from the entire disturbed area on the site shall be
controlled by meeting either Subsection B(5)(c)[1] and [2] or
[1] and [3].
[1] All disturbed ground left inactive for 21 or more days shall
be stabilized by seeding or sodding (only available prior to
September 15) or by mulching or covering or other
equivalent control measure. Because of inclement weather
or extenuating circumstances, the Building Inspector may
vary this requirement up to 30 days.
[2] For sites with more than 10 acres disturbed at one time, or
if a channel originates in the disturbed area, one or more
sedimentation basins shall be constructed. Each
§ 325-8 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-8
305:376
§ 325-9. Permit and control plan required.
No landowner or land user may commence a land disturbance or land
development activity subject to this article without receiving prior approval
of a control plan for the site and a permit from the Public Works Director. At
least one landowner or land user controlling or using the site and desiring
to undertake a land disturbing or land developing activity subject to this
article shall submit an application for a permit and a control plan and pay
an application fee to the Village of Elm Grove. By submitting an application,
the applicant is authorizing the Village personnel and agents to enter the
site to obtain information required for the review of the control plan.
sedimentation basin shall have a surface area of at least
1% of the area draining to the basin and at least three
feet of depth and shall be constructed in accordance with
accepted design specifications. Sediment shall be removed
to maintain a depth of three feet. The basin shall be
designed to trap sediment greater than 15 microns in
size, based on the set of one-year design storms having
durations from 0.5 to 24 hours. The basin discharge rate
shall also be sufficiently low so as not to cause erosion
along the discharge channel or the receiving water.
[3] For sites with less than 10 acres disturbed at one time,
filter fences, straw bales or equivalent control measures
shall be placed along all sideslope and downslope sides of
the site. If a channel or area of concentrated runoff passes
through the site, filter fences shall be placed along the
channel edges to reduce sediment reaching the channel.
(d) Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than 10 cubic
yards of material should not be located with a downslope
drainage length of less than 25 feet to a roadway or drainage
channel. If remaining for more than seven days, they shall be
stabilized by mulching, vegetative cover, tarps or other means.
Erosion from piles which will be in existence for less than
seven days shall be controlled by placing straw bales or filter
fence barriers around the pile. In-street utility repair or
construction soil or dirt storage piles located closer than 25
feet to a roadway or drainage channel must be covered with
tarps or suitable alternative control if exposed for more than
seven days, and the storm drain inlets must be protected with
straw bales or other appropriate filtering barriers.
A. Content of the control plan for land disturbing activities covering more
than one acre.
(1) Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions on a scale of at
least one inch equals 100 feet showing the site and immediately
adjacent areas.
§ 325-8 LAND DIVISION § 325-9
305:377
(a) Site boundaries and adjacent lands which accurately identify
site location;
(b) Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other
watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site;
(c) One-hundred-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways;
(d) Location of the predominant soil types;
(e) Vegetative cover;
(f) Location and dimensions of stormwater drainage systems and
natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the
site and existing flows through the site in accordance with the
one-year set of storms;
(g) Locations and dimensions of utilities, structures, roads,
highways and paving; and
(h) Site topography at a contour interval not to exceed five feet.
(2) Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on the
same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes.
(3) Site construction plan. A site construction plan including:
(a) Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing
activities;
(b) Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt
stockpiles;
(c) Locations, dimensions and specifications of all construction
site management control measures necessary to meet the
requirements of this article;
(d) Schedule of anticipated starting and completion dates of each
land disturbing or land developing activity, including the
installation of construction site control measures needed to
meet the requirements of this article; and
(e) Provisions for maintenance of the construction site control
measures during construction.
B. Content of control plan statement for land disturbing activities covering
less one acre but meeting the applicability requirements stated in
§ 325-8A.
(1) An erosion control plan statement (with map) shall be submitted to
briefly describe the site and erosion controls (including the site
development schedule) that will be used to meet the requirements
of this article.
§ 325-9 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-9
305:378
C. Review of control plan. Within 30 days of receipt of the application,
control plan (or control plan statement) and fee, the Public Works
Director shall review the application and control plan to determine if
the requirements of this article are met. The Public Works Director
shall approve the plan, inform the applicant and issue a permit. If the
conditions are not met, the Public Works Director shall inform the
applicant in writing and may either require needed information or
disapprove the plan. Within 30 days of receipt of needed information,
the Public Works Director shall again determine if the plan meets the
requirements of this article. If the plan is disapproved, the Public Works
Director shall inform the applicant in writing of the reasons for the
disapproval.
D. Permits.
(1) Duration. Permits shall be valid for a period of 180 days or the
length of the building permit or other construction authorizations,
whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The Public Works
Director may extend the period one or more times for up to an
additional 180 days. The Public Works Director may require
additional control measures as a condition of the extension if they
are necessary to meet the requirements of this article.
(2) Performance bonds. As a condition of the approval and issuance of
the permit, the Public Works Director shall require the applicant to
provide either a bond, irrevocable letter of credit or cash escrow to
guarantee a good faith execution of the approved control plan and
any permit conditions. This amount shall be not less than the cost
of constructing the improvements for erosion and sediment control
practices.
(a) The guaranty shall include the cost of implementing all phases
of the plan, from the clearing and stockpiling operation to final
grading and landscaping, including a maintenance guaranty
for a period of not less than two years from the recording of the
final land division document, acceptance of the improvements
by the municipality or the issuance of a permit on a grading
project only, whichever occurs last.
(b) An agreement will be part of this guaranty which will give the
municipality the authority to use the funds to complete the
project if the developer or contractor defaults or does not
properly implement the approved plan. This agreement shall
be effective for a sufficient time period to perform the activities
required, make the appropriate inspections and approve the
final installation after completion. The municipality may extend
the agreement beyond its original expiration date if necessary,
due to unexpected or unforeseen circumstances beyond the
control of the developer.
§ 325-9 LAND DIVISION § 325-9
305:379
§ 325-10. Inspections.
§ 325-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(c) A performance guaranty shall be replaced with a maintenance
guarantee for a stated period of time in an amount equal to a
percentage of the cost of the construction of the improvements
and usually between 10% and 15%. This agreement shall also
be recorded in the Waukesha County Register of Deeds office.
(3) Permit conditions. All permits shall require the permittee to:
(a) Notify the Public Works Director within 48 hours of
commencing any land disturbing activity;
(b) Notify the Public Works Director of completion of any control
measures within 14 days after their installation;
(c) Obtain permission in writing from the Public Works Director
prior to modifying the control plan;
(d) Install all control measures as identified in the approved
control plan;
(e) Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage
systems, control measures and other facilities identified in the
control plan;
(f) Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces
and drainageways resulting from land developing or disturbing
activities;
(g) Inspect the construction control measures after each rain of
0.5 inches or more and at least once each week and make
needed repairs;
(h) Allow the Public Works Director to enter the site for the
purpose of inspecting compliance with the control plan or for
performing any work necessary to bring the site into
compliance with the control plan; and
(i) Keep a copy of the control plan on the site.
A. The Public Works Director shall inspect construction sites at least once
a month during the period starting March 1 and ending October 31 and
at least two times during the period starting November 1 and ending
February 28 to ensure compliance with the control plan.
B. If land disturbing or land development activities are being carried out
without a permit, the Public Works Director shall enter the land
pursuant to the provisions of §§ 66.122 and 66.123, Wis. Stats.
A. The Public Works Director may post a stop-work order if:
§ 325-9 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-11
305:380
§ 325-12. Appeals. [Amended 4-10-2000]
(1) Any land disturbing or land developing activity regulated under
this article is being undertaken without a permit;
(2) The control plan is not being implemented in a good faith manner;
or
(3) The conditions of the permit are not being met.
B. If the permittee does not cease the activity or comply with the control
plan or permit conditions within 10 days, the Public Works Director may
revoke the permit.
C. If the landowner or land user where no permit has been issued does not
cease the activity within 20 days, the Public Works Director may
request the Village Attorney to obtain a cease and desist order.
D. The Public Works Director or the Board of Appeals may retract the stopwork
order or the revocation.
E. Ten days after posting a stop-work order, the Public Works Director may
issue a notice of intent to the permittee or landowner or land user of the
Public Works Director's intent to perform work necessary to comply
with this article. The Public Works Director may go on the land and
commence the work after 14 days from issuing the notice of intent. The
costs of the work performed by the Public Works Director plus interest
at the rate authorized by the Village Board shall be billed to the
permittee or the landowner. In the event a permittee or landowner fails
to pay the amount due, the Clerk shall enter the amount due on the tax
rolls and collect it as a special assessment against the property
pursuant to § 66.60(16), Wis. Stats.
F. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any rule or
regulation made under this article shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in § 1-16 of this Code, except that the forfeiture shall not be
less than $100. [Amended 4-10-2000; 7-26-2005]
G. Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by
injunction.
A. Any person aggrieved by the administration of this article may appeal
the decision to the Board of Appeals established by the Village pursuant
to § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats. The Board shall hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, decision or
determination made by the Village Engineer or Zoning Administrator in
administering this article.
B. The owner may appeal to the Board of Appeals within 10 calendar days
of actual service of the order. If an appeal is not taken by filing in
writing with the Village Clerk within such 10 days, the order shall be
§ 325-11 LAND DIVISION § 325-12
305:381
§ 325-13. Recovery of costs.
Any costs incurred by the municipality in obtaining legal, planning,
engineer or other technical or professional advice in the review or
inspection of the development projects shall be charged to the applicant
and paid prior to the approval of the final plat or certified survey or prior to
issuance of a building permit on the development.
final. Hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be conducted
pursuant to § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats.
§ 325-12 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-13
305:382
ARTICLE II
Surface Drainage Management
[Adopted 5-13-1991]
§ 325-14. Findings; purpose.
The Village of Elm Grove is reliant upon roadside drainage ditches,
driveway culverts and storm sewers at limited locations for management of
surface drainage. The purpose of this article is to promote the maintenance
of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution;
prevent and control soil erosion; prevent and control the adverse effects of
stormwater; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses;
preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic
growth.
§ 325-15. Drains.
§ 325-16. Application for permit.
A. "Drain" means any device for the drainage of water from land or
protection of land from water, including without limitation any open
ditch, channel, swale, creek, tiles or pipeline, whether natural or manmade.
B. No person shall deliberately or by negligence obstruct or fill a drain
without first obtaining a permit from the Public Works Director.25 Such
permit may be withheld for a period not to exceed 90 days for the
purpose of providing alternative drainage, by storm sewers or other
means.
C. The Public Works Director may remove from drains any obstructions or
fill installed without a permit.
D. No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair or install any
drainage structure in any drain without obtaining a permit from the
Public Works Director. Issuance of such permit shall be predicated upon
a finding by the Public Works Director that such drainage structure
does not substantially retard the flow of water and does not adversely
affect the public health, safety or welfare.
A. Any person seeking a permit to alter or install a drainage structure or to
fill or obstruct a drain or to construct, reconstruct, alter, repair or
install any drainage structure in any drain shall fill out a written
application with the Public Works Director containing the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and, if a corporation, the
names and addresses of the officers thereof.
25.Editor's Note: Throughout this article, references to the "Village Engineer" were amended
to read "Public Works Director" at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I).
§ 325-14 LAND DIVISION § 325-16
305:383
§ 325-17. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 325-18. Right of entry; recovery of costs.
Pursuant to § 88.87(3)(c), Wis. Stats., the Public Works Director may enter
onto any property for the purpose of removing an obstruction in a drain
which is in violation of § 88.87(3)(a), Wis. Stats., and which is flooding or
causing damage to a Village highway. The reasonable cost of removal of
an obstruction under this article shall be charged to the property owner
without further notice by a special charge pursuant to § 66.60(16), Wis.
Stats. In the event any special charge remains unpaid for longer than 30
(2) The location of the proposed work.
(3) The plans and specifications for such work in triplicate. This shall
include the drainage area and the design of the structures or
alteration and such other information as the Public Works Director
shall determine to be necessary to process the application.
B. The permit fee shall be $25.
A. Whenever a drain is obstructed by the negligence or deliberate action
of the owner without a permit or when a drainage structure is
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired or installed without a
permit in either a natural watercourse or a drain, the Public Works
Director shall serve a written order by certified mail on the owner
demanding removal within a reasonable time, as specified within the
letter. [Amended 4-10-2000]
(1) Any person aggrieved by the administration of this article may
appeal the decision to the Board of Appeals established by the
Village pursuant to § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats. The Board shall hear
and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any
order, decision or determination made by the Public Works Director
or Zoning Administrator in administering this article.
(2) The owner may appeal to the Board of Appeals within 10 calendar
days of actual service of the order. If an appeal is not taken by filing
in writing with the Village Clerk within such 10 days, the order
shall be final. Hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be
conducted pursuant to § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats.
B. If the owner neglects or refuses to comply with a removal order after
his or her appeal period has expired, the Public Works Director shall
promptly refer the matter to the Village Attorney's office for
prosecution.
C. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any rule or
regulation made under this article shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in § 1-16 of this Code, except that the forfeiture shall not be
less than $100. [Amended 4-10-2000; 7-26-2005]
§ 325-16 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-18
305:384
days, a lien against the property shall be created in accordance with the
provisions of § 66.60(16)(b), Wis. Stats.
§ 325-19. Interference with Village officers prohibited.
No person shall interfere with or impede any Village officer, employee or
contractor in removing an obstruction.
§ 325-20. Emergencies.
Where a drainage obstruction in a natural watercourse or drain is
determined by the Public Works Director to constitute an immediate danger
to the public health, safety or welfare, the Public Works Director shall
proceed forthwith to enter upon the lands involved and have the obstruction
removed, either by public agency or by contract. If such obstruction was
caused by the negligence or deliberate act of the owner and not by natural
causes, the reasonable cost of removal shall be charged and assessed as
provided in § 325-18 of this article.
§ 325-18 LAND DIVISION § 325-20
305:385

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
[Adopted 4-10-2000]
§ 325-21. Authority.
This article is adopted under the authority granted by §§ 61.34(1), 61.354
and 62.234, Wis. Stats.
§ 325-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of this community and to diminish threats to the
environment by:
§ 325-23. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to achieve the aforestated purpose by requiring
the preparation and implementation of duly approved site-specific
stormwater management plans for sites proposed to be developed or
redeveloped and properties proposed to be divided or subdivided and for
logical subwatershed areas containing such sites or properties. All
discharges of stormwater shall be made in a manner consistent with
approved site-specific stormwater management plans, and all land
development and redevelopment activities are intended to include
stormwater management facilities and measures set forth in the approved
plans. Where the Village has prepared and adopted a stormwater
management system plan encompassing the site proposed to be developed
or redeveloped or property proposed to be subdivided, the site-specific plan
required shall be consistent with the system plan.
§ 325-24. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted
A. Establishing procedures to control the adverse impacts of stormwater
runoff and assure and protect the adequacy of existing drainage
facilities to store and convey stormwater;
B. Promoting the attainment and maintenance of surface and ground
water quality;
C. Minimizing the damages to public and private property, the dangers to
public health and safety and the inconveniences and inefficiencies
caused by poor surface drainage and flooding;
D. Reducing the adverse impacts of new land use development and
redevelopment on the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff; and
E. Reducing stream channel erosion and sedimentation.
§ 325-21 LAND DIVISION § 325-24
305:387
or issued pursuant to laws. However, wherever this article imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this article shall govern.
§ 325-25. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor
of the Village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 325-26. Title.
This article shall be known as, referred to or cited as the "Stormwater
Management Ordinance, Village of Elm Grove, Wisconsin."
§ 325-27. Definitions.
The definitions as used in this article are as follows:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The planting, growing, cultivating and
harvesting of crops, including sod; growing and tending of gardens and
trees; harvesting of trees; and pasturing or yarding of livestock.
DETENTION FACILITY — A structure designed to temporarily store
stormwater runoff for later release in order to delay and reduce peak flow
rates and pollutant concentrations. The most common detention facilities
include dry basins, and wet ponds where appropriate may also be used for
detention storage, as well as vehicular parking lots, depressed landscaped
areas, rooftops and underground storage chambers.
GROSS AGGREGATE AREA — The total area, in square feet, of all land
located within the interior property boundary containing a proposed land
development, redevelopment or property subdivision activity.
HYPSOMETRY — Those parts of a map which represent, usually by contour
lines, the physical distance of the surface of the earth above a specified
reference surface.
INFILTRATION — The process by which rainfall or surface runoff percolates
or penetrates into the underling soil.
LAND DEVELOPMENT OR REDEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Any
construction or reconstruction of buildings, roadways, parking lots, paved
and unpaved storage areas and similar facilities.
OFF SITE — Located outside the exterior property boundaries described in
the permit application for a proposed land development or redevelopment
activity or outside the exterior boundaries of a proposed property
subdivision.
ON SITE — Located within the exterior property boundaries described in
the permit application for a proposed land development or redevelopment
or within the exterior boundaries of a proposed property subdivision.
§ 325-24 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-27
305:388
PLANIMETRY — Those parts of a map which represent the horizontal
location and extent of man-made and natural features.
POST-DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — The extent
and distribution of land cover and stormwater management facilities and
measures anticipated to occur under conditions of full site development,
redevelopment or property subdivision that will influence stormwater runoff
and infiltration.
PROPERTY SUBDIVISION — A division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by
the owner thereof or the owner's agent for the purpose of sale or building
development and redevelopment where the act of division creates a number
of parcels or building sites of a minimum size, as defined in Chapter 305,
Land Division.
RETENTION FACILITY — A storage structure designed to reduce or
eliminate the surface discharge of stormwater through evaporation and
infiltration. Wet ponds are the most common type of retention storage,
although wet ponds may also be used for detention storage.
SITE — The entire area of proposed land development, redevelopment or
property subdivision.
SITE-SPECIFIC STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan that
identifies what actions should be taken to reduce stormwater quantity
and pollutant loads from land development, redevelopment or property
subdivision activities to levels meeting the purpose and intent of this article.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — A structure designed to
control or convey stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes and
peak flow discharge rates.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — A practice or technique to
reduce stormwater runoff flow rates, volumes or pollutant loadings.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A plan developed to
address stormwater drainage and nonpoint source pollution control
problems under both existing and planned conditions within a logical
planning area, such as on a watershed or subwatershed, and which meets
the purpose and intent of this article.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — That portion of the precipitation falling during
a rainfall event or that portion of snow melt that runs off the surface of the
land and into the natural or artificial drainage system.
SUBDIVIDE OR SUBDIVISION — The development, redevelopment or any
form of property division which affects property satisfying any of the
dimensional or other criteria in § 325-31 of this article.
WETLAND — An area where the groundwater elevation is at, near or above
the land surface, characterized by both hydric soils and the presence of
hydrophytic plants. For the purpose of this article, a wetland shall have
a minimum area of 2.5 acres. It should be noted that wetlands having a
smaller area than 2.5 acres may be regulated for other purposes by the
federal, state, county and municipal governments.
§ 325-27 LAND DIVISION § 325-27
305:389
WETLAND FUNCTIONAL VALUE — The type, quality and significance of
the ecological and cultural benefits provided by wetland resources, such
as flood storage, water quality protection, groundwater recharge and
discharge, shoreline protection, fish and wildlife habitat, floral diversity,
aesthetics, recreation and education.
§ 325-28. Jurisdiction.
The jurisdiction of this article shall include all lands or waters within the
corporate limits of the Village of Elm Grove.
§ 325-29. Prohibited discharges; exemptions.
§ 325-30. Stormwater management plan and facilities required.
[Amended 12-17-2002]
A. No person shall discharge, spill or otherwise deposit substances or
materials which are not entirely composed of stormwater into receiving
bodies of surface water, storm sewers or other drainage facilities or
onto driveways, sidewalks, parking lots or other impervious or pervious
areas that drain into the streams and watercourses of the area. No
person shall connect a building wastewater sewer or drain to storm
sewers or other stormwater drainage facilities.
B. The following discharges are exempt from the provision of this article:
(1) Discharge authorized by a permit issued by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources;
(2) Discharges resulting from fire-fighting activities;
(3) Discharges from uncontaminated groundwater, potable water
sources, roof drains, foundation drains and foundation drain sump
pump discharges, air-conditioning condensation, lawn watering,
water main and hydrant flushing and swimming pools, if the pool
water has been dechlorinated;
(4) Discharges from individual automobile washing by automobile
owners not involving any commercially zoned site;
(5) Agricultural activities, such activities, however, being subject to
good soil and water conservation practices; and
(6) Facility maintenance activities undertaken by any federal, state,
county or municipal agency, such activities, however, being subject
to construction erosion control measures.
A. No person shall proceed with any residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional land use development or redevelopment or with the
division or subdivision of property without providing appropriate
stormwater management facilities that adequately control stormwater
runoff from such development or redevelopment or subdivided
§ 325-27 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-30
305:390
§ 325-31. Applicability.
This article applies to land use development, redevelopment and property
division or subdivision activities which meet the following criteria:
property. A site-specific stormwater management plan must be
submitted and approved by the Village Engineer before any required
new stormwater management facilities are constructed, unless
exempted or waived pursuant to the provisions of this article. An
approved site-specific stormwater management plan is also required
before an existing drainage system is relocated, deepened, widened,
enlarged, filled, obstructed or otherwise altered in preparation for
land use development and redevelopment or division or subdivision of
property. The plan must be submitted and approved before any land use
development and redevelopment is commenced or a land subdivision
plat or certified survey map is approved and recorded.
B. Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District Rules ("MMSD Rules")
contained in Chapter 13 on Surface Water and Stormwater Runoff
Management (effective January 1, 2002) and all future amendments
thereto are hereby adopted by reference. There shall be compliance
with all applicable provisions contained in MMSD Rules Chapter 13 as
may be amended from time to time that pertain to stormwater runoff
management and plan submittal requirements in addition to the
stormwater requirements of the Village of Elm Grove ordinances. This
shall include, but not be limited to, plat approval under Chapter 236
Wis. Stats., construction site erosion control and post-construction
stormwater quality best management practices to abate pollutant
runoff.
C. The Village Clerk or Village Zoning Administrator shall have available a
current copy of MMSD Rules Chapter 13 which shall be open to public
inspection.26
A. Residential land use development, redevelopment or property division
or subdivision occurring within a gross aggregate area of more than
five acres;
B. Residential land use development or redevelopment occurring within,
or property division of, a gross aggregate area of more than three acres,
if 1.5 acres or more of impervious surfaces are proposed;
C. Nonresidential land use development, redevelopment or property
division or subdivision occurring within a gross aggregate area of more
than 1.5 acres, if 0.5 acre or more of impervious surfaces are proposed;
and
26.NOTE: The MMSD Rules and Stormwater Quality Guidance materials on best management
practices for peak stormwater runoff apply to any development adding 0.5 acre or more of
impervious surface. They are available to read and print at www.mmsd.com [MMSD
website].
§ 325-30 LAND DIVISION § 325-31
305:391
§ 325-32. Exemptions.
The following development and redevelopment activities are exempt from
the requirement of this article:
§ 325-33. Waivers.
The Village Engineer may waive the requirements of this article in part or
in whole. A request for waiver shall be submitted to the Village Engineer
and shall include a narrative description and drawings of the proposed
development or redevelopment or subdivision for which the waiver is being
requested. The Village Engineer may grant a waiver if the Village Engineer
finds that:
D. Land use development, redevelopment or property division or
subdivision of any size area that in the opinion of the Village Engineer is
likely to result in stormwater runoff which exceeds the safe capacity of
existing drainage facilities or receiving watercourse; which causes
undue channel erosion; which increases surface water pollution; or
which endangers property or public health and safety.
A. Maintenance, alteration, improvement or use of an existing structure
which does not significantly affect the water quality or hydrologic and
hydraulic conditions of the surface water resources of the
subwatershed concerned as determined by the Village Engineer in
writing;
B. Maintenance activities undertaken by any federal, state or municipal
governmental agency;
C. Stormwater management facilities to be constructed or measures to be
undertaken by the Village when the Village Engineer has determined
that a stormwater management plan is not required; and
D. Agricultural activities not associated with development and
redevelopment.
A. The development or redevelopment or subdivision is not likely to:
(1) Significantly increase or decrease the rate or volume of stormwater
runoff from the development, redevelopment or subdivision site;
(2) Have a significant adverse impact on a wetland or other
environmentally sensitive area;
(3) Significantly contribute to the degradation of surface or ground
water quality; or
(4) Otherwise significantly impair attainment of the purpose of this
article; and
§ 325-31 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-33
305:392
§ 325-34. Site-specific stormwater management plan.
The site-specific stormwater management plan required by this article shall
meet the following requirements:
B. The applicable adopted stormwater management system plan does not
indicate the need for any site-specific stormwater management
measures on the site concerned.
A. General.
(1) The stormwater management plan shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer and shall contain all of the
information required to evaluate the adequacy of the plan and the
probable impacts of implementation of the plan on the quality and
quantity of stormwater discharges, on existing drainage facilities
and on surface and ground water quality. The plan shall contain the
name, address and telephone number of the owner or developer of
the site concerned, of the registered professional engineer
preparing the plan, of the person responsible for installation of the
stormwater management facilities recommended in the plan and of
the person responsible for the maintenance of those facilities.
(2) The plan shall consist of narrative descriptions and explanations;
maps, charts and graphs; tables; photographs; supporting
calculations; and references to recognized engineering text and
manuals as may be necessary to provide a clear and concise
description of the plan. The sources of maps and data presented in
the plan shall be identified.
B. Existing site conditions. The plan shall include a map and description of
the existing conditions of the site concerned, including:
(1) A map of the site at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger
showing the property boundaries referenced to the United States
Public Land Survey System or to a lot and block of a recorded
subdivision plat and the topography of the site, including contours
shown at an interval of two feet or less, together with such spot
elevations as may be necessary; the contours and spot elevations
shall be referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of
1929;
(2) The hydrologic and hydraulic characteristics of the site, including
drainage flow paths and directions of flow onto, through and out of
the site; related drainage basin boundaries; times of concentration;
and rates and volumes of flow;
(3) The location of areas where stormwater may collect or percolate
into the ground;
(4) Groundwater elevations referred to the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum of 1929;
§ 325-33 LAND DIVISION § 325-34
305:393
(5) Soils by hydrologic group;
(6) Cover type and condition;
(7) Location and extent of impervious surfaces, including type and
condition of the surfaces;
(8) Locations and outlines of all buildings or other structures;
(9) Location of all receiving bodies of surface water on or adjacent to
the site into which stormwater flows;
(10) Location and extent of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval
flood hazard area associated with any perennial stream or
watercourse on or adjacent to the site;
(11) Information regarding current water quality objectives and current
water quality conditions in any perennial watercourses located on
or adjacent to the site;
(12) Locations of points of discharge of stormwater runoff from adjacent
tributary areas together with the size of those areas expressed in
acres;
(13) Locations, sizes and elevations of all existing storm sewers,
channels, ditches, detention or retention ponds or other
engineered drainage facilities on or adjacent to the site, the
elevations being referred to the National Geodetic Datum of 1929;
and
(14) Locations of any existing water supply wells and wellhead
protection areas.
C. Proposed post-development and redevelopment site conditions. The
plan shall describe the alterations proposed to be made to the site and
the resulting proposed post-development and redevelopment
conditions. The description shall include:
(1) Proposed changes in the planimetry of the site and in the
hypsometry of the site by contours having the same contour
interval and referred to the same datum as used to present the
hypsometry of the existing site conditions;
(2) The location and outline of all proposed buildings or other
structures;
(3) Changes in the location, extent and type of impervious surfaces;
(4) The location and extent of areas where vegetation is to be
disturbed or planted;
(5) Changes in the drainage flow paths into, through and out of the site
and related changes in drainage basin boundaries;
§ 325-34 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-34
305:394
(6) The location, elevations and sizes of all proposed minor and major
stormwater management facilities; the former, including all storm
sewers and inlets, and the later, including curbed roadways,
roadway ditches, culverts, storage facilities and interconnected
flow paths, all elevations being referred to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929;
(7) Any changes to lakes, streams, watercourses or wetlands on or
adjacent to the site concerned; and
(8) The location and widths of required public rights-of-way or
easements existing or needed to accommodate the recommended
stormwater management facilities. Any needed improvements to
existing facilities shall also be shown in detail.
D. Anticipated impacts. The plan shall contain a description of the
following anticipated impacts of stormwater runoff from the proposed
development, redevelopment or property subdivision as managed by
the facilities and measures recommended in the plan:
(1) Increases or decreases in the rates and volumes of stormwater
runoff;
(2) Changes in the locations and conveyance capacities of points of
discharge of stormwater from and to the site concerned;
(3) Adequacy of receiving storm sewer, engineered stormwater
management facility or watercourse to convey or store the
anticipated peak rate of stormwater discharge from the site
concerned, giving due consideration to existing flows;
(4) Changes in the location and extent of the one-hundred-year
recurrence interval flood hazard area of any perennial watercourse
location within or through, or adjacent to, the site concerned;
(5) Changes in the quality of receiving wetlands and bodies of surface
water;
(6) Changes in groundwater elevations referred to National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929; and
(7) Impacts on municipal wellhead protection areas.
E. Proposed stormwater management facilities and measures. The plan
shall include a definitive description of the stormwater management
facilities and measures proposed to be used for the control of the
quantity and quality of the anticipated stormwater runoff from the
proposed development, redevelopment or property subdivision. The
measures and descriptions may include:
(1) For detention and retention facilities: locations, areas, depths,
volumes, inlet and outlet configurations and elevation of the
§ 325-34 LAND DIVISION § 325-34
305:395
§ 325-35. Design methodology.
The site-specific stormwater management system plan required under the
provisions of this article shall be designed in accordance with good
engineering practice. The specific methods to be used in the calculation of
peak rates of discharge, volumes and water quality conditions and of the
hydraulic capacities of storage and conveyance facilities shall be left to the
judgment of the professional engineer preparing the plan, subject, however,
to the approval of the Village Engineer. The site-specific stormwater
management system shall be designed such that the natural topography and
land cover, including such features as high-quality woodlands, wetlands,
swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltration capacity and natural
groundwater recharge areas, are protected and preserved to the maximum
extent practicable.
§ 325-36. Water quality criteria.
The stormwater management facilities and measures required to serve land
use development, redevelopment and property subdivision activities subject
to this article shall be designed to meet the following minimum standards:
bottoms and of key inlet and outlet control structures, all elevations
being referred to National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929;
(2) For conveyance facilities: locations of inlets and manholes and
associated rim and invert elevations and pipe sizes; locations,
elevations and cross sections of ditches, swales and channels; and
culvert sizes, inlet and outlet configurations and elevations, all
elevations being referred to National Geodetic Vertical Datum of
1929;
(3) Areas to be used for percolation into the groundwater reservoir;
(4) Provisions for the control of erosion and sedimentation, including
control of off-site impacts; and
(5) Measures to abate any potential pollution of surface and ground
waters.
F. Hydrologic computations. The plan shall include computations of peak
flow rates and discharge volumes for the two-year, ten-year and onehundred-
year recurrence interval rainfall events for each point of
discharge into and out of the site concerned under existing and planned
development and redevelopment conditions. The data shall include
times of concentration to key junctions in flow paths and to points of
discharge into and out of the site.
G. Construction schedule and costs. The plan shall include a schedule for
the construction of the recommended stormwater management
facilities and estimates of attendant capital and operation and
maintenance costs.
§ 325-34 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-36
305:396
§ 325-37. Stormwater discharge criteria.
A. Stormwater discharges shall be treated to achieve the levels of
pollutant removals specified in the adopted Village stormwater
management system plan. Unless otherwise specified in the abovenoted
plans, stormwater management measures shall be designed with
the general goal of removing, on an average annual basis, 80% of the
suspended solids load that may be expected in the absence of control.
To achieve this level of removal, the stormwater management measures
shall be designed to accommodate, at a minimum, the runoff volume
resulting from 1.5 inches of rainfall.
B. Discharge of urban stormwater pollutants to wetlands shall be
minimized to the extent practicable. Significant degradation of wetland
functional values due to stormwater pollutant loading shall be avoided.
C. Stormwater discharges shall be pretreated prior to infiltration to
prolong maintenance of the infiltration capacity and to prevent
discharge of stormwater pollutants and concentrations that would
result in exceeding groundwater quality standards established by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
D. Stormwater detention, retention and infiltration facilities shall not be
located closer than allowed by applicable sections of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code. The stormwater management plan shall show all
wells within the following areas: 100 feet from a well serving a private
water system; or 1,200 feet from a well serving a municipal or a
community/subdivision water supply system; or within the wellhead
protection areas of a well serving a municipal or a community/
subdivision water supply system, if such a protection area has been
delineated. Copies of any variances to the Administrative Code obtained
from the state must be furnished to the Village prior to the start of
construction.
E. In the design of the stormwater facilities and measures, due
consideration shall be given to the design criteria and standards set
forth in the Wisconsin Stormwater Manual prepared and published by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and as may be revised
from time to time.
A. The conveyance and storage facilities incorporated into the site-specific
stormwater management system plan required under this article shall
be designed as an integral part of existing stormwater systems,
provided that there is no downstream flooding. In the event that there is
downstream flooding, the Village Engineer may require site-specific
measures that will not increase downstream storm flows.
B. Design criteria and standards for stormwater management measures
shall be made available by the Village Clerk in cooperation with the
Village Engineer.
§ 325-36 LAND DIVISION § 325-37
305:397
§ 325-38. Stormwater volume criteria.
Stormwater detention and retention control facilities included in the
stormwater management system plan required under this article shall be
designed in conformance with the adopted Village stormwater management
system plan.
§ 325-39. Variation of requirements.
The Village Engineer may establish stormwater management requirements
either more or less stringent than those set forth in this article provided
that the Village Engineer finds that one or more of the following conditions
applies:
§ 325-40. Financial guaranty.
An irrevocable letter of credit of sufficient duration or certified check
shall accompany the plan to guarantee implementation of the proposed
stormwater management measures recommended in the plan. The amount
of the guaranty shall be based upon the estimated initial construction costs
and shall be for 125% of those costs. Upon completion of the recommended
C. Peak flow shaving components of stormwater structures shall be
designed in accordance with standard engineering practice.
D. Runoff volumes and peak flows rates used in designing the water
quantity and quality components of stormwater structures shall be
based on the principles of the document entitled "Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds" (Technical Release 55: Engineering Division, United
States Department of Agriculture, June 1992), Natural Resources
Conservation Service or other methods approved by the Village
Engineer.
E. Unless otherwise specified in the Village stormwater management
system plan or where determined by the Village Engineer to be not
needed, the peak flow discharge rates of stormwater runoff from the
site under post-development conditions shall not exceed the rates
under existing conditions, as calculated under § 325-34F.
A. A higher level of quality in the stormwater discharge is required to
protect sensitive environmental resources.
B. A higher level of protection from ponding or flooding is required to
protect the public health and safety.
C. Provisions are available to manage the stormwater runoff by off-site
facilities, provided that all of the following conditions are met for the
off-site facilities: the facilities are in place; the facilities are adequately
sized to provide a level of stormwater runoff control equal to or greater
than that which would be afforded by on-site facilities and measures
meeting the requirements of this article; and a legal entity exists that is
responsible for the maintenance of the facilities.
§ 325-37 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-40
305:398
measures and submittal of the as-built plan required under § 325-44D(5)
of this article, any portion of the guaranty not utilized shall be released or
returned.
§ 325-41. Maintenance.
If the Village Engineer at any time finds that the stormwater management
measures constructed in accordance with the system plan are not being
properly maintained or if they are altered in any way from the location,
configuration and capacity of the measures specified in the approved plan,
the Village Zoning Administrator, upon the recommendation of the Village
Engineer, shall issue an order to the owner to undertake the needed
maintenance or repair. In the event of noncompliance by the owner within
10 calendar days of actual service of the order or the taking of an appeal,
the Village may seek an injunction to compel action by the owner. The
cost of such legal enforcement action for maintenance shall be levied as
a special charge pursuant to § 66.60(16), Wis. Stats., against the property
concerned. The special charge shall be collectible in the manner as provided
in § 66.60(16) and (17), Wis. Stats.
§ 325-42. Public nuisances.
The following shall be deemed to constitute public nuisances and may be
prosecuted as such by the Village and may be enforced by injunction:
§ 325-43. Compliance order.
When the Village Engineer finds that a willful violation of the provisions
of this article exists, the Village Engineer shall inform the Zoning
Administrator, who may order the owner of the site concerned to correct the
violation by issuing a notice of violation or stop-work order.
A. Any development, redevelopment or property subdivision that is
commenced without an approved stormwater management plan as
required by this article;
B. Any stormwater drainage facility which is not constructed in
accordance with the stormwater management plan required under this
article;
C. Any drainage facility not maintained in accordance with § 325-41 of this
article; and
D. Any activity which adversely impacts on surface or ground water
quality.
A. Any person who commences any site improvements without an
approved plan as required by this article may be required to restore the
land to its original condition within a period of 30 days.
B. If the owner fails to take corrective action after being noticed, the
Village may take all steps necessary to correct the violation, including
§ 325-40 LAND DIVISION § 325-43
305:399
§ 325-44. Permit requirements.
but not limited to using Village forces or engaging contractors after
obtaining an injunction in the absence of consent of the owner.
C. If the owner concerned has filed an irrevocable letter of credit or
certified check under § 325-40 of this article, the appropriate guaranty
shall be drawn upon.
D. If the owner has not filed an irrevocable letter of credit or certified
check the cost shall be levied as a special charge against the property
concerned under § 66.60(16), Wis. Stats.
E. Any person who does not comply with the provisions of this article shall
be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100 and not more than
$1,000 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution. Each
day a violation exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
A. No person shall undertake a land development, redevelopment or
property subdivision activity subject to the requirements of this article
without receiving a permit from the Village Engineer prior to
commencing the proposed land development, redevelopment or
property subdivision activity.
B. Permit application and fee. Any person desiring a permit shall submit to
the Village Engineer a permit application made on a form provided by
the Village. The application must be accompanied by the site-specific
stormwater management plan required under the provisions of this
article, the financial guarantee required under the provisions of this
article and a nonrefundable permit administration fee of $225.
C. The Village Engineer shall, within 30 calendar days of the receipt of a
permit application, review the application for compliance with the
requirements of this article and shall advise the Zoning Administrator,
who shall inform the applicant whether the application plan and
financial guaranty are approved or disapproved. If the application is
approved, the permit shall be issued by the Village Zoning
Administrator. If the application is disapproved, the applicant shall be
advised in writing of the reasons for disapproval.
D. Permit conditions. All permits issued under this article shall be subject
to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under this
article shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The Village
Zoning Administrator may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a
permit condition following written notification to the permit holder.
(1) Compliance with a permit issued under this article does not relieve
the permit holder of responsibility to comply with other applicable
federal, state and municipal laws and regulations.
§ 325-43 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-44
305:400
(2) The permit holder shall properly install all structural and
nonstructural stormwater management measures recommended in
the approved site-specific stormwater management plan.
(3) The permit holder shall notify the Village Engineer at least three
working days before commencing any work to implement the
approved site-specific stormwater management plan and within the
next working day upon completion of the work.
(4) Upon completion of the stormwater management facilities and
other measures required by the approved plan, the Village
Engineer shall conduct an inspection of those facilities and
measures to determine if they were constructed in accordance with
the approved plan and the requirements of this article. The Village
Engineer shall inform the Zoning Administrator, who shall notify
the permit holder in writing of any changes required in the
facilities and measures to bring them into compliance with the
approved plan and the requirements of this article.
(5) Upon final approval of the constructed stormwater management
facilities, the developer or subdivider shall have an as-built plan
prepared by a licensed professional engineer or registered land
surveyor correctly showing the locations, configurations and
elevations of the completed facilities and measures. The as-built
plan shall be prepared to the same scale, contour interval and
vertical datum as the approved site-specific stormwater
management plan and shall be subject to the approval of the Village
Engineer.
(6) If so directed by the Village Zoning Administrator, the permit
holder shall repair, at the permit holder's own expense, any and all
damage to adjoining municipal facilities and drainageways caused
by stormwater runoff where such damage was caused by activities
not in compliance with the approved site-specific stormwater
management plan.
(7) The permit holder shall permit access to the site and property
concerned by the Village Engineer and Zoning Administrator for
the purpose of inspecting the stormwater management facilities
and measures for compliance with the approved site-specific
stormwater management plan.
(8) Where a site-specific stormwater management plan proposes
changes in the direction, in the peak rates or in the total volume of
runoff from a site, the Village Engineer shall advise the Zoning
Administrator, who may require the permit holder to present
written evidence that appropriate legal arrangements have been
implemented with adjacent property owners concerning the
prevention of damage to property or danger to public health and
safety.
§ 325-44 LAND DIVISION § 325-44
305:401
§ 325-45. Appeals.
E. Permits issued under this article shall be valid from the date of issue
through the date upon which the Village Zoning Administrator notifies
the permit holder that all stormwater management facilities and
measures have satisfactorily met final inspection by the Village
Engineer.
A. Any person aggrieved by the administration of this article may appeal
the decision to the Board of Appeals established by the Village pursuant
to § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats. The Board shall hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, decision or
determination made by the Village Engineer or Zoning Administrator in
administering this article and upon appeal may authorize variances
from the provisions of this article which are not contrary to the public
interest and where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provision of this article would result in unnecessary hardship and
shall use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by state
statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances.
B. The owner may appeal to the Board of Appeals within 10 calendar days
of actual service of the order. If an appeal is not taken by filing in
writing with the Village Clerk within such 10 days, the order shall be
final. Hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be conducted
pursuant to § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats.
§ 325-44 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-45
305:402
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater and Sewer Illicit Discharge Connections.
[Adopted 7-28-2009]
§ 325-46. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village of Elm Grove through the regulation
of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum
extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are:
§ 325-47. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — Employees or designees of the
Elm Grove Public Works Director.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Refers to practices,
techniques or measures, schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs
also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to
control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage
from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. NPDES stormwater Phase II permits are required for construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities
include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
and demolition.
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater
discharges by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit connections and Discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system.
C. To delegate authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
article.
§ 325-46 LAND DIVISION § 325-47
305:403
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Refers to one or more artificial ditches, tiles, drains
or similar devices that include, but are not limited to, streets, catch basins,
curbs, gutters, swales and storm drains which collect surface water and
stormwater runoff and snowmelt runoff, and convey it to a point of
discharge. During a regional flood, it may constitute a part of the
Floodplain.
EASEMENT — Refers to any portion of a parcel subject to an agreement
between the property owner, or its predecessor in ownership, and another
person which grants such person the right to make use of or benefit from
that portion of the property for a specific purpose.
FLOODPLAIN — Refers to land which has been or may be covered by
floodwater during a regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe
and may include other designated floodplain areas for various
regulatory purposes, including wetlands.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect Nonstormwater Discharge
to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in § 325-51 of this article.
This includes, but is not limited to, activities related to spills, dumping and
disposal of any substance or material.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connections is defined as either of the
following:
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR, 122.26(b)(14).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — Sometimes referred
to as "MS4" and refers to the Elm Grove storm drainage system which
exists within the Village of Elm Grove within easements of record or by
prescription or necessity or within lands dedicated to the Village or publicly
owned which in certain areas of the Village includes surface and below-
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including
but not limited to any conveyances which allow any Nonstormwater
Discharge, including sewage, processed wastewater, and wash water,
to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm
drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, provided that said drain
or connection had not been previously allowed, permitted, or approved
in writing by the Village of Elm Grove; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drainage system which has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the Village of
Elm Grove.
B.
§ 325-47 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-47
305:404
ground improvements or devices which collect water and convey it to a
point of discharge. Wetlands and street pavements are part of the MS4 in
the Village. In certain places in the Village, it may be located within the
floodplain.
NONPOINT SOURCE — Refers to a land management activity which
contributes to runoff, seepage or percolation which adversely affects or
threatens the quality of waters of the State of Wisconsin and is not a point
source as defined in this article [see § 281.65(2)(b), Wis. Stats.].
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drainage
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POINT SOURCE — Refers to either of the following: (a) A discernible,
confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to any pipe,
ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, container, rolling stock, floating craft
from which pollutants may be discharged into the Waters of the State of
Wisconsin or into a publicly owned Sewerage System. (b) A discernible,
confined and discrete conveyance of stormwater for which a permit is
required under § 283.33(1), Wis. Stats. [see § 283.01(12), Wis. Stats].
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to the pollution of
stormwater. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes,
and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances, in such quantities as to reasonably
present the likelihood that they may cause or contribute to pollution;
floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and
wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate
metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
POLLUTION — Refers to any activity that includes contaminating or
rendering unclean or impure the waters of the State of Wisconsin, or
making the same injurious to public health, harmful for commercial or
recreational use, or deleterious to fish, bird, animal or plant life. It refers to
man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological or
radiological integrity of the water. [See §§ 281.01(10) and 283.01(14), Wis.
Stats.]
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Refers to all structures, conduits and pipelines by
which sewage (i.e., water-carried wastes created in and to be conducted
away from residences, industrial establishments, and public buildings, with
such surface water or groundwater as may be present) is collected and
disposed of, except plumbing inside and in connection with buildings
served, and serviced from building to street main [see § 281.01(13) and
(14), Wis. Stats.].
§ 325-47 LAND DIVISION § 325-47
305:405
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned or controlled facilities by
which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to
any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets,
piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins,
natural and human-made or -altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and
other drainage structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATERS OF THE STATE OF WISCONSIN — Refers to those portions of
Lake Michigan within the boundaries of the State of Wisconsin and all
lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs,
watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater,
natural or artificial, public, except those waters which are entirely confined
and retained completely upon the property of a person within the State of
Wisconsin or its jurisdiction [see § 281.01(18), Wis. Stats.].
WETLANDS — Refers to those areas where water is at, near or above the
land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and
which have soils indicative of wet conditions.
WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (WPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by WDNR that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general
areawide basis.
§ 325-48. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system or
MS4 generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by the Elm Grove Public Works Director.
§ 325-49. Responsibility for administration.
The Elm Grove Public Works Director shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed
upon Elm Grove may be delegated in writing by the Elm Grove Public Works
Director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the
employ of the Village of Elm Grove or as otherwise directed by the Elm
Grove Board of Trustees.
§ 325-47 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-50
305:406
§ 325-50. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and incorporated by reference from the
Wisconsin Statutes and the Wisconsin Administrative Code as they may
relate to point and nonpoint sources of pollution and promulgated pursuant
to this article are minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend
nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no
contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 325-51. Discharge prohibitions; exemptions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the storm drainage system or MS4 or watercourses
any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants, that cause or contribute to a violation of
applicable water quality standards as referenced in § 325-50, above,
other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of
any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article: water line flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration into
storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or
footing drains or sump pump (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air-conditioning
condensation, springs, individual residential washing of vehicles,
natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if
dechlorinated, typically less than one ppm chlorine), fire-fighting
activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the Elm Grove Public Works
Director as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires notification to
the Elm Grove Public Works Department prior to the time of the
test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under a WPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and
provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge
to the storm drain system.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
§ 325-50 LAND DIVISION § 325-51
305:407
§ 325-52. Suspension of MS4 access.
§ 325-53. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity WPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, unless the connection:
(a) was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing
at the time of connection; and
(b) Was documented as allowable contemporaneously with the
installation of each connection; and
(c) Does not currently allow any pollutant to enter the MS4.
(3) A person shall be deemed to be in violation of this article if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such
a connection to continue. In the event there is any modification of a
property or structure that requires a permit of any kind, all
connections that may otherwise presently be illicit connections
shall be corrected even if they have a documented allowable prior
status.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The Public
Works Director may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of
persons or to the MS4 or navigable waters of the State of Wisconsin, as
defined by Wisconsin case law. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the Elm Grove Public Works
Director may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or navigable waters of the State of
Wisconsin or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
(1) Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may
have its MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The Elm Grove Public Works Director or
his designee will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its
MS4 access. The violator may petition the Elm Grove Public Works
Director or his designee for a reconsideration and hearing.
(2) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior
written approval of the Elm Grove Public Works Director.
§ 325-51 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-53
305:408
acceptable to the Public Works Director prior to the allowing of discharges
to the MS4.
§ 325-54. Monitoring of discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity, including, but not limited
to, construction activity.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The Public Works Director or his designee, having reasonable
cause, shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to
this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance
with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force
which require proper identification and clearance before entry into
its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the Elm Grove
Public Works Director.
(2) Owners or their agent(s) shall allow the Public Works Director
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of a WPDES permit to discharge stormwater,
and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state
and federal law.
(3) The Public Works Director, having reasonable cause, shall have the
right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are
necessary in the opinion of the Elm Grove Public Works Director to
conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater
discharge.
(4) The Public Works Director, having reasonable cause, shall have the
right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition
by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Public
Works Director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Public Works Director access
to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge
permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility
with a WPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with
industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the Elm
§ 325-53 LAND DIVISION § 325-54
305:409
§ 325-55. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater
pollutants by use of best management practices.
The Public Works Director may provide requirements identifying best
management practices (BMP) for any activity, operation, or facility which
may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the
storm drain system, or waters of the State of Wisconsin. The owner or
operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at its
own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or
watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premises which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent
the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid WPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the WPDES
permit.
§ 325-56. Waters of the State of Wisconsin protection.
Every person owning or occupying property through which waters of the
State of Wisconsin passes shall keep and maintain that part of the waters of
the State of Wisconsin within the property free of pollution.
§ 325-57. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
Grove Public Works Director or his designee reasonable access to
the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity
authorized or required by this article.
(7) If the Public Works Director or his designee has been refused
access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is
discharged, and he is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the Elm Grove
Public Works Director or his designee may seek issuance of a
special inspection warrant pursuant to § 66.0119, Wis. Stats., from
any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 325-54 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-57
305:410
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain
system, or water of the State of Wisconsin, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify the Elm Grove Police Department of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the Village of Elm Grove in person or
by phone or facsimile within 24 hours of becoming aware of the release.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Public Works Director within three business
days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates
from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of
such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records
shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 325-58. Enforcement.
§ 325-59. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the Elm Grove Public Works Director. The notice of appeal must be received
within 90 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the
appeal before the Elm Grove Board of Appeals shall take place within a
reasonable time from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever the Public Works Director finds that a
person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this
article, he may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of administrative and remediation costs; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If
abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
subcontractor and the expense thereof shall be imposed as a
special charge under § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., and § 325-61 hereafter.
§ 325-57 LAND DIVISION § 325-60
305:411
§ 325-60. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days
following the decision of the Elm Grove Board of Appeals upholding the
decision of the Elm Grove Public Works Director, then representatives of
the Elm Grove Public Works Director may, upon prior notice, enter upon
the subject property, unless the property owner presents a compliance plan
with specific and prompt implementation dates, and are authorized to take
any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in
possession of any premises to refuse to allow the representatives of the
Village of Elm Grove or its designated contractor to enter upon the premises
for the purposes set forth above.
§ 325-61. Cost of abatement of the violation.
Cost recovery. Upon notification from the Director of Public Works that a
violation of this article has been identified, the Village Clerk shall charge
the property owner found to be in violation of this article the costs
associated with abatement and correction, including administrative in full.
The Village of Elm Grove may recover all attorney's fees, court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including
sampling and monitoring expenses. Such costs shall be imposed as a special
charge pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats. Such costs shall be due in full
within 35 days upon mailing of invoice. Pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.,
all costs so charged and not paid when due shall constitute a lien upon
such property and may be assessed and collected as a special charge on the
next property tax bill if not paid within the thirty-day period upon invoicing.
Interest at 1% per month shall be assessed on any unpaid balance. The
Village shall establish a reasonable charge for the costs of administration
and enforcement imposed hereunder.
§ 325-62. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the Village Attorney,
upon the concurrence of the Director of Public Works and the Village
Manager, may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction from the
Circuit Court of Waukesha County restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation. The seeking of injunctive relief
shall not preclude the seeking of any other enforcement or cause of action
allowable by law.
§ 325-63. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
§ 325-60 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-63
305:412
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare and is declared
and deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated or restored
at the violator's expense and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such public nuisance may be taken. The bringing
of a public nuisance action shall not preclude the seeking of any other
enforcement or cause of action allowable by law.
§ 325-64. Fine.
Violation of Article IV of Chapter 325, Stormwater and Sewer Illicit
Discharge Connection, shall result in a fine as in § 1-16 of the Village of Elm
Grove Code of Ordinances, as amended from time to time by the Village of
Elm Grove Board of Trustees.
§ 325-65. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the
discretion of the Director of Public Works to seek cumulative remedies.
§ 325-63 LAND DIVISION § 325-65
305:413
Chapter 326
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY
§ 325-65 ELM GROVE CODE § 325-65
326:414
ARTICLE I
Stormwater Management Utility
§ 326-1. Findings.
§ 326-2. Establishment of Stormwater Management Utility.
In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, there
is hereby established the Village of Elm Grove Stormwater Management
Utility.
§ 326-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS — The costs of general management and
administration of the Stormwater Management Utility, development plan
and erosion control plan review, and compliance with the requirements
of Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 216, including, but are not
limited to, the following:
A. The management of stormwater and other surface water discharges
within and beyond its border is a matter that affects the public health,
safety and welfare of the Village, its citizens and businesses and others
in the surrounding area.
B. Failure to effectively manage stormwater and other surface water
discharge from already developed and vacant property may create,
among other things, erosion of lands, threaten businesses and
residences with water damage and create sedimentation and other
environmental damage.
C. The Village's stormwater management system, which provides for the
regulation, collection and disposal of storm and surface water
discharge, is of benefit and provides services to all real property within
the incorporated Village limits.
D. The costs of operating and maintaining the Village's stormwater
management system, ensuring regulatory compliance and financing
necessary plans, studies, repairs, replacement, improvements and
extension thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated among
property classes in proportion to the contribution to the system from
each property class.
E. The final report entitled "Stormwater Service Charge Study, Village of
Elm Grove, Waukesha County, Wisconsin August/2004" prepared by
Ruekert & Mielke, Inc., is hereby declared to constitute the study and
description of the analytical determinations that demonstrate a
rationale basis for the enactment of this ordinance.
§ 326-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 326-3
326:415
BOARD — The Village Board of the Village of Elm Grove.
CAPITAL COST — The cost of acquiring, purchasing, leasing, planning,
designing, constructing, extending and improving all or any part of the
stormwater management system and any principal, interest or premiums on
any indebtedness incurred for these purposes.
DEBT RETIREMENT — All annual principal and interest requirements and
obligations of the Village that relate to stormwater management system
improvements.
EQUIVALENT RUNOFF UNIT (ERU) — An amount of impervious surface
area on a lot or parcel that is equivalent to the amount of impervious
surface on a typical developed single-family residential lot. The square feet
of impervious surface area per ERU shall be as established by the Village
Board from time to time by resolution and set forth in a Stormwater Utility
Rate Table.
IMPERVIOUS AREA OR IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A horizontal surface
which has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is
highly resistant to infiltration by rainwater. It includes but is not limited to
asphalt, concrete, streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar
surfaces.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS (O&M) — All direct and indirect
costs, excluding debt service and other capital costs, necessary to ensure
adequate drainage and control of storm and surface waters on a continuing
basis and assure optimal long-term function of stormwater management
system facilities. O&M costs may include expenses for, but not limited to,
the following purposes:
Wages, salaries and related employee expenses for management and
administration of the Utility, together with fringe benefits and
premiums paid on such wages and salaries for the state worker's
compensation coverage.
A.
B. Utility billing and accounting expenses.
C. Office supplies.
D. Permit fees.
E. Consultant and legal fees.
Wages and salaries and related employee expenses for operating and
maintenance of the stormwater management system, and supervisory
personnel, together with fringe benefits and premiums paid on such
wages and salaries for the state worker's compensation coverage.
A.
B. Fuel and other operating supplies.
C. Repairs to and maintenance of the equipment associated therewith.
D. Premiums for hazard insurance.
§ 326-3 ELM GROVE CODE § 326-3
326:416
REPLACEMENT FUND — Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories and appurtenances which are necessary during
the useful life of the stormwater management system to maintain the
performance for which such system was designed and constructed.
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries storm and surface drainage but
excludes domestic wastewater and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — Any activities undertaken
by the Village of Elm Grove for the collection, transportation, storage,
treatment and disposal of storm and surface water and for the reduction
or elimination of pollutants in storm and surface water, including, but not
limited to administration, operation and maintenance of the stormwater
management system and Utility, constructing stormwater sewerage
facilities and complying with the requirements of the Wisconsin Statutes
and Administrative Code.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — Any plant, facilities, fixtures or
equipment owned or leased by the Village for the collection, transportation,
storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater and surface water. Such
facilities may include, without limitation by enumeration, surface and
underground drainage conduits of any type, storm sewers, watercourses,
retaining walls and ponds and such other facilities as will support a
stormwater management system.
STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGES — Charges imposed on properties in
the Village to recover the administrative, operating, maintenance and
capital costs relating to stormwater management facilities benefiting
properties in the Village. Stormwater service charges may include user
charges or any other special fees and charges that may be required to
provide for an equitable sharing of Utility costs by properties in the Village.
UTILITY — The Stormwater Management Utility of the Village of Elm Grove.
VILLAGE — The Village of Elm Grove.
§ 326-4. Application.
The application of this chapter, its rules, regulations and rates, shall apply
to all real property within the incorporated limits of the Village.
§ 326-5. Powers and duties of the Utility.
Premiums for insurance providing coverage against liability for the
injury to persons and/or property.
E.
F. Rents and leasing costs.
Operation, licensing and maintenance costs for trucks and heavy
equipment.
G.
H. Consultant and legal fees.
I. Replacement costs.
§ 326-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 326-5
326:417
§ 326-6. Management of Utility.
A. Facilities. The Village, through the Stormwater Management Utility,
may acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand,
replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage and finance such
facilities as are deemed by the Village to be proper and reasonably
necessary for a system of storm and surface water management. These
facilities may include, without limitation by enumeration, surface and
underground drainage facilities, storm sewers, watercourses, retaining
walls and ponds and such other facilities that will support a stormwater
management system.
B. Rates and charges. The Village, through the Stormwater Management
Utility, may establish such rates and charges as are necessary to
finance planning, design, construction, maintenance and operation of
the facilities, regulatory compliance and administration of the Utility in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this ordinance.
C. Budgeting. The Village, through the Stormwater Management Utility,
shall prepare an annual budget, which is to include all administrative,
regulatory compliance, operation and maintenance costs, debt service
and other costs related to the operation of the Stormwater
Management Utility. All costs shall be allocated amongst users of the
stormwater management system as recommended by the Finance
Committee and determined by the Board.
D. The Village may utilize the full authority provided in § 66.0821, Wis.
Stats, with respect to financing methods, user charges and other
matters therein dealt with and shall have all legal authority permitted
for municipal utilities to impose reasonable charges for services.
A. The oversight of the Stormwater Management Utility is hereby vested
in the Village Board. The Board shall direct and delegate the
management and operation of the Stormwater Management Utility to
Village staff and shall prescribe the functions thereof as may be
necessary to operate and manage the Stormwater Management Utility.
B. The Public Works/Utility Committee, appointed in accordance with
Village of Elm Grove Code § 80-3A(5), shall make recommendations to
the Village Board concerning the operation of the Utility.
C. The Finance Committee of the Village Board, in consultation with the
Public Works/Utility Committee, shall make recommendations to the
Village Board concerning the Utility budget, service charge rates and
expenditures.
D. The Village Board shall establish a Stormwater Management Fund,
which shall be used for collection of revenues and payment of expenses
relating to the Utility. Any excess of revenues over expenditures in a
year shall be retained by the Fund for subsequent years' needs.
§ 326-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 326-6
326:418
E. All Utility receipts shall be collected and accounted for by the Village
Treasurer.
F. The Village Board shall cause an annual audit of the books of the
Stormwater Management Utility to be made and shall make the books
and records relating to the Utility available for inspection during
regular business hours.
§ 326-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 326-6
326:419

ARTICLE II
Stormwater Management Service Charges
§ 326-7. Purpose.
There is hereby established a uniform system of stormwater service charges
that shall apply to each and every lot or parcel within the Village. It
shall be the policy to establish stormwater service charges in such amount
in order to pay for all or a part of the following costs relating to the
Utility: operation and maintenance (O&M); administrative; contributions to
a replacement and capital improvement fund; and debt service, including
debt retirement, debt service reserves and coverage requirements. The
Board may establish and modify stormwater service charges as necessary
so as to assure that the charges generate adequate revenues to pay the
costs of the stormwater management program and that costs are allocated
fairly and proportionately to all parcels in the Village.
§ 326-8. Charges.
Stormwater service charges may include the following components:
§ 326-9. Customer classification.
A. User charge. A user charge may be imposed on all property that has
impervious surface area. The charge to each parcel shall be based upon
the number of ERUs assigned to the parcel. The user charge for each
parcel shall be equal to the product of the user charge rate in terms of
dollars per ERU and the number of ERU's assigned to the parcel.
B. Special charge. A special charge may be imposed on property that is in
an area specially benefited by a particular stormwater management
facility. This charge will be developed to reflect the benefits in a
particular area that may not be appropriate to allocate to property
throughout the Village.
C. All stormwater service charge rates shall be established from time to
time by resolution of the Village Board and set forth in a Stormwater
Utility Rate Table attached thereto.
A. For purposes of imposing the user charges, all lots and parcels in the
Village shall be classified into the following five customer
classifications:
(1) Single-family and duplex residential.
(2) Condominium residential.
(3) Multifamily residential.
(4) Nonresidential.
(5) Undeveloped.
§ 326-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 326-9
326:421
B. ERU's shall be calculated for each classification as follows:
(1) Single-family and duplex residential: one ERU per dwelling unit.
(2) Condominium residential. The Village Manager shall be
responsible for determining the total impervious area of each
condominium parcel based on the best available information,
including, but not limited to, data supplied by the Village Engineer,
Village Assessor, Building Inspector or Planning and Zoning
Administrator, aerial photography, the property owner, tenant or
developer or actual on-site measurement. The total impervious
area of the parcel shall be divided equally among the condominium
units to determine the square feet of impervious area per unit. This
amount shall be divided by the number of square feet per ERU as
established by the Village Board and set forth in the Stormwater
Utility Rate Table to determine the number of ERUs to assign to
each unit, except that in no case shall a condominium unit be
assigned less than 0.5 ERUs. The number of ERUs per unit shall be
rounded to the nearest 0.5 ERUs.
(3) Multifamily residential. The Village Manager shall be responsible
for determining the impervious area of each multifamily residential
parcel based on the best available information, including, but not
limited to, data supplied by the Village Engineer, Village Assessor,
Building Inspector or Planning and Zoning Administrator, aerial
photography, the property owner, tenant or developer or actual onsite
measurement. The total impervious area of the parcel shall be
divided by the number of square feet per ERU as established by the
Village Board and set forth in a Stormwater Utility Rate Table to
determine the number of ERUs, except that in no case shall a
multifamily parcel be assigned less than 0.50 ERUs per dwelling
unit. The number of ERUs shall be rounded to the nearest 0.50
ERUs.
(4) Nonresidential property. The Village Manager shall be responsible
for determining the impervious area of each nonresidential parcel
based on the best available information, including, but not limited
to, data supplied by the Village Engineer, Village Assessor, Building
Inspector or Planning and Zoning Administrator, aerial
photography, the property owner, tenant or developer or actual onsite
measurement. The total impervious area of the parcel shall be
divided by the number of square feet per ERU as established by the
Village Board and set forth in a Stormwater Utility Rate Table to
determine the number of ERUs to assign to the parcel. The number
of ERUs per parcel shall be rounded to the nearest 0.50 ERUs.
(5) Undeveloped property. For any lot or parcel that has no impervious
surface area, no ERUs shall be assigned for purposes of imposing
user charges under this chapter.
§ 326-9 ELM GROVE CODE § 326-9
326:422
§ 326-10. Determination of stormwater service charges.
The amount of the charge to be imposed for each classification shall be
made by resolution of the Village Board. The current rates will be set forth
in a Stormwater Utility Rate Table and kept on file in the office of the Village
Clerk. The rates shall be reviewed by the Village Board on an annual basis
and adjusted as necessary.
§ 326-11. Billing and payment.
§ 326-12. Appeals.
C. New construction. For all classifications other than single-family and
duplex residential, the construction of new or expanded buildings,
driveways or other structures shall be subject to an increase in the
number of ERUs assigned to a lot or parcel. The Village shall
recalculate the number of ERUs upon completion of new construction.
A. User charges for residential users shall be billed in advance on an
annual basis. All commercial users shall be billed on a quarterly basis.
Payment of commercial bills shall be made within 25 days of mailing by
the Village. In the event that such bill is not paid when due, a penalty of
1.5% per month on the unpaid balance shall be added thereto. All bills
shall be payable at the office of the Village Treasurer, 13600 Juneau
Boulevard, Elm Grove, Wisconsin 53122.
B. The property owner is held responsible for all stormwater service
charges on real property that s/he or it owns. All stormwater bills and
notices of any nature relative to the stormwater management program
will be addressed to the owner and delivered to the addressee by first
class mail.
C. Reasonable care will be exercised in the delivery of stormwater service
charges bills. A failure to receive a stormwater service charges bill,
however, shall not relieve any person of the responsibility for payment
of stormwater service charges within the prescribed period nor exempt
any party from any penalty imposed for delinquency in the payment
thereof.
D. Unpaid stormwater service charges shall be a lien upon the property
served and shall be enforced as provided in § 66.0809(3), Wis. Stats.
A. The stormwater service charge, a determination of ERUs or ERU
credits may be appealed by filing a written appeal with the Village
Manager prior to the due date if not paid or within 30 days of payment.
The appeal shall specify all bases for the challenge and the amount of
the stormwater service charge the appellant asserts is appropriate.
Failure to timely file an appeal waives all right to contest such charge.
B. The Village Manager shall determine whether the stormwater charge is
fair and reasonable or whether an adjustment or refund is due the
§ 326-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 326-12
326:423
appellant. The Village Manager may act with or without a hearing and
shall inform the appellant in writing of his or her decision.
C. The appellant has 30 days from the decision of the Village Manager to
file a written appeal to the Village Board. The written appeal shall
specify all grounds constituting the basis of the appeal of the Village
Manager's decision and shall again state the amount of the charge that
the appellant considers to be appropriate. The appeal must specifically
address the determination of the Village Manager.
D. The Village Board shall review said written appeal and shall determine
whether the stormwater charge is fair and reasonable or whether an
adjustment or refund is due the appellant. The Village Clerk shall
provide five business days' prior written notice of the time and place of
the Board's consideration of the appeal to the owner at the address
listed in the appeal. The Board shall base its decision on the record
submitted to it at its meeting. The Village Clerk shall notify the
appellant in writing of the Board's determination by first class mail
addressed to the owner using the address listed in the appeal.
E. If as a result of any appeal a refund is due the owner, such refund shall
be applied as a credit on the owner's next stormwater charge bill.
§ 326-12 ELM GROVE CODE § 326-12
326:424
ARTICLE III
Severability
§ 326-13. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any party or
circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions
or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
declared severable.
§ 326-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 326-13
326:425
Chapter 330
FLOODPLAIN ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 106.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 134.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
Plumbing — See Ch. 212.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 220.
Sewers — See Ch. 232.
Land division — See Ch. 305.
Water control — See Ch. 325.
Stormwater Management Utility — See Ch.
326.
Zoning — See Ch. 335.
§ 326-13 ELM GROVE CODE § 326-13
326:426
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 330-1. Statutory authorization.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in §§ 61.35 and 62.23,
for villages, and the requirements in § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 330-2. Finding of fact.
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this
municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general
welfare and tax base.
§ 330-3. Statement of purpose.
To regulate development in flood hazard areas to protect life, health and
property, the governing body does ordain the purpose of these rules is to:
§ 330-4. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for the
Village of Elm Grove, Wisconsin."
§ 330-5. General regulations.
A. Protect life, health and property;
B. Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood-control projects;
C. Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers;
D. Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
F. Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
G. Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers;
H. Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and
result in conflicts between property owners; and
I. Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the
floodplain.
A. Areas to be regulated. This chapter regulates all areas that would be
covered by the regional flood or base flood, as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other maps approved by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources. Base flood elevations are derived
from the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and are
§ 330-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-5
326:427
shown as AE, A1-30 and AH Zones on the FIRM. Regional flood
elevations may be derived from other studies. If more than one map
or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
[Amended 2-24-2014; 10-27-2014]
B. Official maps and revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain districts
are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 Zones on the maps based on
the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) listed below and the revisions in the
Village of Elm Grove Floodplain Appendix. Any change to the Base
Flood Elevations (BFEs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by
the DNR and FEMA through the Letter of Map Change process before it
is effective. No changes to Regional Flood Elevations (RFEs) on non-
FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps
and revisions are on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator,
Village of Elm Grove. If more than one map or revision is referenced,
the most restrictive information shall apply. [Amended 6-24-2008;
11-19-2008; 12-16-2008; 2-24-2014; 10-27-2014]
(1) Official maps. Based on Waukesha County Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) dated November 5, 2014; volume nos. 55133CV001C and
55133CV002C and 55133CV003C. Waukesha County Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel nos. 5133C0236G and
5513C0237G dated November 5, 2014, with corresponding profiles
that are based on the FIS.
(2) Official maps. Based on other studies, any maps referenced in this
section must be approved by the DNR and be more restrictive than
those based on the FIS at the site of the proposed development;
Village of Elm Grove Flood Storage District, Panel 4 of 12. Dated
November 5, 2014. Prepared and approved by the DNR.
C. Establishment of floodplain zoning districts. The regional floodplain
areas are divided into four districts defined in Article X and as follows:
[Amended 10-27-2014]
(1) The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to
carry the regional floodwaters and are contained within AE Zones
as shown on the FIRM.
(2) The Flood-Fringe District (FF) is that portion of the floodplain
between the regional flood limits and the floodway and displayed as
AE Zones on the FIRM.
(3) The Flood Storage District (FSD) consists of those areas of the
floodplain where storage of floodwaters is calculated to reduce the
regional flood discharge.
(4) The General Floodplain District (GFP) consists of those areas that
may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood and does
§ 330-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-5
326:428
not have a BFE or floodway boundary determined, including A, AH
and AO Zones of the FIRM.
D. Locating floodplain boundaries.
(1) Discrepancies between boundaries on the official Floodplain
Zoning Map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the
criteria in Subsection D(1)(a) or (b) below. If a significant difference
exists, the map shall be amended according to Article VIII. The
Zoning Administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile
elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map
amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for documenting actual predevelopment field
conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was
determined and for initiating any map amendments required under
this section. Disputes between the Zoning Administrator and an
applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according
to § 330-26C and the criteria below. Where flood profiles are based
on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must
approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to Article VIII.
(a) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations
shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base
flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
(b) Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary
shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator using the
scale appearing on the map.
(2) Where there is a significant difference between the map and actual
field conditions, the map shall be amended. Where a map
amendment has been approved by both the Elm Grove Board of
Trustees and the Department, the Zoning Administrator shall have
the authority to grant or deny a land use permit.
E. Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of
this chapter shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain
unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood
elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the Floodplain District,
and the map is amended pursuant to Article VIII. To remove flood
insurance requirements, FEMA must first revise the Flood Insurance
Rate Map or issue a letter of map amendment or revision.
F. Compliance. Any development, as defined in Article X, or use within the
areas regulated by this chapter shall be in compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable local, Wis. State, and federal
regulations.
G. Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, the Village of Elm Grove is required to comply with
this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are
required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The construction,
§ 330-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-5
326:429
reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges
by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt when
§ 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
H. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(1) This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under § 59.69, 59.692 or 59.694 for counties;
§ 62.23 for cities; or § 61.35 for villages; or § 87.30, Wis. Stats.,
which relate to floodplains. If another ordinance is more restrictive
than this chapter, that ordinance shall continue in full force and
effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(2) This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail.
I. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor
of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other
powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this chapter,
required by Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, is unclear, the provision shall
be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the
adoption of this chapter or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this chapter.
J. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards in
this chapter are based on engineering experience and scientific
research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased
by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply or
guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be
free from flooding and flood damages. Nor does this chapter create
liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result
from reliance on this chapter.
K. Severability. Should any portion of this chapter be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected.27
27.Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, General development standards, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-27-2014.
§ 330-5 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-5
326:430
ARTICLE II
General Standards Applicable to All Floodplain Districts
The Village shall review all permit applications to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed
building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant resistant materials;
be constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and
mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions of
flooding. [Added 2-24-2014]
Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards.
All subdivision proposals shall include regional flood elevation and floodway
data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this
chapter and all other requirements in § 330-24B. Adequate drainage shall
be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and all public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. [Added 2-24-2014]
§ 330-6. Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. [Amended 2-24-2014]
§ 330-7. Watercourse alterations.
A. No floodplain development shall:
(1) Obstruct flow, defined in Article X as any development which
physically blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or in
conjunction with future development causing an increase in
regional flood height; or [Amended 10-27-2014]
(2) Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain
storage area lost.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined that the
proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the
regional flood height, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other
adopted map, unless the provisions of Article VIII are met. [Amended
10-27-2014]
A. No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped
floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing
all adjacent municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional offices
and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal
permits. The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.
B. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of
the watercourse alteration or relocation, and pursuant to Article VIII,
§ 330-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-7
326:431
§ 330-8. Development permits.
Development that requires a permit from the Department, under §§ 30 and
31, Wis. Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and
navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and
amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles, BFEs established
in the FIS, or other data from the officially adopted FIRM or other floodplain
zoning maps or the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to
Article VIII.
the Zoning Administrator shall apply for a Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and
approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process.
[Amended 2-24-2014]
§ 330-7 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-8
326:432
ARTICLE III
Floodway District (FW)
§ 330-9. Applicability.
This article applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps.
§ 330-10. Permitted uses.
The following open-space uses are allowed in the Floodway District and the
floodway areas of the general floodplain district, if they are not prohibited
by any other ordinance; they meet the standards in § 330-11 and § 330-12;
and all permits or certificates have been issued according to § 330-24:
§ 330-11. Standards for developments in floodway areas.
A. Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas,
parking areas and airport landing strips.
B. Nonstructural private and public recreational uses, such as golf
courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing
areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill
limitations of § 330-11D.
C. Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses, or classified as
historic structures, that comply with §§ 330-11 and 330-12.
D. Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with
§ 330-11D.
E. Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves,
dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of
transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with §§ 30 and 31, Wis.
Stats.
F. Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with § 330-11C.
A. General.
(1) Any development in floodway areas shall comply with Article II and
have a low flood damage potential.
(2) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects
of the proposal according to § 330-6:
(a) A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular
to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will
obstruct flow; or
(b) An analysis calculating the effects of the proposal on regional
flood height.
§ 330-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-11
326:433
(3) The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if the
project will cause any increase in the flood elevations upstream or
downstream, based on the data submitted for Subsection A(2),
above. [Amended 2-24-2014]
B. Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open-space uses,
classified as historic structures, or functionally dependent on a
waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply
with the following criteria: [Amended 2-24-2014]
(1) The structures are not designed for human habitation, do not have
a high flood damage potential, and are constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(2) The structures shall have a minimum of two openings on different
walls having a total net area not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings
being no higher than one foot above grade. The openings shall be
equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices,
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
(3) The structures must be properly anchored to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement and to prevent restricting bridge
openings or other restricted sections of the stream or river;
(4) The structures must have all mechanical and utility equipment
elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation;
and
(5) The structures must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
C. Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges
may be allowed by permit if:
(1) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood
protection elevation; and
(2) Construction does not cause an increase in the regional flood
height according to § 330-6, except where the water surface
profiles, floodplain zoning maps and floodplain zoning ordinance
are amended, as needed, to reflect any changes resulting from such
construction.
D. Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be
allowed by permit if:
(1) The requirements of § 330-6 are met;
(2) No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit is
issued by the Department pursuant to § 30, Wis. Stats., and a
permit pursuant to § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
§ 330-11 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-11
326:434
§ 330-12. Prohibited uses.
All uses not listed as permitted uses in § 330-10 are prohibited, including
the following uses:
Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344 has been issued, if
applicable, and the other requirements of this section are met;
(3) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
(4) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
A. Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or
those not associated with permanent open-space uses;
B. Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to
property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic
life;
C. Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the
adjoining districts;
D. Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are
removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational
areas and Department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable
provisions of local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383 Wis. Adm. Code;
[Amended 2-24-2014]
E. Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water,
except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local
ordinances and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
F. Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
G. Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted
under § NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code; and [Amended 2-24-2014]
H. Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service
existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which
complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
§ 330-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-12
326:435

ARTICLE IV
Flood-Fringe District (FF)
§ 330-13. Applicability.
This article applies to all flood-fringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning
maps.
§ 330-14. Permitted uses.
Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the Flood-Fringe
District if the standards in § 330-15 are met, the use is not prohibited by this
or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified
in § 330-24 have been issued.
§ 330-15. Standards for development in flood-fringe areas.
A. All of the provisions of § 330-6 shall apply in addition to the following
requirements, according to the use requested. Any existing structure in
the flood-fringe must meet the requirements of Article VI,
Nonconforming Uses. [Amended 2-24-2014]
B. Residential uses. Any habitable structure, including a manufactured
home, which is to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or
moved into the flood-fringe area, shall meet or exceed the following
standards:
(1) The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation on fill, except where Subsection B(2) is
applicable. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional
flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the
structure. The Department may authorize other floodproofing
measures if the elevations of existing streets or sewer lines makes
compliance with the fill standards impractical. [Amended
2-24-2014]
(2) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood
elevation if it is dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood
elevation. [Amended 2-24-2014]
(3) Contiguous dry land access, defined in Article X as a vehicle access
route above regional flood elevation, shall be provided from a
structure or building to land outside of the floodplain, except as
provided in Subsection B(4).
(4) In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations
make compliance with Subsection B(3) impractical, the
municipality may permit new development and substantial
improvements where access roads are at or below the regional
flood elevation if:
§ 330-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-15
326:437
(a) The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and
emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to
the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood
event; or
(b) The Village has a natural disaster plan approved by Wisconsin
Emergency Management and the Department. [Amended
2-24-2014]
C. Accessory structures or uses. An accessory structure or use not
connected to a principal structure shall be constructed on fill with its
lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation, subject to flood
velocities of no more than two feet per second, and shall meet all the
provisions of § 330-11B(1), (3) and (4) and Subsection F below.
[Amended 2-24-2014]
D. Commercial uses. Any commercial structure that is erected, altered or
moved into the flood-fringe area shall meet the requirements of
Subsection B. Subject to the requirements of Subsection F, storage
yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower
elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and
property.
E. Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial
structure that is erected in, altered in or moved into the flood-fringe
area shall be protected to the flood protection elevation using fill,
levees, floodwalls, or other floodproofing measures in § 330-28. Subject
to the requirements of Subsections D and F, storage yards, surface
parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an
adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
F. Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive,
or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or
aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or
floodproofed in compliance with § 330-28. Adequate measures shall be
taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during
flooding.
G. Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges
shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans, and
(1) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger
public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed
essential, construction of and substantial improvements to such
facilities shall be permitted only if they are floodproofed in
compliance with § 330-28 to the flood protection elevation.
[Amended 10-27-2014]
(2) Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower
elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the
regional flood elevation.
§ 330-15 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-15
326:438
H. Sewage systems. All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system,
pursuant to § 330-28, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet
the provisions of all local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
[Amended 2-24-2014]
I. Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system, pursuant to § 330-28, to the flood
protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Chs. NR 811 and
NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code. [Amended 2-24-2014]
J. Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is
prohibited in flood-fringe areas.
K. Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 330-15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-15
326:439

ARTICLE V
Other Floodplain Districts
[Added 10-27-2014]
Other floodplain districts may be established under this chapter and
reflected on the Floodplain Zoning Map. These districts may include general
floodplain districts and flood storage districts.
§ 330-16. General Floodplain District (GFP).
A. Applicability. The provisions of this district shall apply to all floodplains
mapped as A, AO, or AH Zones.
B. Permitted uses. Pursuant to § 330-16D, it shall be determined whether
the proposed use is located within the Floodway or Flood-Fringe. Those
uses permitted in the Floodway, pursuant to § 330-10, and Flood-
Fringe, pursuant to § 330-14, are allowed within the General Floodplain
District, according to the standards of § 330-16C, provided that all
permits or certificates required under § 330-24 have been issued.
C. Standards for development. Article III applies to Floodway areas.
Article IV applies to Flood-Fringe areas. The rest of this chapter applies
to either district.
(1) In AO/AH Zones, the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the
conditions listed below, whichever is higher.
(a) At or above the flood protection elevation; or
(b) Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the
structure; or
(c) The depth as shown on the FIRM.
D. Determine Floodway and Flood-Fringe limits. Upon receiving an
application for development within the General Floodplain District, the
Zoning Administrator shall:
(1) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph
or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to
the General Floodplain District limits, stream channel, and existing
floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the
property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and
floodproofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM.
(2) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the
proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation
and to determine floodway boundaries.
(a) A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in § 330-24B(3);
§ 330-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-16
326:441
§ 330-17. Flood Storage District.
The Flood Storage District delineates that portion of the floodplain where
storage of floodwaters has been taken into account and is relied upon to
reduce the regional flood discharge. The district protects the flood storage
areas and will not decrease the effective flood storage capacity which would
cause higher flood elevations.
§ 330-18. through § 330-19. (Reserved)
(b) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on
the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and
sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information;
(c) Specification for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage,
water supply and sanitary facilities.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all areas within the
Flood Storage District (FSD), as shown on the official floodplain zoning
maps.
B. Permitted uses. Any use or development which occurs in a Flood
Storage District must meet the applicable requirements of § 330-15.
C. Standards for development in Flood Storage Districts.
(1) Development in a Flood Storage District shall not cause an increase
equal or greater than 0.00 of a foot in the height of the regional
flood.
(2) No development shall be allowed which removes flood storage
volume unless an equal volume of storage as defined by the predevelopment
ground surface and the regional flood elevation shall
be provided in the immediate area of the proposed development to
compensate for the volume of storage which is lost, (compensatory
storage). Excavation below the groundwater table is not considered
to provide an equal volume of storage.
(3) If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not be
developed unless the entire area zoned as Flood Storage District,
on this waterway, is rezoned to the Flood-Fringe District. This must
include a revision to the floodplain study and map done for the
waterway to revise to the high flood discharge calculated without
floodplain storage, as per Article VIII of this chapter.
(4) No area may be removed from the Flood Storage District unless it
can be shown that the area has been filled to the flood protection
elevation and is contiguous to other lands outside the floodplain.
§ 330-16 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-18
326:442
ARTICLE VI
Nonconforming Uses
§ 330-20. Applicability and continuance.
A. Applicability. If these standards conform with § 59.69(10), Wis. Stats.,
for counties or § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., for cities and villages, they
shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or
structure and to the use of any structure or premises that was lawful
before the passage of this chapter or any amendment thereto.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate the requirements
for nonconforming structures set forth in § 335-51 or any other
provision of the Village Code of Ordinances. [Amended 2-24-2014]
C. The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use that is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may continue, subject to
the following conditions:
(1) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure
shall be permitted unless they comply with this chapter and all
municipal ordinances. As used in this chapter, the words
"modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any
alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or
replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory
structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification; this
includes painting, decorating, paneling and the replacing of other
nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or
replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or
connections to public utilities. The repair of a damaged structure is
not considered maintenance. For purposes of this chapter, the
construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and
that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an
extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may
extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress
and egress to the principal structure. [Amended 2-24-2014]
(2) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted,
and any future use of the property, and any structure or building
thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this
chapter and all municipal ordinances.
(3) As requests are received by the Village for modifications or
additions to nonconforming uses or nonconforming structures, the
Village shall keep a record that lists the nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures, their current assessed value, the cost of
those modifications or additions which have been permitted, and
the percentage of the structure's total current value those
modifications represent. [Amended 2-24-2014]
§ 330-20 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-20
326:443
(4) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure, or any
structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the
structure would equal or exceed 50% of its current assessed value,
shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently
changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with § 330-15. The costs of
elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a
nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded
from the fifty-percent provisions of this subsection. [Amended
11-19-2008; 12-16-2008]
(5) No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed
50% of its current assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire
structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with
conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of
this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for
residential and commercial uses in compliance with § 330-15B.
[Added 2-24-201428]
(6) If on a per-event basis the total value of the work being done under
Subsection C(4) and (5) equals or exceeds 50% of the structure's
current assessed value, the work shall not be permitted unless the
entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure
with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be
provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with
§ 330-15B. [Added 2-24-201429]
(7) Except as otherwise provided in Article VI, if any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed
or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or
rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current chapter
requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if
the total cost to restore the structure to its predamaged condition
equals or exceeds 50% of the structure's current assessed value.
[Amended 11-19-2008; 12-16-2008; 2-24-2014]
(8) For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or
destroyed by a non-flood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of
any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to
restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event,
provided that the minimum Federal Code requirements
promulgated thereunder are met, and all required permits have
been granted prior to the start of construction. [Added
2-24-2014; amended 10-27-2014]
28.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection C(5) as Subsection C(7).
29.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection C(6) as Subsection C(9).
§ 330-20 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-20
326:444
§ 330-21. Floodway areas.
(a) Residential structures:
[1] Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings,
columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must
meet the requirements of § 330-15B.
[2] Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy
and shall be constructed with methods and materials
resistant to flood damage.
[3] Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
(b) Nonresidential structures:
[1] Shall meet the requirements of § 330-20C(8)(a)[1] through
[3].
[2] Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall
meet the standards of § 330-28(1) or (2).
(9) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure, the alteration will comply with § 330-11A, flood-resistant
materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing
methods that comply with § 330-28 are used. Repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the
development standards in § 330-20(8)(a) if it is determined that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure. [Amended 2-24-2014; 10-27-2014]
A. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway area,
unless such modification or addition:
(1) Has been granted a permit or variance that meets all ordinance
requirements;
(2) Meets the requirements of § 330-20;
§ 330-20 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-21
326:445
§ 330-22. Flood-fringe areas. [Amended 11-19-2008; 12-16-2008;
2-24-2014]
(3) Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood
height; and [Amended 2-24-2014]
(4) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed,
pursuant to § 330-28, by means other than the use of fill, to the
flood protection elevation.
(5) If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is
enclosed, the following standards shall apply: [Added 2-24-2014]
(a) The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect
or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of
floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two
openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least
one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area. The
lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches
above the adjacent grade;
(b) The part of the foundation located below the flood protection
elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
(c) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevation or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
(d) Its use must be limited to parking, building access or limited
storage.
B. No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing onsite
sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been
ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health,
shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or
maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a
floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal
ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code. [Amended 2-24-2014]
C. No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable
water shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or
maintenance of an existing well in a floodway area shall meet the
applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and Chs. NR 811
and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such
modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the
Village, and the modification or addition shall be placed on fill or
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with the
standards for that particular use in § 330-15, except where § 330-22B is
applicable. [Amended 10-27-2014]
§ 330-21 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-22
326:446
B. Where compliance with the provisions of § 330-22A would result in
unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for
human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential,
the Board of Appeals, using the procedures established in § 330-26,
may grant a variance from those provisions of § 330-22A for
modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications
or additions that are protected to elevations lower than the flood
protection elevation may be permitted if: [Amended 10-27-2014]
(1) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential
or commercial structures;
(2) Human lives are not endangered;
(3) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed;
(4) Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
(5) Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
(6) The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described
in § 330-15F.
C. All new private sewage disposal systems, or the addition to,
replacement of, repair of or maintenance of a private sewage disposal
system, shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances
and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
D. All new wells, or addition to or replacement, repair or maintenance of a
well, shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter and Chs. NR
811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
E. Flood storage areas: No modifications shall be allowed to any
nonconforming structure in a flood storage area unless the standards
outlined in § 330-17 are met. [Added 10-27-2014]
§ 330-22 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-22
326:447

ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 330-23. Purpose.
Where a zoning administrator, plan commission or a board of appeals has
already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under
§ 62.23(7), Wis. Stats., these officials shall also administer this chapter.
§ 330-24. Zoning administrator; powers and duties; permit
procedures.
A. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to administer the provisions of
this chapter and shall have the following duties and powers: [Amended
2-24-2014; 10-27-2014]
(1) Advise applicants of the provisions of this chapter, assist in
preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the
regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on
all permit applications;
(2) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this chapter and issue certificates of compliance
where appropriate;
(3) Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a
substantial damage assessment to determine if substantial damage
to the structures has occurred;
(4) Keep records of all official actions, such as;
(a) All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
(b) Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations for floodplain development;
(c) Floodproofing certificates;
(d) Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and
ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures, including
changes, appeals, variances and amendments;
(e) All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures;
(f) List of nonconforming structures and uses;
(5) Submit copies of the following items to the Department regional
office;
(a) Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or
text amendments;
§ 330-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-24
326:449
(b) Copies of any case-by-case analyses and any other information
required by the Department, including an annual summary of
the number and types of floodplain zoning actions taken;
(c) Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all
related correspondence concerning the assessments;
(6) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this chapter
to the Elm Grove Plan Commission and the Village Attorney for
prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the
Department regional office; and
(7) Submit copies of text and map amendments to the FEMA regional
office.
B. Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator before any new development, as defined in Article X, or
any repair or change in the use of a building or structure, including
sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application shall be made
to the Zoning Administrator upon furnished application forms and shall
include the following data:
(1) General information.
(a) The name and address of the applicant, property owner and
contractor/builder.
(b) The legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification to an existing structure.
(2) Site development plan. The site development plan shall be drawn to
scale and submitted as a part of the permit application form and
shall contain the following information:
(a) The location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
(b) The location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
(c) The location of any structures, with distances measured from
the lot lines and street center lines;
(d) The location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage
systems or private water supply systems;
(e) The location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
(f) The location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined
from the official floodplain zoning maps;
(g) The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any
fill using National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD); [Amended 2-24-2014]
§ 330-24 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-24
326:450
(h) Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in
NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to
determine whether or not the requirements of Article III or
Article IV are met; and [Amended 10-27-2014]
(i) Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or
discharge according to § 330-6. This may include any of the
information noted in § 330-11A.
(3) Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All
hydraulic and hydrological studies shall be completed under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the State
of Wisconsin. The study contractor shall be responsible for the
technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and
approved by the Department. [Amended 2-24-2014]
(a) Zone A floodplains.
[1] Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the
standards in Ch. NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code,
Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Discharge.
[2] Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in Ch. NR 116.07(4), Wis. Admin.
Code, Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of the Regional
Flood Elevation and the following:
[a] Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic
model shall be based on detailed study information for
downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to
determine adequate starting WSEL for the study.
[b] Channel section must be surveyed.
[c] Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall
be used for the development of cross-section overbank
and floodplain mapping.
[d] A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross
sections is allowed in developed areas with additional
intermediate cross sections required at transition in
channel bottom slope, including a survey of the
channel at each location.
[e] The most current version of HEC Ras shall be used.
[f] A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the tip of
road is required at each structure.
[g] Additional cross sections are required at the
downstream and upstream limits of the proposed
§ 330-24 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-24
326:451
development and any necessary intermediate
locations based on the length of the reach if greater
than 500 feet.
[h] Standard accepted engineering practices shall be
used when assigning parameters for the base model
such as flow. Manning's N values, expansion and
contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The
base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data
such as high water marks to determine the
reasonableness of the model results. If no historical
data is available, adequate justification shall be
provided for any parameters outside standard
accepted engineering practices.
[i] The model must extend past the upstream limit of the
difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles
in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The
height difference between the propose flood profiles
and the existing study profiles shall be no more than
0.00 feet.
[3] Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be
provided, showing all cross-section locations, floodway/
floodplain limits based on best available topographic data,
geographic limits of the proposed development and
whether the proposed development is located in the
floodway.
[a] If the proposed development is located outside the
floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on
the regional flood elevation.
[b] If any par of the proposed development is in the
floodway, it must be added to the base model to show
the difference between existing and proposed
conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients
remain the same as in the existing model, unless
adequate justification based on standard accepted
engineering practices is provided.
(b) Zone AE floodplains.
[1] Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the
existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be
based on Ch. NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydrologic
Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
[2] Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in Ch. NR 116.07(4), Wis. Admin.
Code, Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Elevation and the following:
§ 330-24 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-24
326:452
[a] Duplicate Effective Model: The effective model shall
be reproduced to ensure correct transference of the
model data and to allow integration of the revised data
to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and
downstream of the revised reach. If data from the
effective model is available, models shall be generated
that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevation shown
in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS report to within
0.1 foot.
[b] Corrected Effective Model: shall not include any manmade
physical changes since the effective model date,
but shall import the model into the most current
version of HEC-RAS for Department review.
[c] Existing (Pre-Project Conditions) Model: shall be
required to support conclusions about the actual
impacts of the project associated with the Revised
(Post-Project) Model or to establish more up-to-date
models on which to based the Revised (Post-Project)
Model.
[d] Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model: shall
incorporate the Existing Model and any proposed
changes to the topography caused by the proposed
development. This model shall reflect proposed
conditions.
[e] All changes to the Duplicate Effective Model and
subsequent models must be supported by certified
topographic information, bridge plans, construction
plans and survey notes.
[f] Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to
the stream reach for which the revision is being
requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream
of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the
effective model and result in water surface elevations
and top widths computed by the revised models
matching those in the effective models upstream and
downstream of the revised reach as required. The
Effective Model shall not be truncated.
[3] Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be
submitted to the Department for review which meet the
following conditions:
[a] Consistency between the revised hydraulic models,
the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the
revised flood profiles, topographic work map,
annotated FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary Floodway
Maps (FBFMs), construction plans, bridge plans.
§ 330-24 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-24
326:453
[b] Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour
interval, and a planimetric map showing the
applicable items. If a digital version of the map is
available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM
may be more easily revised.
[c] Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised 1% and
0.2% annual change floodplains and floodway
boundaries.
[d] If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital
mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used, then all
supporting documentation or metadata must be
included with the data submission along with the
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and
State Plane Coordinate System in accordance with
FEMA mapping specifications.
[e] The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the
effective floodplain boundaries.
[f] All cross sections from the Effective Model shall be
labeled in accordance with the effective map, and a
cross-section lookup table shall be included to relate
to the model input numbering scheme.
[g] Both current and proposed floodways shall be shown
on the map.
[h] The stream center line or profiles baseline used to
measure stream distance in the model shall be visible
on the map.
(4) Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter
shall expire 180 days after issuance. However, the legislative body
may, in its discretion and for cause shown, extend the permit for an
additional period of 180 days.
C. Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and no
building that is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified,
repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied, until a certificate of
compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator, except where no
permit is required, subject to the following provisions:
(1) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof and the proposed use conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit.
§ 330-24 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-24
326:454
§ 330-25. Designation of zoning agency.
§ 330-26. Board of Appeals. [Amended 4-22-2008; 2-24-2014]
The Board of Appeals, created under § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., for villages,
is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this
chapter. The Board of Appeals shall exercise the powers conferred by
Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The Zoning
Administrator shall not be the Secretary of the Board.
(3) If all chapter provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall
be issued within 10 days after written notification that the
permitted work is completed.
(4) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered
professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill,
lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with
the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
floodproofing measures meet the requirements of § 330-28.
D. Other permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit, the
applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, Wisconsin
State, and local agencies, including, but not limited to, those required
by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under § 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
[Amended 2-24-2014]
A. The Plan Commission shall:
(1) Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning Administrator; and
(2) Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments
to this chapter, maps and text.
B. This zoning agency shall not:
(1) Grant variances to the terms of the chapter in place of action by the
Board of Appeals; or [Amended 2-24-2014]
(2) Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the
governing body.
A. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall:
(1) Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
(2) Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the
district boundaries shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
§ 330-24 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-26
326:455
(3) Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the
dimensional standards of this chapter.
B. Appeals to the Board of Appeals.
(1) Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer or department of the Village affected by
any decision of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative
officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days, unless otherwise
provided by the rules of the Board of Appeals, by filing with the
official whose decision is in question and, with the Board of
Appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal.
The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the
Board of Appeals all records regarding the matter appealed.
(2) Notice and hearing for appeals including variances.
(a) Notice. The Board of Appeals shall:
[1] Fix a reasonable time for the hearing.
[2] Post adequate notice, pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes,
specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing.
[3] Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest
and the Department regional office at least 10 days in
advance of the hearing.
(b) Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The
Board of Appeals shall:
[1] Resolve boundary disputes according to Subsection C.
[2] Decide variance applications according to Subsection D.
[3] Decide appeals of permit denials according to § 330-27.
(3) Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
(a) Be made within a reasonable time.
(b) Be sent to the Department regional office within 10 days of the
decision.
(c) Be a written determination signed by the Chairman or
Secretary of the Board of Appeals.
(d) State the specific facts that are the basis for the Board of
Appeals' decision.
(e) Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part;
dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction; or grant or deny the
variance application.
§ 330-26 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-26
326:456
(f) Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a
variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the Board of
Appeals proceedings.
C. Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the Board
of Appeals in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district
boundaries:
(1) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or
detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall
prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may
be examined.
(2) In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical
evidence to the Board.
(3) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform the
Zoning Committee or the person contesting the boundary location
to petition the governing body for a map amendment according to
Article VIII.
D. Variance.
(1) The Board of Appeals may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the
standards of this chapter if an applicant convincingly demonstrates
that:
(a) Literal enforcement of the provisions of the chapter will cause
unnecessary hardship;
(b) The hardship is due to adoption of the Floodplain Ordinance
and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots
or premises (in such case the ordinance or map must be
amended);
(c) The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
(d) The variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter in
§ 330-3.
(2) In addition to the criteria in § 330-26D(1), to qualify for a variance
under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met:
(a) The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional flood
elevation.
(b) Variances can be granted only for lots that are less than 1/2
acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed
below the RFE.
(c) Variances shall be granted only upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall
§ 330-26 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-26
326:457
§ 330-27. Appeals of permit denials.
not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall
not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be
contrary to the purpose of the chapter.
(3) A variance shall not:
(a) Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district.
(b) Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or
loss.
(c) Be granted for a hardship that is self-created.
(d) Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the
area.
(e) Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or
map(s) required in § 330-30.
(f) Allow any floor of a basement or crawlway below the regional
flood elevation for residential or commercial structures.
(g) Permit a lower degree of flood protection in the floodplain than
the flood protection elevation.
(h) Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use,
which would preclude its continued designation as an historic
structure.
(4) When a floodplain variance is granted, the Board shall notify the
applicant in writing that it may increase flood insurance premiums
and risks to life and property. A copy shall be maintained with the
variance appeal record.
A. The zoning agency (§ 330-25) or Board of Appeals shall review all data
related to the appeal. This data may include (where appropriate):
(1) Permit application data listed in § 330-24B.
(2) Floodway/flood-fringe determination data in § 330-24.
(3) Data listed in § 330-11A(2)(b) where the applicant has not
submitted this information to the Zoning Administrator.
(4) Other data submitted with the application or submitted to the
Board with the appeal.
B. For appeals of all denied permits the Board shall:
(1) Follow the procedures of § 330-26;
(2) Consider zoning agency recommendations; and
§ 330-26 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-27
326:458
§ 330-28. Floodproofing. [Amended 2-24-2014]
(3) Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
C. For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the Board
shall: [Amended 10-27-2014]
(1) Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data showing
an increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after
amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal
arrangements are made with all adversely affected property
owners, as per the requirements of Article VII.
(2) Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly
demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase, provided
that no other reasons for denial exist.
A. No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure
designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the
applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure
or development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA
floodproofing certificate.
B. For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters. No permit or
variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either:
(1) Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
registered in the State of Wisconsin; or
(2) Meets or exceeds the following standards:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding:
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade: and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, values, or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
(1) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces and other regional flood factors;
(2) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
(3) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement;
(4) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters: and
§ 330-27 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-28
326:459
§ 330-29. Public information.
(5) Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters.
A. Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the
regional flood.
B. All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and
widely distributed.
C. All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any
real property is in.
§ 330-28 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-29
326:460
ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
§ 330-30. Actions requiring amendment. [Amended 2-24-2014;
10-27-2014]
The Village Board of Trustees shall change or supplement the floodplain
zoning district boundaries and the regulations contained in this chapter in
the manner provided by law. Actions that require an amendment include,
but are not limited to, the following:
A. Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations
on the FIRM.
B. Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and
floodplain zoning maps.
C. Any fill in the floodplain that raises the elevation of the filled area to a
height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to
land lying outside the floodplain.
D. Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow, causing any
increase in the regional flood height.
E. Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by § NR
116.05, Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by
the Village.
F. All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines
or to remove an area from the floodway or the flood-fringe that is based
on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
G. Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in
§ 330-5.
H. Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are
made to this chapter, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines
and water surface profiles, in accordance with this chapter.
(1) In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases
shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to
this chapter, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and
water surface profiles, in accordance with this section. Any such
alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR.
(2) In A Zones, increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be
permitted if the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the
official floodplain maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles
in accordance with this section.
§ 330-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-31
326:461
§ 330-31. Amendment procedures. [Amended 2-24-2014]
Amendments to this chapter may be made upon petition of any interested
party according to the provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats. Such petitions shall
include all necessary data required by § 330-24. The land use permit shall
not be issued until a Letter of Map Revision is issued by FEMA for the
proposed changes.
A. The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a
public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The
amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the
Department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The
amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of § 62.23, Wis.
Stats.
B. No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by
the Department.
C. All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow,
causing any increase in the regional flood height, shall obtain flooding
easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely
affected property owners and notify local units of government before
the amendment can be approved by the governing body. [Amended
10-27-201430]
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection D, which immediately
followed, regarding amendments in areas with no water surface profiles.
§ 330-31 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-31
326:462
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
[Amended 10-27-2014]
§ 330-32. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be
unlawful and shall be referred to the Municipal Attorney, who shall
expeditiously prosecute all such violators. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation made under this chapter
shall be subject to a penalty of not more than $50. Each day of continued
violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this chapter
is a public nuisance, and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance
may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen
thereof pursuant to § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 330-32 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-32
326:463

ARTICLE X
Definitions
§ 330-33. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless specifically defined in the Village of Elm Grove Code of
Ordinances, words and phrases in this chapter shall have their
common-law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their
common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future, the
singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the
singular. The word "may" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not
discretionary. Definitions enumerated below in Subsection B shall apply
only to such terms used in this chapter and shall not apply to any other
chapter reference within the Village Code of Ordinance.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A facility, structure, building or
use that is accessory or incidental to the principal use of an property,
structure or building.
AH ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."[Added 10-27-2014]
ALTERATION — An enhancement upgrading or substantial change or
modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to
electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other
systems within a structure.[Added 2-24-2014]
AO ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."[Added 10-27-2014]
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designed AO, AH, AR/AH, or VO
Zone on a community Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a onepercent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flood may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by pond or sheet flow.[Added 10-27-2014]
A ZONES — Those areas shown on the official floodplain zoning map
which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be
numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be
reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a
given area.
BASE FLOOD — Means the flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of
an FIS and depicted on a FIRM.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The height of the base flood, usually in
feet, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988, or other datum referenced in
the Flood Insurance Study report, or average depth of the base flood,
usually in feet, above the ground surface.
§ 330-33 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-33
326:465
BASEMENT — Any enclosed area of a building having its floor
subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
BUILDING — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something having
a location on the ground that is six inches or higher above grade.
This term includes, but is not limited to, any structure having a roof
supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used for the
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, equipment, machinery or
materials, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks,
bridges, dams and culverts. For purposes of this chapter, the terms
"building" and "structure" are interchangeable.
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the
Department pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and which allows limited
filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water
mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions
of this chapter.
CAMPGROUND — Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent
overnight use by four or more camping units or which is advertised or
represented as a camping area.
CAMPING UNIT — Any portable device, no more than 400 square
feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to
a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pickup truck, tent or other
mobile recreational vehicle, that is fully licensed, if required, and ready
for highway use.[Amended 2-24-2014]
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification that the construction
and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor
of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and
banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
CRAWLWAY or CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area below the first
usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used
for access to plumbing and electrical utilities.
DECK — An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides but
has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any artificial change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair
of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any
structure, regardless of the percentage of damage or improvement;
the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site
preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
§ 330-33 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-33
326:466
drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or
equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private
sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
DRYLAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the
regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the
floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface
above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and
relief vehicles.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or
development in the floodway.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
is completed before the effective date of this chapter. At a minimum,
this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
EXPANSION TO EXISTING MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
— The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed.
This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The
federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the
following conditions:
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The probability of a flood occurrence which
is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular
flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in
a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any
given year.
(1) The overflow or rise of inland waters;
The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source;
(2)
The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake
Superior; or
(3)
The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in
a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
(4)
§ 330-33 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-33
326:467
FLOOD-FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the
floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and
associated with standing water rather than flowing water.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map designating approximate
flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered
A Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations.
This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance
aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until
superseded by a Flood Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate
Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of a community
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both
special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community. This map can be amended only by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A technical engineering examination,
evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It
provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood
and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations
and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated
as numbered and unnumbered A Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps
that accompany the Flood Insurance Study form the basis for both the
regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
FLOODPLAIN — Land that has been or may be covered by floodwater
during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the flood-fringe
and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory
purposes.
FLOODPLAIN ISLAND — A natural geologic land formation within the
floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the
regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — Policy and procedures to insure wise
use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation,
education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain
regulations.
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations
of land surface elevations along a stream or river.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural provisions,
changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and
sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the
purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation of two feet of
freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the
regional flood. (See also "freeboard.")
§ 330-33 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-33
326:468
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of
floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the
regional flood discharge.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FREEBOARD — A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified
number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates
for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated,
including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of
bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization,
loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the
riverbed or streambed.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE — Any structure or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
HEARING NOTICE — Posting meeting the requirements of Ch. 985,
Wis. Stats. For appeals, notice shall be posted at least one week (seven
days) before the hearing; for all zoning ordinances and amendments,
a notice, shall be posted for 14 days and at least a week (seven days)
before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional
notice, exceeding these minimums.[Amended 4-22-2008]
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.[Added 2-24-2014]
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Damage that could result from
flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant
economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is either:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs that have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program, as determined by
(4)
§ 330-33 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-33
326:469
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward
rise in the regional flood elevation equal to or greater than 0.00 foot,
based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions,
which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but
not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as
roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and
discharge.
LAND USE — Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved
real estate. (See also "development.")
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE — Elevation of the lowest ground surface
that touches any of the exterior walls of a building.[Added 2-24-2014]
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements or 44 CFR
60.3.[Added 2-24-2014]
MAINTENANCE — The act or process of restoring to original
soundness, including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs,
or the replacement of existing fixtures, system or equipment with
equivalent fixtures, systems or structures.[Added 2-24-2014]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to
be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile
home but does not include a "mobile recreational vehicle."
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle that is built on a
single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or
permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for
highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not
for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes
that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land but do not remain
capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not
fall within the definition of mobile recreational vehicles.
MODEL CORRECTED EFFECTIVE — A hydraulic engineering model
that corrects any errors that occur in the Duplicate Effective Model,
adds any additional cross sections to the Duplicate Effective Model, or
incorporates more detailed topographic information than that used in
the current Effective Model.[Added 2-24-2014]
the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior, in
states without approved programs.
§ 330-33 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-33
326:470
MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE — A copy of the hydraulic analysis
used in the effective FIS and referred to as the "effective
model."[Added 2-24-2014]
MODEL, EFFECTIVE — The hydraulic engineering model that was
used to produce the current effective Flood Insurance Study.[Added
2-24-2014]
MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT) — A modification of the Duplicate
Effective Model or Corrected Effective Model to reflect any man-made
modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date
of the effective model, but prior to the construction of the project for
which the revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred
since the date of the effective model, then this model would be identical
to the Corrected Effective Model or the Duplicate Effective
Model.[Added 2-24-2014]
MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) — A modification of the Existing or
Pre-Project Conditionals Model, Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected
Effective Model to reflect revised or post-project conditions.[Added
2-24-2014]
MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL — The county, city or village
governmental units enacting, administering and enforcing this chapter.
NAVD or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.[Added
2-24-2014]
NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, "new
construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning
regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood
insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial
FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — An existing lawful structure or
building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural
requirements of this chapter for the area of the floodplain that it
occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe
district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower
than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing lawful use or accessory use of
a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter for the area of the floodplain that it occupies (such as a
residence in the floodway).
§ 330-33 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-33
326:471
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together
with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood
height.
OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP — That map, adopted and made
part of this chapter, as described in § 330-5B, which has been approved
by the Department and FEMA.
OPEN-SPACE USE — Those uses having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up
to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention
of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other
easily recognized characteristic.
PERSON — An individual, or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, municipality or state agency.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field
located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative
sewage system approved by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption
field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or
a system located on a different parcel than the structure.[Amended
2-24-2014]
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines, such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and
distribution and collection systems, such as water, sanitary sewer and
storm sewer.
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Means base flood waters will
not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the
special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the
base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood
with a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the regional flood elevation (RFE) is
equivalent to the base flood elevation (BFE).
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was
issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
§ 330-33 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-33
326:472
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/
or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
STRUCTURE — See "Building."
SUBDIVISION — Has the meaning given in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the current assessed
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the equalized assessed value
of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the
structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered
substantial improvement regardless of the work performed. The term
does not however, include either any project for the improvement of
a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code
violations identified by the Building Inspector and/or Zoning
Administrator, and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designated as an
historic structure.[Added 2-24-2014]
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — Where special conditions affecting a
particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict
conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height
or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the
purposes of the chapter.
VARIANCE — An authorization by the Board of Appeals for the
construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner that
is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the
floodplain zoning chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the floodplain zoning chapter. A structure or other
development without required permits, lowest floor elevation
documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway
encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such
time as that documentation is provided.
WATERSHED — The entire region contributing runoff or surface water
to a watercourse or body of water.
§ 330-33 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-33
326:473
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along
a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile
of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
WELL — An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods to obtain groundwater regardless of
its intended use.
§ 330-33 ELM GROVE CODE § 330-33
326:474
Chapter 335
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 106.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 134.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
Plumbing — See Ch. 212.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 220.
Sewers — See Ch. 232.
Land division — See Ch. 305.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 330.
§ 330-33 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 330-33
326:475

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 335-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by §§ 61.35, 61.351,
62.23(7), 87.30, 144.26,31 and 236.45, Wis. Stats., and amendments thereto.
The Village Board of the Village of Elm Grove does ordain as follows.
§ 335-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as, referred to and cited as the "Zoning
Ordinance, Village of Elm Grove, Wisconsin" and is hereinafter referred to
as the "chapter."
§ 335-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the comfort, health, safety,
morals, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the Village of Elm
Grove, Wisconsin.
§ 335-4. Intent.
It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate and restrict the use of all
structures, lands and waters and to:
A. Regulate lot coverage and the size and location of all structures so as to
prevent overcrowding and to provide adequate sunlight, air, sanitation
and drainage;
B. Regulate population density and distribution so as to avoid sprawl or
undue concentration and to facilitate the provision of adequate public
service and utilities;
C. Regulate parking, loading and access so as to lessen congestion in and
promote the safety and efficiency of streets and highways;
D. Secure safety from fire, flooding, pollution, contamination and other
dangers;
E. Stabilize and protect existing and potential property values;
F. Preserve and protect the beauty of the Village of Elm Grove;
G. Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of the
surface and subsurface waters;
H. Prevent flood damages to persons and property;
I. Minimize expenditures for flood relief and flood control projects;
31.Editor's Note: Section 144.26 was renumbered as § 281.31 by 1995 Act 227, § 432.
§ 335-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-4
326:477
§ 335-5. Affect on existing provisions; greater restrictions to apply.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted
or issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
§ 335-6. Interpretation of provisions.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the Village and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of
any other power now possessed by the Village of Elm Grove.
§ 335-7. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection provided by this chapter is believed to be
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering experience
and scientific methods of study. On unpredictable, but rare occasions, larger
floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by man-made or
natural causes such as ice jams or bridge openings restricted by debris.
Therefore, no part of this chapter is intended to imply that areas outside of
the delineated floodplain or land uses permitted within the floodplain will
be totally free from flooding and the associated flood damages. This chapter
is not intended to create a liability on the part of or a cause of action against
the Village of Elm Grove or any office or employee thereof for any flood
damages that may result from reliance on this chapter.
J. Further the maintenance of safe and healthful water conditions;
K. Protect the traffic-carrying capacity of existing and proposed arterial
streets and highways;
L. Implement those municipal, county, watershed and regional
comprehensive plans or components of such plans adopted by the
Village of Elm Grove;
M. Provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter; and
N. Provide penalties for the violation of this chapter.
§ 335-4 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-7
326:478
ARTICLE II
Applicability; General Use Regulations
§ 335-8. Jurisdiction.
The jurisdiction of this chapter shall apply to all structures, lands, water, air,
and air space within the corporate limits of the Village of Elm Grove.
§ 335-9. Compliance required.
No structure, land, water or air shall hereafter be used or developed, and
no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or substantially improved
without full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable local, county, state and federal regulations.
§ 335-10. Compliance by governmental units.
Unless specifically exempted by law, all governmental units are required to
comply with this chapter and obtain all required permits. State agencies
are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The construction,
reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by
the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt from compliance
when § 30.12(4)(a), Wis. Stats., applies.
§ 335-11. Permitted uses. [Amended 7-22-2003; 4-26-2005]
Only the following uses and their essential services may be allowed in any
district.
A. Principal uses specified for a district.
B. Accessory uses and structures are permitted as specified within the
individual districts, but not until the principal structure is present or
under construction.
C. Accessory structures in the nature of yard maintenance buildings.
(1) Preamble. It is the Village's opinion that, in general, yard
maintenance buildings located on or near property lines detract
from the overall ambience that makes Elm Grove unique. Therefore
it is the Village's strong preference that, if residents feel that a yard
maintenance building is necessary, the yard maintenance building
be designed to match and be located next to the principal structure
or garage.
(2) Conditions and restrictions. Accessory structures in the nature of
yard maintenance buildings used for the storage of garden and
cultivating tools, lawn mowers, snow blowers, yard maintenance
equipment, pool equipment and similar tools and supplies shall be
allowed to be erected subject to the following conditions and
restrictions:
§ 335-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-11
326:479
(a) All such structures shall be approved by the Building Board
only after application has been made on forms provided by the
Village.
(b) A permit fee shall be required for each permit as determined
from time to time by the Village Board.
(c) Any such proposed structure shall be approved by the Building
Board pursuant to criteria in § 335-88D(6)(c).
(d) No existing yard maintenance building shall be structurally
altered or structurally repaired without obtaining a building
permit and complying with all applicable provisions of the
Village Code including, but not limited to, § 335-88D(6)(c).
D. Conditional uses and their accessory uses are considered as special
uses requiring review, public hearing, and approval by the Village Plan
Commission in accordance with § 335-86 of this chapter. When a use is
classified as a conditional use at the date of adoption of this chapter, it
shall be considered a legal use without further action of the Village.
Changes to or substitution of conditional uses shall be subject to review
and approval by the Plan Commission in accordance with § 335-86 of
this chapter.
E. Uses not specified in this chapter as permitted uses are hereby
declared to be prohibited. Unspecified uses that are similar in character
to principal uses permitted in the district may be permitted by the Plan
Commission upon a finding by the Plan Commission that the desired use
is not contrary to the intent of the district and that such use will not
otherwise violate any provisions of this chapter.
F. Temporary uses, such as real estate sales field offices or shelters for
materials and equipment being used in the construction of a permanent
structure, may be permitted by the Plan Commission.
G. No animals other than household pets shall be kept or raised, and no
kennels or hutches shall be maintained in the Village of Elm Grove.
H. Performance standards listed in Article VIII of this chapter shall be met
with respect to all uses in any district.
I. Preclusion of transient commercial use of residential property in
certain zoning districts. [Added 12-19-2016]
(1) Precluding transient commercial use of residential property in the
Village's Rs-1, Rs-2, Rs-3, Rs-4 and Rm-1 Zoning Districts is found
to be and deemed essential to the character, general health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the Village. The goals advanced with
the preclusion of transient commercial use of residential property
are:
(a) Avoidance of vehicular traffic that is greater than normally
expected in the residential neighborhood.
§ 335-11 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-11
326:480
(b) Prevention of excessive noise, fumes, glare and vibrations
generated during the use of the residential neighborhood.
(c) Reduction of the commercial use of residential property to
maintain residential property values.
(d) Avoidance of the intensification of parking problems within
residential property districts.
(e) Encouragement of a more permanent population within
residential property districts that facilitates and contributes to
the more effective delivery of public safety services.
(f) Reduction of public safety problems within residential property
districts.
(2) Definitions. For the purpose of this § 335-11I, the following words
and phrases shall have the following definitions:
DWELLING UNIT — An area within a structure which a natural
person can use as a sleeping place.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property having a dwelling unit
located within a zoning district or underlying zoning district, in
conjunction with a Planned Development Overlay District,
consisting of the following zoning districts: Rs-1, Rs-2, Rs-3, Rs-4
or Rm-1.
TRANSIENT COMMERCIAL USE OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
— Any use of residential property for which remuneration is
exchanged, such as compensation, money, rent or other bargainedfor
consideration given in return for occupancy, possession or use
of real property and where the term of occupancy, possession or
tenancy of the property by any person allowed such occupancy,
possession or tenancy is less than 30 consecutive calendar days.
VILLAGE — The Village of Elm Grove, Wisconsin.
(3) The Transient Commercial Use of Residential Property by a natural
person or family is prohibited. Any property owner or natural
person or family who engages in acts contrary to this prohibition
shall be subject to prosecution.
(4) Penalty.
(a) Any person found guilty of violating § 335-11I, notwithstanding
the general penalty provision contained in § 1-16 of this Code,
upon conviction thereof shall forfeit not less than $150 or no
more than 200% of the compensation of value received by the
party in violation of this section for each such offense, together
with the costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
such forfeiture and costs, shall be subject to the alternate
penalties provided for in Wis. Stats. § 800.095.
§ 335-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-11
326:481
§ 335-12. Site regulations. [Amended 11-25-2003]
No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is unsuitable for
such use or structure by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate
drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography or loadbearing
strength, erosion susceptibility or any other feature likely to be
harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of
this community. The Village Plan Commission, in applying the provisions of
this section, shall, in writing, recite the particular facts upon which it bases
its conclusion that the land is not suitable for certain uses. The applicant
shall have an opportunity to present evidence contesting such unsuitability
if he/she so desires. Thereafter the Village Plan Commission may affirm,
modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
(b) Each violation and each day or fraction thereof a violation
continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) Nothing in this Code shall preclude the Village from
maintaining any action, including, but not limited to, injunctive
relief, to abate, prevent, or remove a violation of any provision
of this Code.
(d) Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of
prosecution as ordered by a court, such person shall be subject
to the alternate penalties provided for in Wis. Stats. § 800.095
from time to time.
A. All lots shall abut upon a public street or have other Village-approved
access.
B. All principal structures shall be located on a lot and only one principal
structure shall be located, erected or moved onto a lot in all residential
districts. The Plan Commission may permit more than one structure per
lot in other districts where more than one principal structure is needed
for the orderly development of the parcel. When additional structures
are permitted, the Plan Commission may impose additional yard
requirements, landscaping requirements or parking requirements, or
may require a minimum separation distance between principal
structures.
C. Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage by all buildings and impervious
surfaces shall be set forth in the individual district regulations in
§ 335-17 through § 335-26 or as modified by a planned development
overlay approval under § 335-30. Three percent may be added to the
total maximum impervious surface coverage for an individual district
through the use of permeable surfaces. However, the total amount of
impervious surface may not exceed the square footage that would
otherwise be permitted in the underlying zoning district. [Added
3-24-2014]
§ 335-11 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-12
326:482
(1) Any lot that utilizes permeable surface to exceed the maximum
allowable impervious surface area for its zoning district shall be
required to submit a construction and site plan that includes the
following items:
(a) A survey map and grading plan that indicates the location and
size of the area of permeable surfacing.
(b) Specifications and design for permeable surface materials,
substrate base, hydraulic design and soil conditions.
(c) An installation plan for the project.
(d) An operation and maintenance plan that is consistent with the
manufacturer's original permeability specifications.
(2) Use of permeable surface materials to exceed the maximum lot
coverage area for the underlying zoning district is considered a
conditional use and requires a conditional use permit as set forth
under § 335-86.
D. No building permit shall be issued for a lot which abuts a public street
dedicated to only a portion of its proposed width and located on that
side thereof from which the required dedication has not been secured.
E. Lots abutting more restrictive district boundaries shall provide side and
rear yards not less than those required in the more restrictive abutting
district. The setbacks on the less restrictive district shall be modified
for a distance of not more than 60 feet from the district boundary line so
as to equal the average of the street yards required in both districts.
F. Buffer yard required. Any business or industrial use that abuts a
residential parcel shall provide a minimum buffer yard of 20 feet
between the business use and all single-family and two-family
residential districts. The purpose of the buffer yard is to screen the
business activity or multifamily residential activity from the single- or
two-family residential environment in such a manner that:
(1) If a buffer yard is composed entirely of plant materials, it shall be of
sufficient depth and height and contain sufficient plant species as
to provide dense visual screening within two years and during all
seasons of the year.
(2) Where architectural walls or fences are used, sufficient
landscaping shall be used in conjunction with such wall or fence to
create an attractive view from the residential side. Any wall or
fence shall not be less than four nor more than six and one-half feet
in height and shall comply with the requirements set forth for
fences in § 335-88D(8)(g) of this chapter.
(3) Pursuant to § 335-32G, all public off-street parking areas which
abut single-family residential development shall be provided with a
continuous screen consisting of either dense landscaping or a wall
§ 335-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-12
326:483
of appropriate height, sufficiently opaque to prevent the
penetration of headlight glare.
(4) All landscaping shall be maintained by the owner or operator to the
satisfaction of the Building Board.
(5) No lighting shall be permitted on or in any part of the buffer yard,
and no lighting installed elsewhere on the parcel shall direct any
rays onto adjacent residential properties.
(6) No signs shall be permitted on or in any part of the buffer yard.
G. Downtown Overlay District site design guidelines.
(1) Findings. The Village recognizes the importance of a vital central
business district, not only in terms of economic value but also as an
essential expectation of Village residents. The village finds that the
maintenance of a traditional "Village Center" theme within a
recognized Downtown Design Overlay District, incorporating
elements of neighborhood compatibility, land use diversity,
pedestrian-friendly design, empathetic building placement, use of
high quality materials and consideration for public safety, will
address existing and future needs and will best promote public
health, safety, order, commerce, and general welfare and will
encourage efficiency and economy in the process of development.
(2) Authority. Pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23(2) and
61.34(1), the Village hereby adopts the Downtown District Site
Design Guidelines (also known as the "Downtown Design
Guidelines"), dated July 2, 2003, and revised on August 7, 2003, as
a stand-alone component of its Zoning Code which shall also serve
to augment any Village master plan. Pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 66.035,32 the Village Board of Elm Grove hereby elects to enact
this section as part of the Zoning Code. This shall be accomplished
by referencing the Downtown District Site Design Guidelines
through its publication solely in pamphlet form without any
publication in conformity with Wis. Stats. § 61.50(1), provided a
copy of such pamphlet has first been made available for public
inspection in the office of the Clerk for a period no less than two
weeks before its enactment and thereafter remain permanently on
file for such purpose. Said Downtown District Site Design
Guidelines may be amended from time to time.
(3) Downtown Design Overlay District boundaries. The boundaries of
the Downtown Design Overlay District are hereby established as
shown on the map entitled "Downtown Design Overlay District,"
Village of Elm Grove, Wisconsin, dated May 23, 2003, and revised
on August 7, 2003; which map accompanies and is hereby made a
part of this chapter.33 Said map may be amended from time to time.
32.Editor's Note: Section 66.035, Wis. Stats., was repealed by 1999 Act 150, § 86, effective
1-1-2001.
§ 335-12 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-12
326:484
§ 335-13. Reduction or joint use of required space.
No lot, yard, parking area, building area or other space shall be reduced in
area or dimensions so as not to meet the provisions of this chapter. No part
of any lot, yard, parking area or other space required for a structure or use
shall be used for any other structure or use.
§ 335-14. Division or combination of residential land.
Because the Village is almost fully developed, with all residential lands
being either a part of platted subdivisions or defined through existing
metes-and-bounds legal descriptions, and because the Village is satisfied
that the resulting development, density and land uses generally provide the
highest and best use of residential land in the Village:
(4) Scope. This enactment of Downtown District Site Design
Guidelines and Downtown Design Overlay District boundaries shall
not repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, interfere or supercede any
existing zoning ordinances, permits, easements, covenants, or
agreements between parties or permits previously issued;
provided, however, that where the Downtown District Site Design
Guidelines in any way impose standards not required by other
existing zoning ordinances, permits, easements, covenants or
agreements, the provisions of the Downtown District Site Design
Guidelines shall be used to supplement them.
(5) Purpose. The general purpose of the Downtown District Site Design
Guidelines is to assist the Village staff, Plan Commission and
Building Board in reviewing proposed improvements within the
Downtown Design Overlay District boundaries to enhance the
visual character of the Downtown Design Overlay District and
avoid monotony. These guidelines are intended to foster sound,
attractive, functional and quality development. The guidelines shall
be liberally construed in favor of the Village of Elm Grove and shall
be considered minimum standards.
A. Lots existing on the effective date of this chapter shall not be divided
except, with the approval of the Plan Commission and pursuant to all
applicable laws and ordinances then in effect, provided that all
minimum zoning requirements are satisfied. In granting approval, the
Plan Commission may consider the size and shape of the lots in close
proximity to the lot to be divided, the size and shape of the lots resulting
from the proposed division and any deed or other restriction applicable
to the lot proposed to be divided.
33.Editor's Note: For informational purposes, a copy of the map and pamphlet version of the
Downtown District Site Design Guidelines, dated July 2, 2003, and revised on August 7,
2003, is located in the office of the Village Clerk and may be examined there during
regular office hours.
§ 335-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-14
326:485
B. Lots existing on the effective date of this chapter shall not be combined
to create a larger lot except with the approval of the Plan Commission;
such larger lot shall not thereafter be divided.
§ 335-14 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-14
326:486
ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts
§ 335-15. Establishment. [Amended 10-13-1997; 11-14-2018]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Village of Elm Grove is hereby divided
into the following 16 basic zoning districts and three overlay districts:
Rs-1 Single-Family Residential District
Rs-2 Single-Family Residential District
Rs-3 Single-Family Residential District
Rs-4 Single-Family Residential District
Rm-1 Multiple-Family Residential District
Rm-2 Multiple-Family Residential District
B-1 Local Business District
B-2 Office Business District
B-3 Mid-Rise Office and Professional Business District
M-1 Limited Manufacturing District
I-1 Institutional District
G-1 Governmental District
W-1 Wetland District
FWO Floodway Overlay District
FFO Floodland Fringe Overlay District
PDO Planned Development Overlay District
A. Boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the
map entitled "Zoning Map--Village of Elm Grove, Wisconsin," dated
April 9, 2000; which map accompanies and is herewith made a part of
this chapter.34 Such boundaries shall be construed to follow: corporate
limits; U. S. Public Land Survey lines; lot or property lines; center lines
of streets, highways, alleys, easements and railroad rights-of-way or
such lines extended; unless otherwise noted on the Zoning Map.
B. Boundaries of the W-1 Wetland District were based on the Wisconsin
Wetland Inventory Map for the Village of Elm Grove, dated December
16, 1987, and stamped "FINAL," and include, but are not limited to, all
shoreland wetlands five acres or more in area, shown on those maps.35
C. Boundaries of the Floodland Districts are hereby established as shown
on the map entitled, "Supplementary Floodland Zoning Map ---Village of
Elm Grove, Wisconsin," dated September 13, 1982, which map
34.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the office of the Village Clerk and may be examined
there during regular office hours.
35.Editor's Note: Said maps are on file in the office of the Village Clerk and may be examined
there during regular office hours.
§ 335-15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-15
326:487
§ 335-16. Zoning Map.
A certified copy of the Zoning Map, dated January 23, 2001, shall be
adopted and approved with the text as part of this chapter and shall be
available to the public in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 335-17. Rs-1 Single-Family Residential District.
The Rs-1 Residential District is intended to provide for single-family
residential development, at densities not to exceed 1.7 dwelling units per
net acre, served by municipal sanitary sewer facilities.
accompanies and is herewith made a part of this chapter.36 The
boundaries of the FWO Floodway Overlay District shall be determined
by use of the scale contained on the Supplementary Floodland Zoning
Map. The boundaries of the FFO Floodplain Fringe Overlay District
shall be determined by the floodland limits shown on the
Supplementary Floodland Zoning Map. The flood stages, under
floodway conditions, contained on the Supplementary Floodland Zoning
Map were developed from technical data contained in the Flood
Insurance Study--Village of Elm Grove, Waukesha County, Wisconsin,
published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
and dated January 19, 1982. The information contained in the flood
insurance study is further illustrated on the FEMA Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map and Flood Insurance Rate Map, both maps dated July 19,
1982. Where a conflict exists between the floodland limits as shown on
the Supplementary Flood Zoning Map and actual field conditions, the
elevations from the one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood profile
shall be the governing factor in locating the regulatory floodland limits.
D. Vacation of public streets and alleys shall cause the land vacated to be
automatically placed in the same district as the abutting side to which
the vacated land reverts.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings with attached garages.
(2) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above
uses, including Private Garages when located on the same lot and
not involving the conduct of a business; provided, however, that no
principal dwelling structure shall be erected unless a Private
Garage with a minimum area of 440 square feet is erected
simultaneously with the principal dwelling structure. Carports shall
be permitted in such district, provided that a Private Garage has
36.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the office of the Village Clerk and may be examined
there during regular office hours.
§ 335-15 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-17
326:488
been constructed and is directly connected as prescribed below.
Every Private Garage and Carport so erected shall be directly
connected with the main structure, either by common wall, portico,
porch or similar connection, roofed over, said roof to be connected
to the roof or walls of the main dwelling structure. In addition to
Private Garages, servants' quarters shall be considered accessory
structures; provided, however, that such quarters shall be occupied
only by servants employed on the premises and shall not be rented
as a separate domicile, and such quarters shall be connected with
the principal structures in the same manner as Private Garages.
[Amended 12-15-2014]
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(1) Utility substations.
(2) Detached garages.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Professional home offices.
(5) Driveways, patios, walkways or other hardscape constructed using
a permeable surface to exceed the allowable percentage of
maximum impervious surface area as defined within this chapter.
[Added 3-24-2014]
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall be a minimum of 25,000 square feet in
area and shall be not less than 125 feet in width at the front building
line.
E. Building height and area.
(1) Height. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(a) The building height for principal structures (including any part
thereof) shall not exceed 36 feet; provided, however, that the
building height for principal structures may be increased by
one foot for every two feet added to all side yard and the rear
setback requirements for the district in which the structure is
located. A maximum of five feet of additional building height
may be added under this subsection.
(b) For principal structures having exposed foundations on the
side or rear yards, the vertical height at that location shall not
exceed 46 feet; provided, however, that the vertical height at
that location may be increased by one foot for every two feet
added to all side and rear setback requirements of the district
up to a maximum of five feet of additional vertical height.
(c) The building height of accessory structures, other than
servants' quarters and garages, shall not exceed 10 feet.
§ 335-17 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-17
326:489
§ 335-18. Rs-2 Single-Family Residential District.
The Rs-2 Residential District is intended to provide for single-family
residential development, at densities not to exceed 2.2 dwelling units per
net acre, with larger home sizes, served by municipal sanitary sewer
facilities.
(d) The building height of servants' quarters and garages shall not
exceed 36 feet.
(2) A one-story dwelling shall have a minimum living area of 1,600
square feet.
(3) A split-level home shall have a minimum living area of 1,600 square
feet on the upper two levels.
(4) A one-and-one-half-story home shall have a minimum living area of
1,400 square feet on the first floor and a total minimum area of
1,950 square feet.
(5) A two-story home shall have a minimum combined living area of
2,100 square feet on the two floors.
(6) The required attached garage shall have a minimum floor area of
440 square feet.
F. Yards (principal and/or accessory structures).
(1) There shall be a minimum building setback of 50 feet from each
abutting street right-of-way.
(2) There shall be a side yard setback on each side of any principal or
accessory structure not less than 20 feet in width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than 25 feet.
G. Maximum building footprint area: 20% of lot area.
H. Maximum impervious surface: 30% of lot area.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings with attached garages.
(2) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above
uses, including Private Garages when located on the same lot and
not involving the conduct of a business; provided, however, that no
principal dwelling structure shall be erected unless a Private
Garage with a minimum area of 440 square feet is erected
simultaneously with the principal dwelling structure. Carports shall
be permitted in such district, provided that a Private Garage has
§ 335-17 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-18
326:490
been constructed and is directly connected as prescribed below.
Every Private Garage and Carport so erected shall be directly
connected with the main structure, either by common wall, portico,
porch or similar connection, roofed over, said roof to be connected
to the roof or walls of the main dwelling structure. In addition to
Private Garages, servants' quarters shall be considered accessory
structures; provided, however, that such quarters shall be occupied
only by servants employed on the premises and shall not be rented
as a separate domicile, and such quarters shall be connected with
the principal structures in the same manner as Private Garages.
[Amended 12-15-2014]
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(1) Utility substations.
(2) Detached garages.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Professional home offices.
(5) Driveways, patios, walkways or other hardscape constructed using
a permeable surface to exceed the allowable percentage of
maximum impervious surface area as defined within this chapter.
[Added 3-24-2014]
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square
feet in area and shall be not less than 120 feet in width at the front
building line.
E. Building height and area.
(1) Height. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(a) The building height for principal structures (including any part
thereof) shall not exceed 36 feet; provided, however, that the
building height for a principal structure may be increased by
one foot for every two feet added to all side yard and the rear
setback requirements for the district in which the structure is
located. A maximum of five feet of additional building height
may be added under this subsection.
(b) For principal structures having exposed foundations on the
side or rear yards, the vertical height at that location shall not
exceed 46 feet; provided, however, that the vertical height at
that location may be increased by one foot for every two feet
added to all side and rear setback requirements of the district
up to a maximum of five feet of additional vertical height.
(c) The building height of accessory structures, other than
servants' quarters and garages, shall not exceed 10 feet.
§ 335-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-18
326:491
§ 335-19. Rs-3 Single-Family Residential District.
The Rs-3 Residential District is intended to provide for single-family
residential development, at densities not to exceed 2.2 dwelling units per
net acre, with smaller home sizes, served by municipal sanitary sewer
facilities.
(d) The building height of servants' quarters and garages shall not
exceed 36 feet.
(2) A one-story dwelling shall have a minimum living area of 1,600
square feet.
(3) A split-level home shall have a minimum living area of 1,600 square
feet on the upper two levels.
(4) A one-and-one-half-story home shall have a minimum living area of
1,400 square feet on the first floor and a total minimum area of
1,950 square feet.
(5) A two-story home shall have a minimum combined living area of
2,100 square feet on the two floors.
(6) The required attached garage shall have a minimum floor area of
440 square feet.
F. Yards (principal and/or accessory structures).
(1) There shall be a minimum building setback of 50 feet from each
abutting street right-of-way.
(2) There shall be a side yard setback on each side of any principal or
accessory structure not less than 20 feet in width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than 25 feet.
G. Maximum building footprint area: 20% of lot area.
H. Maximum impervious surface: 30% of lot area.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings with attached garages.
(2) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above
uses, including Private Garages when located on the same lot and
not involving the conduct of a business; provided, however, that no
principal dwelling structure shall be erected unless a Private
Garage with a minimum area of 440 square feet is erected
simultaneously with the principal dwelling structure. Carports shall
be permitted in such district, provided that a Private Garage has
§ 335-18 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-19
326:492
been constructed and is directly connected as prescribed below.
Every Private Garage and Carport so erected shall be directly
connected with the main structure, either by common wall, portico,
porch or similar connection, roofed over, said roof to be connected
to the roof or walls of the main dwelling structure. In addition to
Private Garages, servants' quarters shall be considered accessory
structures; provided, however, that such quarters shall be occupied
only by servants employed on the premises and shall not be rented
as a separate domicile, and such quarters shall be connected with
the principal structures in the same manner as Private Garages.
[Amended 12-15-2014]
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(1) Utility substations.
(2) Detached garages.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Professional home offices.
(5) Driveways, patios, walkways or other hardscape constructed using
a permeable surface to exceed the allowable percentage of
maximum impervious surface area as defined within this chapter.
[Added 3-24-2014]
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum of 20,000 square feet
and shall be not less than 90 feet in width at the front building line.
E. Building height and area.
(1) Height. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(a) The building height for principal structures (including any part
thereof) shall not exceed 36 feet; provided, however, that the
building height for a principal structure may be increased by
one foot for every two feet added to all side yard and the rear
setback requirements for the district in which the structure is
located. A maximum of five feet of additional building height
may be added under this subsection.
(b) For principal structures having exposed foundations on the
side or rear yards, the vertical height at that location shall not
exceed 46 feet; provided, however, that the vertical height at
that location may be increased by one foot for every two feet
added to all side and rear setback requirements of the district
up to a maximum of five feet of additional vertical height.
(c) The building height of accessory structures, other than
servants' quarters and garages, shall not exceed 10 feet.
§ 335-19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-19
326:493
§ 335-20. Rs-4 Single-Family Residential District.
The Rs-4 Residential District is intended to provide for single-family
residential development at densities not to exceed 2.9 dwelling units per net
acre, served by municipal sanitary sewer facilities.
(d) The building height of servants' quarters and garages shall not
exceed 36 feet.
(2) A one-story dwelling shall have a minimum living area of 1,400
square feet.
(3) A split-level home shall have a minimum living area of 1,400 square
feet on the upper two levels.
(4) A one-and-one-half-story home shall have a minimum living area of
1,225 square feet on the first floor and a total minimum area of
1,695 square feet.
(5) A two-story home shall have a minimum combined living area of
1,900 square feet on the two floors.
(6) The required attached garage shall have a minimum floor area of
440 square feet.
F. Yards (principal and/or accessory structures).
(1) There shall be a minimum building setback of 50 feet from each
abutting street right-of-way.
(2) There shall be a side yard setback on each side of any principal or
accessory structure not less than 20 feet in width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than 25 feet.
G. Maximum building footprint area: 20% of lot area.
H. Maximum impervious surface: 30% of lot area.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings with attached garages.
(2) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above
uses, including Private Garages when located on the same lot and
not involving the conduct of a business; provided, however, that no
principal dwelling structure shall be erected unless a Private
Garage with a minimum area of 440 square feet is erected
simultaneously with the principal dwelling structure. Carports shall
be permitted in such district, provided that a Private Garage has
been constructed and is directly connected as prescribed below.
§ 335-19 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-20
326:494
Every Private Garage and Carport so erected shall be directly
connected with the main structure, either by common wall, portico,
porch or similar connection, roofed over, said roof to be connected
to the roof or walls of the main dwelling structure. In addition to
Private Garages, servants' quarters shall be considered accessory
structures; provided, however, that such quarters shall be occupied
only by servants employed on the premises and shall not be rented
as a separate domicile, and such quarters shall be connected with
the principal structures in the same manner as Private Garages.
[Amended 12-15-2014]
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(1) Utility substations.
(2) Detached garages.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Professional home offices.
(5) Driveways, patios, walkways or other hardscape constructed using
a permeable surface to exceed the allowable percentage of
maximum impervious surface area as defined within this chapter.
[Added 3-24-2014]
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum of 15,000 square feet in
area and shall not be less than 90 feet in width at the front building
line.
E. Building height and area.
(1) Height. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(a) The building height for principal structures (including any part
thereof) shall not exceed 36 feet; provided, however, that the
building height for a principal structure may be increased by
one foot for every two feet added to all side yard and the rear
setback requirements for the district in which the structure is
located. A maximum of five feet of additional building height
may be added under this subsection.
(b) For principal structures having exposed foundations on the
side or rear yards, the vertical height at that location shall not
exceed 46 feet; provided, however, that the vertical height at
that location may be increased by one foot for every two feet
added to all side and rear setback requirements of the district
up to a maximum of five feet of additional vertical height.
(c) The building height of accessory structures, other than
servants' quarters and garages, shall not exceed 10 feet.
§ 335-20 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-20
326:495
§ 335-21. Rm-1 Multiple-Family Residential District.
The Rm-1 Residential District is intended to provide for multiple-family
residential development at densities not to exceed 8 dwelling units per net
acre served by municipal sanitary sewer facilities.
(d) The building height of servants' quarters and garages shall not
exceed 36 feet.
(2) A one-story dwelling shall have a minimum living area of 1,100
square feet.
(3) A split-level home shall have a minimum living area of 1,100 square
feet on the upper two levels.
(4) A one-and-one-half story-home shall have a minimum living area of
975 square feet on the first floor and a total minimum area of 1,325
square feet.
(5) A two-story home shall have a minimum combined living area of
1,500 square feet on the two floors.
(6) The required attached garage shall have a minimum floor area of
240 square feet.
F. Yards (principal and/or accessory structures).
(1) There shall be a minimum building setback of 50 feet from each
abutting street right-of-way.
(2) There shall be a side yard setback on each side of any principal or
accessory structure not less than 20 feet in width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than 25 feet.
G. Maximum building footprint area: 25% of lot area.
H. Maximum impervious surface: 40% of lot area.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Two-family dwellings.
(2) Multiple-family dwellings with densities not to exceed 8 dwelling
units per net acre.
(3) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above
uses, including private garages when located on the same lot and
not involving the conduct of a business; provided, however, that no
principal structure shall be erected unless a garage with a
minimum of one parking space per dwelling unit is erected
§ 335-20 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-21
326:496
simultaneously with the principal structure; and carports shall not
be permitted in such district. Each required indoor parking space
shall be a minimum of 240 square feet in area. Every garage
so erected for a two-family dwelling shall be directly connected
with the main structure, either by common wall, portico, porch or
similar connection, roofed over, said roof to be connected to the
roof or walls of the main structure. The Plan Commission may allow
the required garage for a multifamily development (three or more
dwelling units) to be a detached structure. In addition to garages,
servants' quarters shall be considered accessory structures;
provided, however, that such quarters shall be occupied only by
servants employed on the premises and shall not be rented as a
separate domicile, and such quarters shall be connected with the
principal structures in the same manner as garages.
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(1) Utility substations.
(2) Multiple-family dwellings at densities over 8 dwelling units per net
acre.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Professional home offices.
(5) Driveways, patios, walkways or other hardscape constructed using
a permeable surface to exceed the allowable percentage of
maximum impervious surface area as defined within this chapter.
[Added 3-24-2014]
D. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have the minimum of the larger of 20,000 square feet in
area or 7,500 square feet per unit.
(2) Lots shall not be less than 120 feet in width at the front building
line.
E. Building height and area.
(1) Height. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(a) The building height for principal structures (including any part
thereof) shall not exceed 36 feet; provided, however, that the
building height for a principal structure may be increased by
one foot for every two feet added to all side yard and the rear
setback requirements for the district in which the structure is
located. A maximum of five feet of additional building height
may be added under this subsection.
(b) For principal structures having exposed foundations on the
side or rear yards, the vertical height at that location shall not
§ 335-21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-21
326:497
§ 335-21.1. Rm-2 Multiple-Family Residential District. [Added
11-14-2018]
The Rm-2 Residential District contains multiple-family residential
development for independent senior living dwellings in which all residents
are over the age of 62 years as defined by 24 CFR 100.303, as amended
exceed 46 feet; provided, however, that the vertical height at
that location may be increased by one foot for every two feet
added to all side and rear setback requirements of the district
up to a maximum of five feet of additional vertical height.
(c) The building height of accessory structures, other than
servants' quarters and garages, shall not exceed 10 feet.
(d) The building height of servants' quarters and garages shall not
exceed 36 feet.
(2) No two-family structure shall be less than 2,200 square feet in
area, excluding attached garage area.
(3) No multiple-family structure shall be less than 3,500 square feet in
area, excluding garage area.
(4) No two-family or multifamily dwelling unit shall contain less than
1,000 square feet in living area per unit.
F. Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building setback of 50 feet from the
abutting street right-of-way.
(2) There shall be a side yard setback on each side of any principal
structure not less than 20 feet in width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than 25 feet.
G. Maximum building footprint area: 30% of lot area.
H. Maximum impervious surface: 65% of lot area.
§ 335-21 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-21.1
326:498
from time to time.37 Such independent senior living dwellings must be
served by municipal sanitary sewers and municipal water.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Multiple-family independent senior living dwellings with densities
not to exceed 16 dwelling units per net acre.
(2) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incident to the above uses, including private garages when located on
the same lot and not involving the conduct of a business; provided,
however, that no principal structure shall be erected unless a garage
with a minimum of one parking space per dwelling unit is erected
simultaneously with the principal structure; and carports shall not be
permitted in such district. Each required indoor parking space shall be
a minimum of 240 square feet in area. Every garage so erected for a
two-family dwelling shall be directly connected with the main structure,
either by common wall, portico, porch or similar connection, roofed
over, said roof to be connected to the roof or walls of the main
structure. The Plan Commission may allow the required garage for a
multifamily development containing three or more dwelling units to be
a detached structure.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Utility substations.
(2) Multiple-family independent senior living dwellings as part of a
Residential Planned Development Overlay District project under
§ 335-30. Densities of up to 38 dwelling units per net acre may
potentially be granted subject to the adjustments provided for in
§ 335-30F(3) and (4).
37.24CFR 100.303 (April 1, 2015) 62 or over housing. (a) The provisions regarding familial
status in this part shall not apply to housing intended for, and solely occupied by, persons
62 years of age or older. Housing satisfies the requirements of this section even though:
(1) There are persons residing in such housing on September 13, 1988 who are under 62
years of age, provided that all new occupants are persons 62 years of age or older; (2)
There are unoccupied units, provided that such units are reserved for occupancy by
persons 62 years of age or over; (3) There are units occupied by employees of the housing
(and family members residing in the same unit) who are under 62 years of age provided
they perform substantial duties directly related to the management or maintenance of the
housing. (b) The following examples illustrate the application of paragraph (a) of this
section: Example (1): John and Mary apply for housing at the Vista Heights apartment
complex which is an elderly housing complex operated for persons 62 years of age or
older. John is 62 years of age. Mary is 59 years of age. If Vista Heights wishes to retain its
"62 or over" exemption it must refuse to rent to John and Mary because Mary is under 62
years of age. However, if Vista Heights does rent to John and Mary, it might qualify for the
"55 or over" exemption in § 100.304. Example (2): The Blueberry Hill retirement
community has 100 dwelling units. On September 13, 1988, 15 units were vacant and 35
units were occupied with at least one person who is under 62 years of age. The remaining
50 units were occupied by persons who were all 62 years of age or older. Blueberry Hill
can qualify for the "62 or over" exemption as long as all units that were occupied after
September 13, 1988 are occupied by persons who were 62 years of age or older. The
people under 62 in the 35 units previously described need not be required to leave for
Blueberry Hill to qualify for the "62 or over" exemption.
§ 335-21.1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-21.1
326:499
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Driveways, patios, walkways or other hardscape constructed using
a permeable surface to exceed the allowable percentage of
maximum impervious surface area as defined within this chapter.
D. Lot area and width.
(1) Multi-family Lots shall not be less than one acre (43,560 square feet) in area.
(2) Lots shall not be less than 120 feet in width at the front building
line.
E. Building height and area.
(1) Height.
(a) The building height for principal structures (including any part
thereof) shall not exceed 36 feet; provided, however, that the
building height for a principal structure may be increased by
one foot for every two feet added to all side yard and the rear
setback requirements for the district in which the structure is
located. A maximum of five feet of additional building height
may be added under this subsection.
(b) For principal structures having exposed foundations on the
side or rear yards, the vertical height at that location shall not
exceed 46 feet; provided, however, that the vertical height at
that location may be increased by one foot for every two feet
added to all side and rear setback requirements of the district,
up to a maximum of five feet of additional vertical height.
(c) The building height of accessory structures, other than
garages, shall not exceed 10 feet.
(d) The building height of detached garages shall not exceed 24
feet.
(2) No multiple-family structure shall be less than 3,500 square feet in
area, excluding the garage area.
(3) No dwelling unit shall contain less than 700 square feet in living
area.
F. Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building setback of 25 feet from each
abutting street right-of-way.
(2) There shall be a minimum side yard building setback of 20 feet.
(3) There shall be a rear yard building setback of not less than 25 feet.
G. The maximum building footprint area shall be 30% of the lot area.
§ 335-21.1 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-21.1
326:500
§ 335-22. B-1 Local Business District.
The B-1 Business District is intended to provide for individual or small
groups of retail and customer service establishments serving primarily the
convenience of the local neighborhood. The setting is that of a shopping
center with adequate off-street parking. The character, appearance and
operation of local centers shall be compatible with the character of the
surrounding area.
H. The maximum impervious surface shall be 65% of the lot area.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Antique and collectors stores.
(2) Appliance stores.
(3) Art shops.
(4) Bakeries.
(5) Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations and other
financial institutions.
(6) Barbershops and beauty parlors.
(7) Book or stationery store.
(8) Broadcast studios without transmission or receiving towers.
(9) Brokerages (stock, mortgage and other financial services).
(10) Business offices.
(11) Camera and photographic supply stores.
(12) Clothing store, tailor or dressmaker.
(13) Cocktail lounges.
(14) Convenience grocery or food store.
(15) Confectioneries.
(16) Delicatessens.
(17) Dental clinics.
(18) Department stores.
(19) Drugstores.
(20) Electronic stores.
(21) Fish markets.
(22) Florist shop.
§ 335-21.1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-22
326:501
(23) Fruit stores.
(24) Furriers and fur apparel.
(25) Furniture stores.
(26) Gift stores.
(27) Grocery stores.
(28) Hardware stores.
(29) Hobby and craft shops.
(30) Insurance sales offices and real estate offices.
(31) Interior decorator.
(32) Janitorial supplies.
(33) Jewelry stores.
(34) Laundries and dry-cleaning establishments.
(35) Lodges and clubs.
(36) Meat markets.
(37) Medical clinics.
(38) Music stores.
(39) Newspaper and magazine stores.
(40) Office supplies and business machine stores.
(41) Optical stores.
(42) Packaged beverage stores.
(43) Paint, glass and wallpaper stores.
(44) Parking lots and parking structures serving groups of businesses in
the district.
(45) Photographer.
(46) Plumbing and heating supplies.
(47) Professional offices.
(48) Publishing houses.
(49) Real estate offices.
(50) Restaurants, except drive-in restaurants or restaurants with drivethrough
windows with take-away service. [Amended 11-22-2011]
§ 335-22 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-22
326:502
(51) Self-service laundry and dry-cleaning establishments.
(52) Shoe stores and leather goods stores, sales and repairs.
(53) Soda fountains.
(54) Sporting goods stores.
(55) Taverns.
(56) Theaters.
(57) Tobacco shops.
(58) Variety stores.
(59) Vegetable stores.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the
operation of business or owned or used by tenants residing within
quarters located in the same structure as the business. [Amended
4-23-2002]
(2) Off-street parking and loading areas.
(3) Residential quarters for the owner or proprietor or any rental
tenant located in the same structure as the business, provided such
living accommodations satisfy all applicable health, safety and
current building code provisions and such use is accurately
reflected in a current plan of operation which identifies the number
and location of all residential occupants in such structure in
accordance with § 335-22 of the Code of the Village of Elm Grove.
[Amended 4-23-2002]
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(1) Automotive and marine sales and service.
(2) Building maintenance and supply stores.
(3) Drive-in banks.
(4) Equipment rental stores.
(5) Fuel oil, bottled gas, salt and ice dealers.
(6) Funeral homes.
(7) Garden supply stores.
(8) Gasoline service stations and car wash establishments, provided
that all pumps and service islands meet the setback and yard
requirements.
§ 335-22 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-22
326:503
(9) Grain processing and storage.
(10) Physical culture facilities, such as fitness centers, massage parlors,
tanning parlors and body-piercing establishments as defined by
Wis. Admin. Code § HFS 173.03(8) and tattoo parlors.
(11) Power equipment centers, sales, service and storage.
(12) Restaurants with drive-through windows with take-away service.
Only property which has frontage along, and vehicular ingress and
egress access to, Bluemound Road may be considered for such a
use. [Added 11-22-201138]
(13) Utilities.
(14) Video arcades.
(15) Video tape sales and rental.
(16)Wireless communication antennas.
(17) Multifamily residential units as part of a Mixed Compatible
Residential Planned Development Overlay District project under
§ 335-30. Densities of up to 12 dwelling units per net acre may
potentially be granted subject to the adjustments provided for in
§ 335-30F(3) and (4). [Added 5-25-2004]
(18) Parking lots, driveways, walkways or other hardscape constructed
using a permeable surface to exceed the allowable percentage of
maximum impervious surface area as defined within this chapter.
[Added 3-24-2014]
(19) Other unspecified uses which are found to be similar in character
to those principal uses conditionally permitted by the Plan
Commission. [Added 3-24-2014]
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall be a minimum of 7,200 square feet in
area and shall be not less than 60 feet in width at the front building
line.
E. Building height. No structure or parts thereof shall exceed 35 feet in
building height, or two stories, whichever is less. No accessory
structure shall exceed 10 feet in building height.
F. Yards (principal and/or accessory structures).
(1) There shall be a minimum building setback of 20 feet from each
abutting street right-of-way.
(2) There shall be no required side yard; however, when a side yard is
provided, there shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the lot line.
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of Subsection B(12)
through (16) as Subsection B(13) through (17), respectively.
§ 335-22 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-22
326:504
(3) There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than 25 feet.
G. Yards within the Downtown Design Overlay District (principal and/or
accessory structures). [Added 8-22-200639]
(1) Subject to the provisions of § 335-22G(2), the Plan Commission may
approve deviations from any of the yard requirements specified in
§ 335-22F.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 335-22F(1), (2) and (3), an
applicant shall propose, and the Plan Commission shall review and
approve, the proposed side, front and rear yard setbacks for
structures to be developed or redeveloped within the boundaries of
the Downtown Design Overlay District as established by
§ 335-12G(3). Before determining appropriate setbacks, the Plan
Commission shall first make a final determination that due
consideration has been given to the existing conditions of adjacent
properties when establishing side, front and rear yard setbacks, so
as to provide a suitable, streamlined and compatible transition
between structures. The following criteria shall be considered by
the Plan Commission in determining front, side and rear yard
setbacks:
(a) Whether the building setbacks of new or modified structures
are compatible with those of existing, adjacent structures and
are scaled at an appropriate distance based on massing and
height characteristics to adjacent structures;
(b) Whether the proposed new or modified structure fosters a
harmonious relationship to adjacent structures;
(c) Whether the proposed location of the new or modified
structure is reasonably accessible to streets and public
walkways, as contemplated in the Downtown District Site
Design Guidelines;
(d) Whether the major facade and/or major entrance of the
proposed new or modified structure is functionally linked to
the primary pedestrian access as determined by the Plan
Commission on a case-by-case basis; and
(e) Whether the proposed new or modified structure maintains an
appropriate distance from any adjacent single- and/or multiplefamily
residentially zoned properties as determined by the Plan
Commission on a case-by-case basis.
H. Maximum impervious surface: 80% of lot area.
I. Maximum building footprint area: 60% of lot area.
39.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections G,
H and I as Subsections H, I and J, respectively.
§ 335-22 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-22
326:505
§ 335-23. B-2 Office Business District.
The B-2 Business District is intended to provide for individual or limited
office and special service uses where the office activity would be compatible
with other neighborhood uses and not exhibit the intense activity of other
business districts.
J. Plan of operation required. (Refer to § 335-85.)
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Advertising agency.
(2) Barbershops.
(3) Beauty shops.
(4) Bookstores (except those regulated by Chapter 87).
(5) Brokerages (stock, mortgage, and other financial services).
(6) Clothing resale shops.
(7) Corporate business offices.
(8) Day-care centers.
(9) Interior decorator.
(10) Professional offices of an architect, landscape architect, lawyer,
accountant, doctors of medicine, Christian Science practitioner,
dentist, clergy, engineer, manufacturer's representative, business
consultant, computer consultant or other recognized profession,
but excluding body-piercing establishment operator [as defined by
Wis. Admin. Code § HFS 173.03(8)], massage therapist, body
worker or cosmetician.
(11) Real estate and insurance offices.
(12) Studios for photography, painting, music, sculpture, dance or other
recognized fine art.
(13) Travel agents.
(14) Other unspecified uses which are found to be similar in character
to those principal uses permitted by the Plan Commission.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with
the operation of the business or for occupants of the premises.
(2) Off-street parking areas.
§ 335-22 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-23
326:506
(3) Restaurants and delicatessens accessory to a permitted use
intended to serve office employees.
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-10-2001; 5-25-2004; 9-25-2007]
(1) Radio and television broadcast studios.
(2) Utilities.
(3) Wireless communication antennas.
(4) Multifamily residential units as part of a Mixed Compatible
Residential Planned Development Overlay District project under
§ 335-30. Densities of up to 12 dwelling units per net acre may
potentially be granted subject to the adjustments provided for in
§ 335-30F(3) and (4).
(5) Antique and collectors stores.
(6) Appliance stores.
(7) Art shops.
(8) Bakeries.
(9) Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations and other
financial institutions.
(10) Broadcast studios without transmission or receiving towers.
(11) Business offices.
(12) Camera and photographic supply stores.
(13) Clothing store, tailor or dressmaker.
(14) Confectioneries.
(15) Delicatessens.
(16) Dental clinics.
(17) Department stores.
(18) Drugstores.
(19) Electronic stores.
(20) Fish markets.
(21) Florist shops.
(22) Fruit stores.
(23) Furriers and fur apparel.
(24) Furniture stores.
§ 335-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-23
326:507
(25) Gift stores.
(26) Hobby and craft shops.
(27) Jewelry stores.
(28) Meat markets.
(29) Medical clinics.
(30) Music stores.
(31) Newspaper and magazine stores.
(32) Office supplies and business machine stores.
(33) Optical stores.
(34) Paint, glass and wallpaper stores.
(35) Professional offices.
(36) Shoe stores and leather goods stores, sales and repairs.
(37) Sporting goods stores.
(38) Variety stores.
(39) Vegetable stores.
(40) Parking lots, driveways, walkways or other hardscape constructed
using a permeable surface to exceed the allowable percentage of
maximum impervious surface area as defined within this chapter.
[Amended 3-24-201440]
(41) Other unspecified uses which are found to be similar in character
to those principal uses conditionally permitted by the Plan
Commission.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall be a minimum of 7,200 square feet in
area and shall be not less than 60 feet in width at the front building
line.
E. Building height. No principal structure or parts of a principal structure
shall exceed 35 feet in height, or two stories, whichever is less. No
accessory structure shall exceed 10 feet in height.
F. Yards (principal and/or accessory structures).
(1) There shall be a minimum building setback of 20 feet from each
abutting street right-of-way.
40.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection C(40) as Subsection
C(41).
§ 335-23 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-23
326:508
(2) There shall be no required side yard; however, when a side yard is
provided, there shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the lot line.
(3) There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than 25 feet.
G. Yards within the Downtown Design Overlay District (principal and/or
accessory structures). [Added 8-22-2006]
(1) Subject to the provisions of § 335-23G(2), the Plan Commission may
approve deviations from any of the yard requirements specified in
§ 335-23F.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 335-23F(1), (2) and (3), an
applicant shall propose, and the Plan Commission shall review and
approve, the proposed side, front and rear yard setbacks for
structures to be developed or redeveloped within the boundaries of
the Downtown Design Overlay District as established by
§ 335-12G(3). Before determining appropriate setbacks, the Plan
Commission shall first make a final determination that due
consideration has been given to the existing conditions of adjacent
properties when establishing side, front and rear yard setbacks, so
as to provide a suitable, streamlined and compatible transition
between structures. The following criteria shall be considered by
the Plan Commission in determining front, side and rear yard
setbacks:
(a) Whether the building setbacks of new or modified structures
are compatible with those of existing, adjacent structures and
are scaled at an appropriate distance based on massing and
height characteristics to adjacent structures;
(b) Whether the proposed new or modified structure fosters a
harmonious relationship to adjacent structures;
(c) Whether the proposed location of the new or modified
structure is reasonably accessible to streets and public
walkways, as contemplated in the Downtown District Site
Design Guidelines;
(d) Whether the major facade and/or major entrance of the
proposed new or modified structure is functionally linked to
the primary pedestrian access as determined by the Plan
Commission on a case-by-case basis; and
(e) Whether the proposed new or modified structure maintains an
appropriate distance from any adjacent single- and/or multiplefamily
residentially zoned properties as determined by the Plan
Commission on a case-by-case basis.
H. Maximum impervious surface: 80% of lot area.
I. Maximum building footprint area: 60% of lot area.
§ 335-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-23
326:509
§ 335-24. B-3 Mid-Rise Office and Professional District.
The B-3 Business District is intended to provide for office, professional and
special service uses in a more intense, urban setting.
J. Plan of operation required. (Refer to § 335-85.)
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Administrative and public service offices.
(2) Banks or financial institutions.
(3) Barbershops and beauty shops.
(4) Brokerages (stock, mortgage and other financial services).
(5) Corporate business offices.
(6) Fitness centers.
(7) Gift shops and boutiques.
(8) Hotels and motels.
(9) Interior decorator.
(10) Medical clinics.
(11) Professional offices of an architect, landscape architect, lawyer,
accountant, engineer, manufacturer's representative, business
consultant, computer consultant or other recognized profession.
(12) Real estate and insurance offices.
(13) Retail stores.
(14) Studios for photography, painting, music, sculpture, dance or other
recognized fine art.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with
the operation of the business or for occupants of the premises.
(2) Off-street parking areas.
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(1) Convention centers.
(2) Radio and television broadcast studios.
(3) Restaurants and delicatessens.
(4) Restaurants with drive-through windows with take-away service.
Only property which has frontage along, and vehicular ingress and
§ 335-23 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-24
326:510
egress access to, Bluemound Road may be considered for such a
use. [Added 11-22-201141]
(5) Automotive parking on a short-term basis related to businesses on
adjacent properties.
(6) Wireless communication antennas.
(7) Multifamily residential units as part of a Mixed Compatible
Residential Planned Development Overlay District project under
§ 335-30. Densities of up to 12 dwelling units per net acre may
potentially be granted subject to the adjustments provided for in
§ 335-30F(3) and (4). [Added 5-25-2004]
(8) Parking lots, driveways, walkways or other hardscape constructed
using a permeable surface to exceed the allowable percentage of
maximum impervious surface area as defined within this chapter.
[Added 3-24-2014]
(9) Other unspecified uses which are found to be similar in character
to those principal uses conditionally permitted by the Plan
Commission. [Added 3-24-2014]
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 40,000 square
feet and shall be not less than 100 feet in width at the front building
line.
E. Building height.
(1) Principal structures in the B-3 Business District shall not be less
than three, nor more than five, stories in height. No accessory
structure shall exceed 10 feet in building height.
(2) No principal structure or parts of a principal structure shall exceed
65 feet in height. Accessory structures shall not exceed 10 feet in
height.
F. Yards (principal and/or accessory structures).
(1) There shall be a minimum setback of 50 feet from each abutting
street right-of-way for structures not exceeding 35 feet in height.
(2) There shall be a side yard setback on each side of all buildings not
less than 25 feet in width for structures not exceeding 35 feet in
height.
(3) There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than 25 feet for
structures not exceeding 35 feet in height.
(4) The setback requirements in all yards shall be increased one foot
for each two feet the structure exceeds 35 feet in height.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of Subsection C(4)
through (6) as Subsection C(5) through (7), respectively.
§ 335-24 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-24
326:511
§ 335-25. M-1 Limited Manufacturing District.
The M-1 Manufacturing District is intended to provide for manufacturing,
industrial and related uses of a limited nature and size in situations where
such uses are not located in basic industrial groupings and where the
relative proximity to other uses requires more restrictive regulation.
G. Maximum impervious surface: 80% of lot area.
H. Maximum building footprint area: 60% of lot area.
I. Plan of operation required. (Refer to § 335-85.)
A. Permitted uses. [Added 5-26-200942]
(1) Indoor storage and warehouse facilities.
B. Conditional uses. Processing, manufacturing and/or storage of the
following, provided that the Plan Commission, in approving or
disapproving proposed locations for uses under this subsection, shall
give due consideration to the character and suitability for development
of the neighborhood in which any such use is proposed to be located,
and shall also base its decision on such evidence as may be presented to
the Plan Commission regarding those attributes of the proposed use,
such as increased traffic on the public streets, heavy vehicular traffic
and the emission of noise, smoke, dust or dirt, odorous or noxious gases
and the like, that would be detrimental to such character and such
suitability for development. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(1) Dairies and bottling plants.
(2) Dry cleaners and dyeing establishments.
(3) Laundries.
(4) Printing and publishing.
(5) Wholesaling and distributors.
(6) Any similar use, subject to the approval of the Plan Commission.
(7) Adult-oriented establishments.
(8) Garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the
operation of an industry.
(9) Off-street parking and loading areas.
(10) Office, storage, power supply and other uses normally auxiliary to
the principal industrial operations.
(11) Restaurants and delicatessens to serve industrial workers.
42.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections A through G as
Subsections B through H, respectively.
§ 335-24 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-25
326:512
§ 335-26. I-1 Institutional District. [Amended 10-13-1997]
The I-1 Institutional District is intended to provide for private and quasipublic
institutional uses and private and public schools.
(12) Experimental, testing and research laboratories.
(13) Factory outlets.
(14) Millwork.
(15) Service facilities for in-factory day-care services to employees,
provided that all state and federally imposed standards for daycare
facilities are complied with.
(16) Utilities.
(17)Wireless communication antennas.
(18) Parking lots, driveways, walkways or other hardscape constructed
using a permeable surface to exceed the allowable percentage of
maximum impervious surface area as defined within this chapter.
[Added 3-24-2014]
(19) Other unspecified uses which are found to be similar in character
to those principal uses conditionally permitted by the Plan
Commission. [Added 3-24-2014]
C. Lot area and width. Lots in the M-1 District shall have a minimum of
20,000 square feet in area and shall be not less than 50 feet in width at
the front building line.
D. Building height and area. No structure or parts of a structure shall
exceed 45 feet in height or two stories. Accessory structures shall not
exceed 10 feet in height.
E. Yards (principal and/or accessory structures).
(1) There shall be a minimum building setback of 50 feet from each
abutting street right-of-way.
(2) There shall be a side yard setback on each side of the principal
structure not less than 30 feet in width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than 30 feet.
F. Maximum impervious surface: 80% of lot area.
G. Maximum building footprint area: 60% of lot area.
H. Plan of operation required. (Refer to § 335-85.)
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Churches.
§ 335-25 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-26
326:513
(2) Fraternal lodges.
(3) Historic sites.
(4) Hospitals, sanitariums, sanatoriums and nursing homes.
(5) Libraries and museums.
(6) Private recreation clubs.
(7) Public or private schools, colleges, and universities.
(8) Social, veteran, and service clubs.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Residential quarters for caretakers or clergy.
(2) Garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the
operation of a permitted use.
(3) Off-street parking and loading areas.
(4) Service buildings and facilities normally accessory to the permitted
uses.
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-10-2001]
(1) Crematoriums. [Added 3-27-201243]
(2) Cemeteries. [Added 3-27-2012]
(3) Medical clinics.
(4) Utilities.
(5) Water towers and storage tanks.
(6) Transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay and microwave towers
with or without broadcast facilities or studios.
(7) Wireless communication antennas.
(8) Community-based residential facilities with densities not to exceed
12 residential units per net acre. An enhanced density of not more
than 35 residential units per net acre may be granted at the
discretion of the Board of Trustees if found to comply with all
criteria listed under § 335-30F(3)(d). All residential units in a
community-based residential facility allowable under this
subsection shall consist of at least a single room with an attached
bathroom that shall not be occupied by more than two residents.
[Added 11-22-2011]
43.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of Subsection C(1)
through (7) as Subsection C(3) through (9), respectively.
§ 335-26 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-26
326:514
(9) Residential care apartment complexes with densities not to exceed
12 residential units per net acre. An enhanced density of not more
than 30 residential units per net acre may be granted at the
discretion of the Board of Trustees if found to comply with all
criteria listed under § 335-30F(3)(d). [Added 11-22-2011]
(10) Parking lots, driveways, walkways or other hardscape constructed
using a permeable surface to exceed the allowable percentage of
maximum impervious surface area as defined within this chapter.
[Added 3-24-2014]
(11) Other unspecified uses which are found to be similar in character
to those principal uses conditionally permitted by the Plan
Commission. [Added 3-24-2014]
D. Lot area and width. Lots in the I-1 District shall be a minimum of 20,000
square feet in area with a minimum lot width of 100 feet at the front
building line.
E. Building height and area.
(1) No principal structure or part of a principal structure shall exceed
35 feet in height. No accessory structure shall exceed 10 feet in
height.
(2) A one-story dwelling shall have a minimum living area of 1,600
square feet.
(3) A split-level home shall have a minimum living area of 1,600 square
feet on the upper two levels.
(4) A one-and-one-half-story home shall have a minimum living area of
1,400 square feet on the first floor and a total minimum area of
1,950 square feet.
(5) A two-story home shall have a minimum combined living area of
2,100 square feet on the two floors.
(6) The required attached garage shall have a minimum floor area of
440 square feet.
(7) The sum total of the floor area of the principal building and all
accessory buildings shall not exceed 30% of the lot area.
F. Yards (principal and/or accessory buildings).
(1) There shall be a minimum building setback of 50 feet from the
abutting street right-of-way.
(2) There shall be a side yard setback on each side of the principal
structure not less than 30 feet in width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than 25 feet.
§ 335-26 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-26
326:515
§ 335-26.1. G-1 Governmental District. [Added 10-13-1997]
The G-1 Governmental District is intended to eliminate the ambiguity of
maintaining, in unrelated use districts, areas which are under public or
private ownership and where the use for public governmental purpose is
anticipated to be permanent.
G. Community-based residential facilities and residential care apartment
complexes. Notwithstanding any other provision in this subsection to
the contrary, for facilities granted a conditional use permit under
§ 335-26C(6) and/or § 335-26C(7) the following building height and
area rules shall apply: [Added 11-22-2011]
(1) The principle structure may not exceed three stories in height.
(2) Maximum impervious surface: 80% of lot area.
(3) Maximum building footprint area: 80% of lot area.
(4) Lots shall be a minimum of 40,000 square feet in area with a
minimum lot width of 100 feet at the front building line.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Historic sites.
(2) Libraries and museums.
(3) Public administrative offices and public service buildings, including
fire and police stations.
(4) Public parks.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Residential quarters for caretakers.
(2) Garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the
operation of a permitted use.
(3) Off-street parking and loading areas.
(4) Service buildings and facilities normally accessory to the permitted
uses.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Utilities.
(2) Water towers and storage tanks.
(3) Communication structures.
(4) Parking lots, driveways, walkways or other hardscape constructed
using a permeable surface to exceed the allowable percentage of
§ 335-26 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-26.1
326:516
§ 335-27. W-1 Wetland Overlay District.
maximum impervious surface area as defined within this chapter.
[Added 3-24-2014]
(5) Other unspecified uses which are found to be similar in character
to those principal uses conditionally permitted by the Plan
Commission. [Added 3-24-2014]
D. Lot area and width. Lots in the G-1 District shall be a minimum of
20,000 square feet in area with a minimum lot width of 100 feet at the
front building line.
E. Building height and area.
(1) No principal structure or part of a principal structure shall exceed
35 feet in height. No accessory structure shall exceed 10 feet in
height.
(2) A one-story dwelling shall have a minimum living area of 1,600
square feet.
(3) A split-level home shall have a minimum living area of 1,600 square
feet on the upper two levels.
(4) A one-and-one-half-story home shall have a minimum living area of
1,400 square feet on the first floor and a total minimum area of
1,950 square feet.
(5) A two-story home shall have a minimum combined living area of
2,100 square feet on the two floors.
(6) The required attached garage shall have a minimum floor area of
440 square feet.
(7) The sum total of the floor area of the principal building and all
accessory buildings shall not exceed 30% of the lot area.
F. Yards (principal and/or accessory buildings).
(1) There shall be a minimum building setback of 50 feet from the
abutting street right-of-way.
(2) There shall be a side yard setback on each side of the principal
structure not less than 30 feet in width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than 25 feet.
A. Intent; boundaries.
(1) The W-1 Wetland Overlay District is intended to preserve, protect
and enhance the ponds, streams and wetland areas of the Village of
Elm Grove. The preservation, protection and enhancement of these
areas will serve to maintain safe and healthful conditions; maintain
§ 335-26.1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-27
326:517
and improve water quality, both ground and surface; prevent flood
damage; control stormwater runoff; protect stream banks from
erosion; protect groundwater recharge and discharge areas;
protect wildlife habitat; protect native plant communities; avoid
the location of structures on soils which are generally not suitable
for use; and protect the water-based recreation resources of the
Village.
(2) The boundaries of the W-1 Wetland Overlay District are based on
the Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Map for the Village of Elm Grove,
dated December 16, 1987, and stamped "FINAL", and include, but
are not limited to, all wetlands shown on that map which are five
acres or greater in area and which are located within shorelands as
defined in this chapter.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Hiking, fishing, swimming and boating, unless prohibited by other
ordinances and laws.
(2) The harvesting of wild crops in a manner that is not injurious to the
natural reproduction of such crops.
(3) The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and
harvesting of timber.
(4) Ditching, tiling, dredging, excavating or filling done to maintain or
repair an existing drainage system only to the extent necessary to
maintain the level of drainage required to continue the existing
use.
(5) The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and walkways,
including those built on pilings.
(6) The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of
existing streets, roads and bridges.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) The construction of streets which are necessary for the continuity
of the Village street system, necessary for the provision of essential
utility and public safety services or necessary to provide access to
permitted open space uses, provided that:
(a) The street cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside of a
wetland; and
(b) The street is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse
impact upon the natural functions of the wetland and meets the
following standards:
[1] The street shall be designed and constructed for the
minimum cross section practical to serve the intended use;
§ 335-27 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-27
326:518
[2] Street construction activities are to be carried out in the
immediate area of the roadbed only; and
[3] Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling or
excavating that is to be done must be necessary for the
construction or maintenance of the street.
(2) The establishment and development of public and private parks
and recreation areas, public boat access sites, natural and outdoor
education areas, historic and scientific areas, wildlife refuges,
game preserves and private habitat areas, provided that:
(a) Any private recreation or wildlife habitat area must be used
exclusively for that purpose;
(b) No filling is to be done; and
(c) Ditching, excavating, dredging, dike and dam construction
may be done in wildlife refuges, game preserves and private
wildlife habitat areas, but only for the purpose of improving
wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values.
(3) The construction and maintenance of electric, gas, telephone,
water and sewer transmission and distribution lines and related
facilities by public utilities and cooperative associations organized
for the purpose of producing or furnishing heat, light, power or
water to members, provided that:
(a) The transmission and distribution lines and related facilities
cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside of a wetland;
and
(b) Any filling, excavating, ditching or draining that is to be done
must be necessary for such construction or maintenance and
must be done is a manner designed to minimize flooding and
other adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the
wetlands.
(4) The construction and maintenance of railroad lines, provided that:
(a) The railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located
outside of a wetland; and
(b) Any filling, excavating, ditching or draining that is to be done
must be necessary for such construction or maintenance and
must be done in a manner designed to minimize flooding and
other adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the
wetlands.
D. Prohibited uses.
§ 335-27 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-27
326:519
(1) Any use not listed as a permitted use or a conditional use is
prohibited unless the W-1 District lands concerned are first rezoned
into another district.
(2) The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction
or placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary
high-water mark of any navigable water are prohibited.
E. Wetland mapping discrepancies. Whenever a discrepancy exists
between the boundary of a wetland, as shown in the W-1 Wetland
District, and actual field conditions, the Village shall contact the
Southeast District Office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) to determine if the wetland delineation is in error. If
the DNR staff concurs that an area has been incorrectly mapped as a
wetland, the Village shall have the authority to immediately grant or
deny a permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the
correct zoning district. The Village shall then take appropriate action to
amend the Zoning Map within a reasonable period of time.
F. Amendment procedure.
(1) Notice to DNR. The Village shall transmit a notice of any change
(text or map) in the W-1 District, if such change affects land in the
shoreland, to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
(DNR). Notice requirements shall be as follows:
(a) A copy of every petition for a text or map change mailed within
five days of filing with the Village Clerk.
(b) At least 10 days' prior notice of any public hearing on a
shoreland W-1 zoning amendment.
(c) Notice of a Village Plan Commission recommendation no later
than 10 days following the recommendation.
(d) Notice of a Village Board decision no later than 10 days
following the decision.
(2) Review standards. No wetland in a shoreland W-1 District shall be
rezoned if the rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact
on stormwater or floodwater storage capacity; maintenance of dry
season streamflow, the discharge of groundwater from the wetland
to another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland;
filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic
compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
shoreline protection against soil erosion; fish spawning, breeding,
nursery or feeding grounds; wildlife habitat; or areas of special
recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland
types.
(3) DNR objections. If the DNR has notified the Village Plan
Commission that an amendment to the shoreland portion of the W-1
§ 335-27 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-27
326:520
§ 335-28. FWO Floodway Overlay District.
District may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the
criteria listed in Subsection F(2) above, that amendment, if
approved by the Village Board, shall contain the following
provision:
"This amendment shall not take effect until more than 30 days
have elapsed since written notice of the Village Board's approval
of this amendment was mailed to the Department of Natural
Resources. During that 30-day period, the Department of Natural
Resources may notify the Village Board that it will adopt a
superseding shoreland ordinance for the Village pursuant to
Section 61.351 of the Wisconsin Statutes. If the Department does
so notify the Village Board, the effect of this amendment shall be
stayed until the Section 61.351 adoption procedure is completed
or otherwise terminated."
G. Protest. In the event of a protest against such district change or
amendment to the regulations of this chapter, duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more either of the areas of the
land included in such proposed change, or by the owners of 20% or
more of the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, or
by the owners of 20% or more of the land directly opposite thereto
extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such
changes or amendments shall not become effective except by the
favorable vote of 3/4 of the Village Board members voting on the
proposed change.
A. Intent; conflicting provisions.
(1) The FWO Floodway Overlay District is intended to be used to
protect people and property from flood damage by prohibiting the
erection of structures that would impede the flow of water during
periodic flooding. Permitting use of the floodway would increase
damages in the broader floodplain by increasing flood stages. In
delineating the FWO District, the effects of development within the
associated flood fringe shall be computed. No increase in flood
stage shall be permitted that is equal to or greater than 0.01 foot
unless the Village has made appropriate legal arrangements with
all affected units of government and all property owners affected by
the stage increase and until the Village and all affected units of
government have amended their water surface profiles and
floodland zoning maps to reflect the increased flood elevations. No
floodway overlay district changes shall be permitted where the
cumulative effect of changes increases flood stages more than 1.0
foot. In addition to floodway delineated by detailed engineering
methods, any unnumbered A Zones which appear on the Village's
Flood Insurance Rate Map shall be placed in the FWO Floodway
Overlay District.
§ 335-27 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-28
326:521
(2) Overlay districts provide for the possibility of superimposing
certain additional requirements upon a basic underlying zoning
district without disturbing the requirements of the basic district. In
the instance of conflicting requirements, the stricter of the
conflicting requirements shall apply.
(3) Where there are conflicts between this section and the Floodplain
Ordinance,44 the Floodplain Ordinance shall take precedence.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Drainage.
(2) Movement of floodwater.
(3) Navigation.
(4) Stream bank protection.
(5) Water measurement and control facilities.
(6) Any of the following uses are permitted, provided that they are
permitted uses in the district immediately adjacent to the floodway,
and further provided that such use shall not involve the erecting or
placing of a structure.
(a) Grazing.
(b) Horticulture.
(c) Open parking and loading areas, provided that such uses shall
not be subject to inundation depths greater than two feet or
flood velocities greater than two feet per second.
(d) Open recreational uses, such as parks, sport fields, beaches,
bathing, golf courses and driving ranges.
(e) Outdoor plant nurseries.
(f) Utility poles, towers and underground conduit for transmitting
electricity, telephone, cable television, natural gas, water and
sewer lines and similar products and services.
(g) Wildlife preserves.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Open space and related uses for the following uses, provided that
the applicant shows that such use or improvement will not impede
drainage, will not cause ponding, will not obstruct the floodway,
will not increase flood flow velocities, will not increase the flood
stage and will not retard the movement of floodwaters. When
permitted, all structures shall be floodproofed and constructed so
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 330, Floodplain Zoning.
§ 335-28 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-28
326:522
as not to catch or collect debris nor be damaged by floodwaters.
Certification of floodproofing shall be made to the Building
Inspector and shall consist of a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures
are consistent with the flood velocities, forces, depths and other
factors associated with the one-hundred-year recurrence interval
flood.
(a) Navigational structures.
(b) Public water measuring and control facilities.
(c) Bridges and approaches.
(d) Marinas.
(e) Filling as authorized by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources to permit the establishment of approved bulkhead
lines.
(f) Other open space uses consistent with the purpose and intent
of the district and compatible with uses in adjacent districts,
not including structures.
(2) Municipal water supply and sanitary sewage collection systems,
provided that the system is floodproofed to an elevation of at least
two feet above the elevation of the one-hundred-year recurrence
interval flood and is designed to eliminate or minimize infiltration
of floodwaters into the system. Certification of floodproofing shall
be made to the Building Inspector and shall consist of a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the flood velocities,
forces, depths and other factors associated with the one-hundredyear
recurrence interval flood level for the particular stream reach.
D. Dumping and filling prohibited. Lands lying within the Floodway
Overlay District shall not be used for dumping or be filled except as
authorized to permit establishment of approved bulkhead lines or to
accommodate bridge approaches. Normal earth grading activities to
permit utilization of the lands for open space, outdoor recreation, yard,
parking and similar uses are permitted.
E. Dangerous materials storage prohibited. Lands lying within the
Floodway Overlay District shall not be used for the storage of materials
that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or
plant life.
F. Incompatible uses prohibited. Lands lying within the Floodway Overlay
District shall not be used for any solid waste disposal site or on-site soil
absorption sanitary sewerage system site or the construction of any
well which is used to obtain water for ultimate human consumption.
§ 335-28 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-28
326:523
§ 335-29. FFO Floodplain Fringe Overlay District.
Sewage treatment plants and treatment ponds shall not be constructed
in the Floodway Overlay District.
G. Maintenance of drainageways. No development in the Floodway
Overlay District shall adversely affect the channels, floodways or
shorelands of any tributary of Underwood Creek, Dousman Ditch,
drainage ditches or other lands lying outside the floodlands.
A. Intent; conflicting provisions.
(1) The FFO Floodplain Fringe Overlay District is intended to provide
for and encourage the most appropriate use of land and water in
areas subject to periodic flooding and to minimize flood damage to
people and property. In developing flood fringe areas,
consideration shall be given to the maintenance of flood storage
capacity and preventing significant increases in the flood
discharges identified in the Village's Flood Insurance Study. The
effects of development within the flood fringe shall be computed.
No increase in flood stage shall be permitted to exceed 0.01 foot
unless the permit applicant has made appropriate legal
arrangements with all affected units of government and all
property owners affected by the stage increase and until all such
affected units of government have amended their water surface
profiles and floodland zoning maps to reflect the increased flood
elevations. Under no circumstances shall the cumulative effect of
flood stage increases raise the regional flood profile in excess of 1.0
foot.
(2) Overlay districts provide for the possibility of superimposing
certain additional requirements upon a basic underlying zoning
district without disturbing the requirements of the basic district. In
the instance of conflicting requirements, the more strict of the
conflicting requirements shall apply.
(3) Where there are conflicts between this section and the Floodplain
Ordinance,45 the Floodplain Ordinance shall take precedence.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Any use of land, except development involving structures, that is
permitted in the underlying basic use district. Examples of such use
would be required yards in a residential district; or parking or
loading areas in a commercial or industrial district, provided that
inundation depths for parking and loading areas do not exceed two
feet or that such areas are not subject to flood velocities greater
than two feet per second upon the occurrence of a one-hundredyear
recurrence interval flood.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 330, Floodplain Zoning.
§ 335-28 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-29
326:524
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Residential and commercial structures, provided that the structure
is permitted in the underlying basic use district, and provided that
such floodplain fringe areas shall be filled to an elevation at least
two feet above the elevation of the one-hundred-year recurrence
interval flood. Such fill shall extend for at least 15 feet beyond the
limits of the structure placed thereon. All structures shall be
provided with dryland access to lands outside the floodplain. Where
existing streets or sewer lines are at elevations which make
dryland access impractical, the Village may permit development
where access roads are at or below the one-hundred-year
recurrence interval flood stage, provided that the Village has
written assurance from appropriate police and fire departments
and emergency service agencies that rescue and relief service will
be provided to properties in the area by wheeled vehicles during a
flood event, or the Village has an adopted natural disaster plan
concurred with by the Wisconsin Division of Emergency
Government and approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources. The finished surface of the lowest floor (excluding
basement or crawlway) shall be constructed or placed at an
elevation that is at least two feet above the elevation of the onehundred-
year recurrence interval flood. Basement or crawlway
floors may be placed at the one-hundred-year recurrence interval
flood elevation, provided that the basement or crawlway is
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. Residential
structures placed on fill may be removed from the Floodplain
Fringe Overlay District, provided that the fill is contiguous to lands
lying outside of the floodlands, and further provided that the
property owner, or his agent, has complied with all the
requirements for amending the Zoning Map as set forth in Article I
of this chapter.
(2) Industrial structures, provided that the structure is permitted in
the underlying district and provided that the fill requirements and
dryland access requirements for residential structures in the FFO
District are complied with. However, when the intent and purpose
of this chapter cannot be fulfilled by filling the floodplain fringe due
to existing and committed development, and when the Village Plan
Commission has made a finding to this effect, all new structures
and all additions to existing structures in the Floodplain Fringe
Overlay District shall be floodproofed to a point two feet above the
elevation of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood.
Certification of floodproofing shall be made to the Building
Inspector and shall consist of a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures
are consistent with the flood velocities, forces, depths and other
factors associated with the one-hundred-year recurrence interval
flood level for the particular stream reach. Structures placed on fill
may be removed from the Floodplain Fringe Overlay District,
§ 335-29 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-29
326:525
provided that the fill is contiguous to lands lying outside of the
floodlands, and further provided that the property owner or his
agent has complied with all the requirements for amending the
Zoning Map as set forth in Article I of this chapter.
(3) Accessory structures, provided that the structure is not designed
for human habitation, has a low flood-damage potential, is
constructed and placed to provide minimum obstruction to flood
flows (whenever possible, accessory structures should be placed
with their longitudinal axis parallel to the flow of floodwaters), is
firmly anchored to prevent them from floating away and restricting
bridge openings and has all services facilities (such as electrical
and heating equipment) at an elevation that is at least two feet
above the one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood.
(4) Municipal water supply and sanitary sewerage systems, provided
that the system is floodproofed to an elevation of at least two feet
above the elevation of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval
flood and is designed to eliminate or minimize infiltration of
floodwaters into the system. Certification of floodproofing shall be
made to the Building Inspector and shall consist of a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the flood velocities,
forces, depths and other factors associated with the one-hundredyear
recurrence interval flood level for the particular stream reach.
(5) Filling to remove lands from the FFO Floodplain Fringe Overlay
District, provided that such fill shall be to an elevation at least two
feet above the elevation of the one-hundred-year recurrence
interval flood, and further provided that such lands are contiguous
to lands lying outside of the floodlands. No such Floodplain Fringe
Overlay District shall be removed from the Supplementary
Floodland Zoning Map until the filling is complete and until the
property owner, or his agent, has complied with all the
requirements for amending the Zoning Map as set forth in Article I
of this chapter.
D. Incompatible uses prohibited. Land lying within the Floodplain Fringe
Overlay District shall not be used for any solid waste disposal site, onsite
soil absorption sanitary sewerage system site or the construction of
any well which is used to obtain water for ultimate human consumption.
E. Maintenance of drainageways. No filling or development in the FFO
Floodplain Fringe Overlay District shall adversely affect the channels,
floodways or shorelands of any tributary of Underwood Creek,
Dousman Ditch, drainage ditches or other lands lying outside the
floodlands.
F. Floodland permit required. No river or stream shall be altered or
relocated until a floodland zoning change has been applied for and
granted in accordance with the requirements of this section, and until
§ 335-29 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-29
326:526
§ 335-30. Planned Development Overlay District. [Amended
5-25-2004]
all adjacent communities have been requested to review and comment
on the proposed alteration or relocation. The flood-carrying capacity
of the altered or relocated watercourse shall not be reduced to less
than the flood-carrying capacity before the watercourse was altered or
relocated.
G. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources Notification. A copy of all
notices for amendments or rezoning in the Floodland Districts shall be
transmitted to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
No amendments to the floodland district boundaries or regulations shall
become effective until approved by the DNR. In the case of floodland
district boundary changes, an official letter of map amendment from the
Federal Emergency Management Agency may also be required.
A. Intent. The Planned Development Overlay District ("PDO District") is
intended to permit development, redevelopment and rehabilitation of
property through use of coordinated site planning, diversification of
location of structure location and/or types and/or through mixing of
compatible allowed uses. The PDO District is intended to achieve high
standards of planning and construction and allow for design flexibility
while, at the same time, maintaining use requirements set forth in the
underlying zoning district.
B. General provisions.
(1) A petition for unified and planned development, redevelopment
and/or rehabilitation of a site using a PDO District may encompass
one or more individual lots or structures, together with allowed
compatible uses and related accessory uses or structures
(collectively, the "project") may be approved in accordance with
this section.
(2) The Village may approve a specific petition for rezoning under this
section after a public hearing when all regulations and standards,
including but not limited to the approval, execution and recording
of a development agreement as required in § 335-30J, have been
met.
(3) All petitions for a zoning amendment establishing a PDO District
shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the Plan
Commission, in making its recommendation, and by the Village
Board.
(4) The granting of a zoning amendment establishing a PDO District
shall be discretionary.
C. Allowed uses.
§ 335-29 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-30
326:527
(1) Uses allowed in a PDO District are those uses expressly provided
for as permitted, conditional and/or accessory uses in the
underlying zoning district.
(2) More than one type of use may be allowed in a PDO District if the
underlying zoning district allows such uses as permitted and/or
conditional uses.
D. Dimensional and stormwater management requirements.
(1) PDO Districts shall comply at all times with MMSD District Rules
and Regulations Chapter 13 relating to stormwater management
requirements within the underlying zoning district.
(2) PDO Districts may, however, deviate from the requirements of the
underlying zoning district with respect to maximum building
height, yard areas, lot dimensions, setbacks and parking
requirements.
(3) The density of residential units allowed in the PDO District is
subject to the provisions of § 335-30F(1).
(4) PDO Districts authorized under this section shall not contain less
than the following applicable minimum acreage for a single or
combination of parcels:
Uses Minimum Acreage
Residential PDO District 5
Commercial PDO District 5
Industrial PDO District 20
Mixed Compatible Use PDO District 20
Mixed Compatible Use within the
boundaries identified in § 335-12G(3)
1.5
Residential PDO District adjacent on at
least one complete side to a business,
office and/or manufacturing zoning
district in any municipality
1.5
E. Ownership and transfer requirements.
(1) Areas zoned as PDO Districts may be under any form of ownership
arrangement (including but not limited to the Wisconsin
Condominium Ownership Act [Wis. Stat. Ch. 703, as amended from
time to time]) provided the total completion of the project as
reflected in the development agreement approved by the Village
Board of Trustees can be guaranteed.
(2) No project or portion thereof, except a residential condominium
unit therein, shall be transferred before full completion of the
§ 335-30 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-30
326:528
obligations within the development agreement without the prior
written consent of the Village Board of Trustees.
(3) All requests for consent to transfer that are approved by the Village
Board shall be conditioned upon the deposit of financial security in
whatever form or amount deemed reasonably necessary by the
Village Board of Trustees.
(4) Individually developed lots or improvements thereon may be
transferred at any time after execution and recording of the
development agreement if allowed by the terms of the development
agreement.
F. Residential density calculations.
(1) Determination of residential density. Only one of three possible
levels of residential density shall be allowed in a specific PDO
District:
(a) The number of residential units allowed as a permitted use in
the underlying zoning district; or
(b) The number of residential units allowed as a conditional use in
the underlying zoning district, which can be less, but not more
than, a maximum total density of 12 dwelling units per net
acre; or
(c) The number of residential units allowed where an enhanced
density is allowed in recognition of a project of exceptionally
high overall quality as provided by § 335-30F(3).
(2) Density calculations involving residential use. Except as otherwise
allowed by this subsection, residential unit density in all PDO
Districts shall be calculated by considering all land encompassed
within the proposed project area.
(3) Enhanced density.
(a) If, notwithstanding dimensional differentials, a proposed
project uniformly contains exterior and interior materials,
design details, workmanship and features of an exceptionally
high quality, comparable to the highest quality tier of the
Village's then current housing stock or its best commercial
office structure, an "enhanced density" for residential units
may be recommended by the Plan Commission and may be
granted as part of the original PDO District approval process.
(b) If granted, the enhanced density level of residential use shall
be in lieu of any other possible residential density.
(c) An enhanced density shall constitute a discretionary number of
residential units that can be less than but not more than a
maximum total of 22 residential units per net acre.
§ 335-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-30
326:529
(d) The following criteria shall be considered by the Village Board
of Trustees in determining whether to approve an enhanced
density:
[1] Whether the project will provide better utilization of the
land and better preservation of natural resources than
would otherwise be realized if the site were developed
either in conformity with the density requirements of the
underlying district or as a PDO District without an
enhanced density;
[2] Whether the project makes adequate provision such that
an increase in residential density will not have an
unreasonable adverse effect on neighboring properties,
existing and/or proposed public rights-of-way and/or
municipal and other public services as a result of the type,
intensity and frequency of the use(s) associated with the
proposed project;
[3] Whether the structures proposed for the project are
harmonious with existing surrounding structures and land
uses.
[4] Whether building materials have been selected and are
proposed to be utilized in a manner that is harmonious
with the natural environment and the general character of
other buildings and structures in the vicinity of the
proposed development.
[5] Whether the proposed project will result in the
construction or upgrading of specific public infrastructure
improvements that will benefit the public without cost to
the Village.
[6] Whether the proposed project will enhance an existing
structure that is deemed beneficial to the character of the
neighborhood where it is situated.
(4) Mixed Compatible Use PDO District. The residential density of a
Mixed Compatible Use PDO District project shall take into account
the amount of nonresidential use in the project as follows:
(a) The average net interior square footage of all residential units
("ARU") upon completion of the project shall be calculated.
This calculation shall not, however, include utility space,
garage and areas, such as halls or other common areas, shared
by all occupants.
(b) The total interior square footage of all space devoted to
nonresidential ("TNR") uses shall be calculated. This
calculation shall not, however, include utility space, garage
areas for customer and employee parking and, where different
§ 335-30 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-30
326:530
portions of a building are owned or rented by different entities,
areas, such as halls and other common areas, that are shared
by more than one such entity.
(c) TRU is the total number of residential units anticipated upon
completion of the project.
(d) Land size is the total size of the project in net acres.
(e) The effective residential density ("ERD") shall be calculated
according to the expression:
ERD = [TRU + (TNR/ARU)] ÷ land size. The effective
residential density shall not be greater than the level of
residential density allowed for a project in § 335-30F(1).
G. Procedural requirements.
(1) Conceptual review.
(a) All parties contemplating a request for the establishment of a
PDO District shall first confer with the Zoning and Planning
Administrator prior to appearing before the Plan Commission
or filing a rezoning petition and provide sufficient written
details and drawings concerning the proposed project as
necessary to permit an adequate staff review.
(b) A staff review may involve other Village departments and
professional consultants in the assessment of the feasibility
and potential impact of the project on Village infrastructure
and resources as well as its conformity with the provisions of
the Village's Zoning Code.
(c) Any party desiring to submit a petition for the establishment of
a PDO District shall, following completion of the staff review
process, meet with the Village Plan Commission for a
conceptual review prior to the submission of the petition.
(d) The purpose of the conceptual review is solely for the purpose
of allowing the exchange of informal observations about a
possible project while facilitating the orientation of the
members of the Plan Commission and the petitioner(s) of a
potential project regarding issues that may have to be
addressed in the event that a petition is filed.
(e) All discussion about the proposed nature and scope of the
contemplated project at the conceptual review by Village staff
and Plan Commission members shall be nonbinding
commentary and shall not, under any circumstance, vest any
party with any right with respect to any development or project
contemplated or discussed.
§ 335-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-30
326:531
(f) A request for a conceptual review shall be accompanied by the
payment of the fee established by Village Board resolution
from time to time.
(2) Petition. Following completion of the conceptual review, all affected
real estate owners within the proposed PDO District or their agents
shall file a petition with the Village Clerk for rezoning of the
property as a PDO District. Such petition shall be accompanied by
the review fee established by Village Board resolution from time to
time and by all of the following information:
(a) A statement that describes the relationship of the proposed
PDO District to the Village's Zoning Code, adopted Master Plan
(or any adopted component thereof), and describes in detail
the uses requested to be included in the proposed PDO
District, including the following information:
[1] Total area to be included in the PDO District, area of open
space, the proposed number of dwelling units, together
with the proposed residential unit density and details of
supporting calculations in accordance with this § 335-30,
projected population analysis with details that support the
assumptions used to calculate same, requirements for and
availability of municipal or school district services and any
other similar data pertinent to a comprehensive evaluation
of the proposed development.
[2] A general summary of the estimated cost of constructing
public and private structures and site-related
improvements, landscaping and special features.
[3] Details about the manner in which the owners will
participate in the formulation and execution of the
development agreement.
[4] Details concerning the organizational structure of the
property owners' or management association proposed to
be established for the purpose of providing any necessary
continuing private services, implementation of the
development agreement or administration of the project.
[5] Any proposed departures from the standards of
development as set forth in the Village zoning ordinances
other Village ordinances or applicable state or federal
statutes or regulations.
[6] A realistic development timetable, including all
benchmark dates from commencement to completion of
physical development of the proposed project.
(b) A general development plan including:
§ 335-30 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-30
326:532
[1] A legal description of the boundaries of all property
included in the proposed PDO District and its relationship
to surrounding properties, including existing topography
on the site with contours at no greater than two-foot
intervals as part of an ALTA survey.
[2] A detailed site plan for the entire PDO District showing:
[a] The type, size, arrangement, including respective
use(s) and location of any individual lots, building sites
and proposed structures on each individual lot.
[b] The location of open space areas and areas reserved
or dedicated for private or public uses, including, but
not limited to, easements and drainageways.
[c] Landscaping, exterior lighting and signage.
[d] The location of public and private roads, driveways
and parking facilities and the calculations used to
justify the number of spaces proposed.
[e] The existing and proposed location of public and
private sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
[f] The existing and proposed location of all other public
and private utilities or other easements.
[g] Characteristics of soils related to contemplated
specific uses.
[3] Anticipated uses of adjoining lands in regard to roads,
surface water drainage and compatibility with existing
adjacent land uses.
[4] Architectural plans, elevation and perspective drawings
and sketches illustrating the character and design of all
proposed structures.
(3) Referral to Plan Commission.
(a) The petition for a Planned Development Overlay District shall
be referred to the Village Plan Commission for its review and
preliminary recommendation, including any additional
conditions or restrictions that it may deem reasonably
necessary or appropriate.
(b) No final recommendation shall be rendered by the Plan
Commission until after the holding of the public hearing
provided in § 335-30G(4), which shall be attended by as many
of the members of the Plan Commission as feasible without
necessity that a quorum be achieved.
(4) Public hearing.
§ 335-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-30
326:533
(a) The Village Board shall hold a public hearing pursuant to
§ 335-79 of this chapter.
(b) Notice for such hearing shall include reference to the
development plans filed in conjunction with the requested PDO
District.
H. Review criteria for petition.
(1) The Village Plan Commission, in making its preliminary and final
recommendation on the petition, and the Village Board, in making
its determination, shall consider whether each of the following
criteria are satisfied: [Amended 12-21-2004]
(a) Whether the petitioner(s) for the proposed Planned
Development Overlay District has demonstrated:
[1] An intent and ability to begin the physical development of
the PDO District within 18 months following the approval
of the petition; and
[2] That the necessary financial resources to carry out the
project in strict conformity with the development
agreement have been obtained and committed.
(b) Whether the proposed Planned Development Overlay District
is consistent in all respects with:
[1] The purpose of this section and the spirit and intent of this
chapter; and
[2] The adopted Master Plan or any adopted component
thereof.
(2) The Village Plan Commission, in making its preliminary and final
recommendations, and the Village Board, in making its decision on
any proposed PDO District, shall consider the following criteria:
(a) The development will not be contrary to the general welfare
and economic prosperity of the community.
(b) The proposed site is being provided with adequate drainage
facilities for surface and storm waters.
(c) The proposed site is accessible from public roads that are
adequate to carry the traffic that can be expected to be
generated by the proposed development.
(d) No undue constraint or burden will be imposed on public
services and facilities (such as fire, EMT and police
protection), street maintenance, maintenance of public areas
near the proposed development and/or educational facilities.
§ 335-30 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-30
326:534
(e) The private roads and driveways on the site of the proposed
development are adequate to serve the users of the proposed
development.
(f) Public sanitary sewerage facilities are adequately provided.
(g) The entire tract or lots to be included in a Planned
Development Overlay District is subject to the terms and
conditions of the development agreement, and the legal
description encompasses said PDO District as a single area,
shows all of its component lots and has been prepared to be
recorded with the Register of Deeds for Waukesha County.
(h) The proposed project will be adequately served by appropriate
off-street parking.
(i) The architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting and
general site development will result in an attractive and
harmonious project compatible without unreasonably affecting
the property values of the surrounding neighborhood.
(j) The locations for entrances and exits have been designated to
prevent unnecessary interference with the safe and efficient
movement of traffic on surrounding streets and that the
development will not create an unreasonable adverse effect
upon the general traffic pattern of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(k) Provision has been made for the adequate and continuing
operation and maintenance of all aspects of the project.
(l) The proposed project has, where applicable, been examined
with respect to its compatibility with the nonmandatory
Downtown Overlay District Site Design Guidelines set forth in
§ 335-12G.
(3) In the case of a proposed PDO District with residential uses, the
Village Plan Commission, in making its preliminary and final
recommendations, and the Village Board, in making its decision on
any proposed PDO District, shall also consider the following:
(a) Such development will provide an attractive residential
environment of sustained desirability and economic stability.
(b) The impact of the population composition of the project upon
the school district's capacity to provide needed educational
services.
(c) Permanent preservation of open space areas as shown on the
approved site plan is ensured by the creation of appropriate
easements and recorded deed restrictions.
§ 335-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-30
326:535
(d) The proposed mixture of uses produces a unified composite
which is compatible within the underlying districts and which,
as a total development entity, is compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood.
(4) In the case of a proposed Industrial PDO District, the Village Plan
Commission, in making its preliminary and final recommendations,
and the Village Board, in making its decision on any proposed PDO
District, shall also consider the following:
(a) The operational character, physical plant arrangement and
architectural design of structures will be compatible with the
latest in industrial development design and performance
standards and will not result in an adverse effect upon the
property values of the surrounding neighborhood.
(b) The proposed project will include adequate provisions for offstreet
parking and truck service areas and will be adequately
served by rail and/or arterial highway facilities.
(c) The proposed project is compatible with the available
transportation system of the community and will not result in
an adverse effect on the safety and efficiency of the public
streets.
I. Determination.
(1) The Village Board, after due consideration, may deny the petition,
approve the petition as submitted or approve the petition subject to
additional conditions and restrictions. The approval of a PDO
District shall be based upon, and shall include as conditions
thereto, approval of the plan of operation for the project and
execution by all necessary parties to the development agreement
as provided for in § 335-30J.
(2) Rezoning to the Planned Unit Development Overlay District shall
not become effective until a development agreement has been
approved by the Village Board, is fully executed by all parties and
recorded with the Waukesha County Register of Deeds.
J. Development agreement contents and demonstration of consent.
(1) The Village Board's review and approval process shall be
conditioned upon the execution by the Village Board and the
applicant of the development agreement approved by the Village
Board in conjunction with its approval under § 335-30I embodying
all of the terms and conditions of the specific project plan and any
additional terms of implementation.
(2) The development agreement shall be submitted to the Plan
Commission for its recommendation prior to approval by the
§ 335-30 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-30
326:536
Village Board and shall include, without limitation by reason of
enumeration:
(a) Timetables for performance/completion of improvements;
(b) Performance requirements and standards and assurances for
all improvements and/or modifications pertaining to the PDO
District;
(c) Inspection requirements;
(d) Prohibitions on any division/combination of the real estate lots
included within the PDO District except as otherwise provided,
including an exception for residential condominium units;
(e) Provision for lapsing of specific plan approval and automatic
reversion of the zoning status of the property to non-PDO
District status upon specified changes of circumstances or
upon failure of the project to materialize as agreed to in the
development agreement;
(f) Agreements, bylaws, provisions and/or covenants or additional
deed restrictions to be recorded against the lot(s) within the
PDO District that will perpetually govern the organizational
structure, use, maintenance and continued preservation and
protection of the project and any of its common services,
common open areas and/or other facilities; and
(g) Exhibits, drawings or other attachments that depict
improvements, including but not limited to structures, fixtures
and landscaping and their relative locations in the
development area as well as design and engineering details as
may be necessary to document to a reasonable degree of
specificity the type, character and nature of the improvements
to be made within the development area.
(3) Execution of the development agreement shall constitute evidence
of consent and subordination of the entire project area to the terms
of the development agreement. The development agreement and
all agreements, bylaws, provisions covenants and/or additional
deed restrictions required here under shall be recorded, shall run
with all of the land included within the approved PDO District and
shall fully bind all parties to such agreement and those
subsequently taking interest in the property or properties.
(4) No approval of a PDO District shall take effect and no rights shall
vest in regard to any PDO District petition approved by the Elm
Grove Village Board until the development agreement and all of its
exhibits have been duly recorded with the Waukesha County
Register of Deeds.
§ 335-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-30
326:537
K. Changes and additions. Any subsequent change or addition to the plans
or uses of a PDO District or project located therein shall first be
submitted for review to the Village of Elm Grove Plan Commission and
then to the Village Board utilizing the procedural requirements,
including the payment of fees, contained in § 335-30G.
L. Subsequent land division.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in the development agreement, the
division of any land or lands within a PDO District for the purpose
of change or conveyance of ownership shall not be favored and
shall not be permitted unless there is a demonstration of
substantial and significant benefit to the public interest arising out
of the specific land division.
(2) Any land division request shall be accompanied by a detailed
proposed certified survey map of the lands to be divided.
(3) In addition to complying with any other applicable procedural
requirements, any proposal for division of any land within a PDO
District shall detail how the various dimensional, density, parking,
green space, impervious surface, public infrastructure
improvements approved pursuant to the development agreement
and other requirements established by the initial granting of the
PDO District will be affected or altered. Such proposal shall further
demonstrate that all necessary components and obligations
associated with the project, including, but not limited to, physical
and legal undertakings, will be otherwise be provided so that the
proposed division will not negatively impact the organizational
structure, use, maintenance and continued preservation and
protection of the project and any of its common services, common
open areas and/or other facilities.
(4) The approval of any division of lands within a PDO District is
discretionary.
§ 335-30 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-30
326:538
ARTICLE IV
Loading, Parking and Access
§ 335-31. Loading requirements.
On every lot on which a business, trade or industrial use is hereafter
established, space with access to a public street or alley shall be provided
as indicated below for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public
right-of-way.
§ 335-32. Parking requirements. [Amended 10-28-2003;
10-24-2006]
In all districts and in connection with every use there shall be provided,
at the time any use is increased or building is erected, off-street parking
spaces for all vehicles in accordance with the following:
A. Number of loading and unloading spaces required.
Gross Floor Area of Building
(square feet) Number of Spaces
5,000 - 24,999 1
25,000 - 49,999 2
50,000 - 99,000 3
100,000 - 174,999 4
175,000 - 249,999 5
Each additional 75,000 (or fraction
thereof)
1 additional
B. Each loading and unloading space shall have access to a public
dedicated street or alley.
C. The minimum area for each loading and unloading space, excluding the
area needed to maneuver, shall be 250 square feet.
D. At no time shall any part of a truck or van be allowed to extend into the
right-of-way of a public thoroughfare while the truck or van is being
loaded or unloaded.
A. Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each parking
space, and driveways shall be at least 12 feet wide for one- and twofamily
dwellings and a minimum of 20 feet at the property line for all
other uses. Entrances and exits from a parking lot serving five or more
vehicles shall not be closer than 25 feet to a single-family residential
district lot line.
B. Location of off-street parking shall conform to the following standards:
§ 335-31 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-32
326:539
(1) Off-street parking shall not be permitted in a required street yard
or side yard, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
(2) Off-street parking for uses other than residential shall be located
on the same lot or a lot contiguous to the building it is intended to
serve, or at an off-site location approved by the Village Plan
Commission as allowed by § 335-32K. Rental, lease or ownership of
all lots or parcels intended for use by the applicant shall be shown.
(3) Notwithstanding restrictions contained in § 335-13, the Plan
Commission may grant an exception to the general requirement
that off-street parking shall not be permitted in street yards and/or
side yards if the Plan Commission determines that the conditions
on the property are such that parking in the street yards and/or
side yards is reasonably necessary to provide adequate parking and
is adequately landscaped to avoid adverse impact on adjoining
parcels or to the district where the parcel is located.
C. Parking spaces for use by physically handicapped persons. All off-street
parking areas open to the public providing more than 25 parking
spaces, except for parking areas restricted to use by employees only,
shall provide and reserve parking spaces for use by motor vehicles
which transport physically disabled persons in accordance with the
requirements of § 346.503, Wis. Stats.
D. Minimum dimensions; exceptions.
(1) The minimum dimensions of each parking space shall be in
accordance with the design standards set forth in the latest
available edition of "Transportation and Land Developing" (Stover/
Koepke, Institute of Transportation Engineers), except for parking
spaces provided for use by physically disabled persons. Parking
spaces provided for use by physically disabled persons shall be at
least 12 feet wide in accordance with the requirements of
§ 346.503, Wis. Stats.
(2) The applicant may request an exception to the above minimum
dimension requirements by submitting a traffic study that would be
conducted by a licensed professional traffic operations engineer.
E. Maneuvering lanes. Maneuvering lanes shall be limited to one-way
traffic movement, except that the ninety-degree parking pattern may
permit two-way maneuvering lanes.
F. Surfacing. All off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete or permeable brick pavers and shall be drained so as to
dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a
way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent properties or
toward structures. Surfacing shall be in accordance with engineering
standards and specifications approved by the Village Manager, and
surfacing shall be completed within one year after the date of the
§ 335-32 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-32
326:540
permit. Any parking area for more than five vehicles shall have the
aisles and spaces clearly marked.
G. Landscaping. All public off-street parking areas which abut singlefamily
residential development shall be provided with a continuous
screening from headlights. Curbed end islands of a minimum of 100
square feet shall be provided when two or more drive aisles exist in a
parking lot or where traffic control is needed to delineate the path for
pedestrians or motor vehicles. Location of landscape areas, plant
materials, protection afforded the plantings, including curbing and
provisions for maintenance, shall be subject to approval by the Plan
Commission. All plans for such proposed parking areas shall include a
topographic survey or grading plan which shows existing and proposed
grades and location of improvements. The preservation of existing
trees, shrubs and other natural vegetation in the parking area may be
included in the calculation of the required minimum landscape area.
H. Lighting. All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking shall be
so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking area
only. Furthermore, all lighting shall be consistent with the requirements
enumerated in § 335-65, Outdoor lighting.
I. Curbs and barriers. Curbs or barriers shall be installed a minimum of
four feet from a property line so as to prevent the parked vehicles from
extending over any lot lines.
J. Minimum number of parking spaces required. [Amended 11-22-2011;
3-27-2012; 2-25-2019]
Use
Minimum Parking Required
(number of spaces)
Automobile repair garages and
service stations area (exclusive
of bays and pumping stations)
1 for each 500 square feet of floor
area
Athletic fields 12 for each soccer field, baseball or
softball diamond or football field
designated for organized events
Churches, theaters,
auditoriums, community
centers, vocational and night
schools and other places of
public assembly
1 for each 250 square feet of floor
area
Community-based residential
facilities
1 per 6 dwelling units, plus 1 for
each employee on the largest work
shift
Day-care centers 1 for each employee, plus 1 for each
10 students
Dwellings:
§ 335-32 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-32
326:541
Use
Minimum Parking Required
(number of spaces)
1- and 2-family 2 per dwelling unit
Multiple-family 2 per dwelling unit
Independent senior living (as
defined in Rm-2 Multiple-
Family Residential)
1.1 per dwelling unit
Fitness clubs, recreation
centers, bowling alleys,
gymnasiums
1 for each 250 square feet of floor
area
Financial institutions, service
businesses and government
offices
1 for each 250 square feet of floor
area
Funeral homes 1 for each 250 square feet of floor
area
Hospitals, treatment centers,
nursing homes and other longterm-
health care centers
2 per licensed bed
Lodges and private clubs 1 for each 250 square feet of floor
area
Manufacturing and processing
plants, laboratories, and
warehouses
1 for each 500 square feet of floor
area
Medical and dental clinics 1 for each 250 square feet of floor
area
Motels, hotels, tourist rooms
and bed-and-breakfasts
1.5 per guest room
Offices 1 for each 250 square feet of floor
area
Retail stores 1 for each 200 square feet of floor
area
Residential care apartment
complex
1 per 2 dwelling units, plus 1 for
each employee on the largest work
shift; for facilities required to have
20 or more spaces, 50% of the
spaces corresponding to the number
of total dwelling units equipped with
full kitchens, including an ownerinstalled,
permanent, gas or electric
range stove or cooktop, shall be
enclosed
Restaurants, bars and places of
entertainment
1 for each 150 square feet of floor
area
§ 335-32 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-32
326:542
Use
Minimum Parking Required
(number of spaces)
Schools, public and private 1 for each secondary and
elementary employee, plus 1 for
each 10 students
Warehouses without employees 1 for each 1,000 square feet of floor
area
K. Joint or shared parking.
(1) Purpose. Joint or shared parking is allowed if the multiple uses that
the shared parking will benefit can cooperatively establish and
operate the facilities. The applicant shall have the burden of proof
for a requested substitution of the required total number of on-site
parking spaces with shared parking spaces and shall document and
submit information substantiating the request. Joint or shared
parking may be approved by the Plan Commission, provided:
(a) A sufficient number of spaces are provided to meet the average
demand of the participating uses;
(b) An executed license or lease agreement between the
respective property owners has been submitted that
demonstrates the coordinated use of the parking demand;
(c) The executed license or lease agreement addresses the issue of
parking requirements (as enumerated in this chapter) in the
event that the property is sold or the nature of a business and/
or use changes or expands.
(d) The shared parking spaces shall be provided for parking use
and shall be located within a reasonable distance from the
use(s) they are intended to serve as determined by the Plan
Commission.
L. Adjustments to required parking.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow adjustments to the
minimum number of parking spaces required in all zoning districts
(as identified in Subsection J) to avoid unnecessary and excessive
parking facilities. To achieve these purposes, the Plan Commission
may reduce the minimum number of required off-street parking
spaces in specific cases as described in this section.
(2) Adjustments. The minimum number of required parking spaces
may be adjusted by the Plan Commission on a case-by-case basis.
The petitioner for such an adjustment shall show to the satisfaction
of the Plan Commission that adequate parking and access will be
provided for customers, deliveries, clients, visitors, and employees.
§ 335-32 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-32
326:543
§ 335-33. Outside storage and parking of recreational vehicles and
trailers. [Amended 1-22-2008]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store any recreational vehicle
or trailer on any property in the Village of Elm Grove except as provided
herein:
The following provisions and factors shall be used as a basis to
adjust parking requirements:
(a) The petitioner may provide evidence that actual parking
demands will be less than the chapter requirements by
submitting written documentation and data to the satisfaction
of the Plan Commission that the operation will require less
parking than this chapter requires.
(3) Changes in occupancy or use. When the use of part of a building,
structure, or land is changed to another use or building owner that
requires more parking spaces than required for the use existing
immediately prior to such change, additional parking spaces shall
be provided for the new use or occupant in the amount necessary to
conform to this section unless an adjustment is approved by the
Plan Commission in conformance with the requirements of this
section or a joint/shared parking plan has been approved by the
Plan Commission in accordance with the requirements of § 335-32
K.
A. In residential districts or on a nonconforming residential premises,
recreational vehicles, mobile homes, boats, snowmobiles and trailers
may be parked within a fully enclosed accessory permanent structure.
In addition:
(1) Recreational vehicles (45 feet or less in length but not including a
primary housing unit) and trailers may be parked in the side yard
or rear yard, provided that no such recreational vehicle or its
trailer is located closer than three feet to the principal structure,
nor closer than six feet to any lot line. The parked recreational
vehicle or trailer shall be screened from adjacent lots by a fence
conforming to the requirements of § 335-88D(6)(g) of this chapter
or by a continuous, dense landscaping screen.
(2) Recreational vehicles and trailers or components thereof may not
be parked in the street yard, including any portion of a driveway
located within the street yard.
(3) The Building Board shall not permit recreational vehicles or trailers
on a corner lot to be parked closer to either street than the
required street yard setback for the district in which it is located.
B. Open storage in nonresidential districts. The owner or applicant shall
file an application to store recreational vehicles (not including mobile
homes) in the open in nonresidential districts. The Building Board shall
§ 335-32 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-33
326:544
§ 335-34. Driveways. [Amended 8-22-2006]
All driveways installed after the effective date of this chapter shall meet the
following requirements:
review the applicant's site and operational plans which shall show the
location of all existing structures and the location of the proposed
outside storage. In reviewing the plans, the Building Board shall give
due consideration to the location of existing structures; the location
of the proposed open storage; the provision of adequate light and
air circulation; the appropriate use of landscaping and screening; and
appropriate provisions for fire protection and other safety
considerations.
C. Prohibited uses. Notwithstanding the uses permitted in Subsections A
and B above:
(1) No parked or stored recreational vehicle shall be occupied or used
for human habitation, including but not limited to, sleeping, eating,
resting or conducting business, except as provided in Subsection D
below.
(2) No parked or stored recreational vehicle which does not carry,
where required, a valid current year's license and/or registration or
which is in a state of visible disrepair or partial construction shall
be parked or stored in any district unless it is stored within a
completely enclosed structure which conforms to all the
regulations of this Zoning Ordinance of Elm Grove.
D. Ownership. A parked or stored recreational vehicle permitted by this
section must be owned by the owner of the premises upon which it is
located or by the tenant if said dwelling is a rentable property, it being
the intention of this restriction to provide said permission only for
residents of the Village of Elm Grove and not to permit residents to
accommodate friends or family members residing outside the
community except for visitation not to exceed 14 days per calendar
year. Any permit issued under the terms of this section is issued to the
resident or tenant and does not run in perpetuity with the land, but
shall lapse if the ownership of the property shall be transferred, leased
or subleased to a different tenant.
A. Driveway openings serving a single parcel shall be located at least
three feet from all lot lines, except for driveways of parking lots serving
five or more vehicles which shall be located at least 25 feet from
abutting residential lots pursuant to § 335-32A.
B. Vehicular ingress and egress.
(1) Openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall not exceed 35 feet
in width at the street right-of-way for commercial properties and 24
feet at the street right-of-way for residential properties. The width
§ 335-33 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-34
326:545
at the edge of the roadway shall be determined by the Department
of Public Works.
(2) Deviations. Upon application by a property owner or his/her
authorized agent, the Plan Commission may approve deviations
from the requirements of this section for vehicular ingress and
egress openings constructed or reconstructed within the
boundaries of the Downtown Design Overlay District as established
by § 335-12G(3). Such deviations may be granted pursuant to the
following procedure:
(a) The Director of Public Works shall evaluate the proposed
driveway opening deviation and provide a recommendation to
the Plan Commission regarding the proposed deviation.
(b) In evaluating a proposed deviation from this section, the Plan
Commission shall consider whether the proposed deviation:
[1] Unnecessarily burdens vehicular traffic in the area;
[2] Imposes a safety hazard upon bicycle and pedestrian
traffic; or
[3] Interferes with the intent and purpose of the Downtown
District Site Design Guidelines with respect to connectivity
of pedestrian access.
(c) Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Plan Commission
from requesting additional information deemed relevant for
the purpose of evaluating a proposed deviation from the
requirements of this section.
C. Driveway culverts shall be installed or replaced when, in the opinion of
the Director of Public Works, installation or replacement is reasonably
necessary to reduce or prevent erosion or promote or improve
drainage. Installation or replacement of driveway culverts shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 325, Art. II,
concerning surface drainage.
D. Driveway aprons.
(1) No driveway shall be installed, repaired, reinstalled or replaced
unless the property owner has obtained a driveway permit prior to
commencement of any work. Unless otherwise expressly permitted
by the Director of Public Works, all portions of private driveways
that connect to any part of the Village right-of-way shall be
bituminous asphalt to minimize potential damage to public and
private property during snow removal operations and to facilitate
maintenance and replacement of culverts.
(2) In streets with curb and gutters, no driveway ramps shall be
allowed in the gutter which may impede the flow of surface water
or create the potential of being hit by snowplows.
§ 335-34 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-34
326:546
§ 335-35. Highway access.
No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed
rights-of-way of expressways, nor to any controlled access arterial street
without permission of the highway agency that has access control
jurisdiction. No direct public or private driveway access shall be permitted
to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of the following:
§ 335-36. Parking of vehicles, buses and commercial trailers in
residential areas.
§ 335-37. Storage of junked, antique and special interest motor
vehicles and accessories.
E. Permit application required. No person or entity may install any
driveway improvement except seal coating before completing and filing
a driveway permit application, regardless of materials used.
A. To arterial streets within 100 feet of the intersection of their right-ofway
lines with another arterial street or with a local street right-of-way.
B. To local streets within 50 feet of the intersection of their right-of-way
lines with another street right-of-way.
C. Access barriers, such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping or
other topographic barriers, shall be erected to prevent unauthorized
vehicular ingress or egress to the above specified streets or highways.
D. Temporary access to the above rights-of-way may be granted by the
Village Board after review and recommendation by the highway
agencies having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be temporary,
revocable and subject to any conditions required and shall be issued for
a period not to exceed 12 months.
A. No bus or commercially licensed trailer or motor vehicle having a
maximum gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds shall be parked, kept
or stored in any residential district, except when loading, unloading or
rendering a service.
B. Only one commercially licensed motor vehicle having a maximum gross
weight of 8,000 to 10,000 pounds shall be parked, kept or stored in any
lot within a residential district except when loading, unloading or
rendering a service, provided that said vehicle is:
(1) Located no closer than three feet to the principal structure; and
(2) Parked no closer than 10 feet to any lot line.
A. Definitions. In addition to the definitions contained in Article XII and for
the purpose of this entire Zoning Chapter, the following definitions shall
be applicable:
§ 335-34 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-37
326:547
ANTIQUE MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is operable
at all times, is registered pursuant to § 341.265, Wis. Stats., as an
antique motor vehicle, and which displays registration plates issued by
the State of Wisconsin.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, other than an antique
or special interest vehicle as defined in this section, which is partially
dismantled or wrecked or otherwise disabled or mechanically ruined
and which cannot safely or legally be operated and which remains
located at the same premises for a period of 10 days or more; or any
motor vehicle without registration, registration plates or with expired
registration for more than 60 days and during which period or
thereafter remains located on the same premises for a period of 10 days
or more.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESSORIES — Any part or parts of any motor
vehicle.
REMOVAL — The physical relocation of a motor vehicle to an
authorized location following the provisions of the Village of Elm Grove
Ordinances.
SPECIAL INTEREST MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle which is 20
or more years old, which has been registered pursuant to § 341.266,
Wis. Stats., as a special interest vehicle and which displays special
interest vehicle registration plates issued by the State of Wisconsin.
B. Storage of antique and special interest motor vehicles regulated. No
person, firm or corporation owning or having custody of any antique or
special interest motor vehicle as defined in this section shall store or
permit such vehicle or vehicles to remain on private property in a
residential district except as provided herein:
(1) No more than two antique or special interest vehicles shall be
parked in the side yard or rear yard, provided that no such vehicle
is located closer than three feet to the principal structure, nor
closer than three feet to any lot line. Parked antique or special
interest motor vehicles shall be screened from adjacent lots by a
fence conforming to the requirements of § 335-88D(6)(g) of this
chapter or by a continuous, dense landscaping screen.
(2) No antique or special interest motor vehicles shall be parked in the
street yard or side yard, including any portion of a driveway located
within the street yard or side yard, except to permit residents to
accommodate visitation by family or friends who reside outside the
community for a period not to exceed 14 days per calendar year,
except that notice given under Subsection E(2) shall not be
construed to extend this time limit of 14 days per calendar year.
(3) The Building Board shall not permit antique or special interest
motor vehicles on a corner lot to be parked closer to either street
than the required street yard setback for the district in which the
lot is located.
§ 335-37 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-37
326:548
C. Storage of junked motor vehicles and motor vehicles accessories
prohibited.
(1) No person, firm or corporation owning or having custody of any
junked motor vehicle or any motor vehicle accessories shall store
or permit any such vehicle or accessories to remain on any private
property within the Village for a period of more than 10 days, and
no person, firm or corporation owning any private property in the
Village, as determined from the tax assessment records of the
Village, shall store or permit any such vehicles or accessories to
remain on his/her/its property for a period of more than 10 days.
Such storage is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall
be subject to penalties provided for under § 335-92D.
(2) After notification has been given pursuant to Subsection E(2) of
this section to remove any abandoned or junked motor vehicle or
motor vehicle accessories from any private property, the same
vehicle shall not be moved to any other private property upon
which such storage is also prohibited or onto any public highway or
other public property.
D. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any motor
vehicle or motor vehicle accessories stored within an enclosed
structure, or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such
business enterprise, in a storage place or depository maintained in the
lawful place and manner.
E. Enforcement.
(1) Investigation.
(a) The Zoning Administrator or any member of the Elm Grove
Police Department on routine patrol or upon receipt of a
complaint may investigate a suspected violation of the
provisions of this section and record the make, model, style
and identification numbers and its location.
(b) In the event either the Zoning Administrator or any member of
the Elm Grove Police Department is refused or unable to obtain
permission to enter on private property to investigate a
suspected violation of this section, such individual may procure
a special inspection warrant in accordance with § 66.122, Wis.
Stats.46
(2) Notice to remove. Whenever the Zoning Administrator or any
cooperating member of the Elm Grove Police Department shall find
or be notified that any junked, antique or special interest motor
vehicle or motor vehicle accessories have been stored or permitted
46.Editor's Note: Section 66.122 was renumbered as § 66.0119 by 1999 Act 150, §§ 287
through 290.
§ 335-37 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-37
326:549
to remain on any private property, the Zoning Administrator shall
send a notice by U.S. mail to the owner of record of such vehicle
or accessories, if such owner can be ascertained by the exercise of
reasonable diligence, and also to the owner of the private property,
as shown on the tax assessment records of the Village on which
the same is located, to remove such motor vehicle or motor vehicle
accessories within 10 days. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare
an affidavit of mailing for the notice. In addition to requiring the
removal of such junked, antique or special interest motor vehicle
or motor vehicle accessories within 10 days subject to Subsection
B(2) the notice shall contain the following additional information:
(a) The nature of the complaint.
(b) The description and location of the motor vehicle and/or motor
vehicle accessories.
(c) Subject to Subsection B(2), direct that the motor vehicle or
motor vehicle accessories shall be removed from the premises
no later than 10 days from the date of notification.
(d) A statement that the owner of the motor vehicle and/or motor
vehicle accessories, or the owner of the private property on
which the same is located, may seek reconsideration of the
directive for the removal of such motor vehicle or motor
vehicle accessories by stating the reasons in writing and
delivering same to the Zoning Administrator before the
deadline date directed by the Zoning Administrator.
(e) A statement that removal from the location specified in the
notification to another location, upon which such storage is not
permitted, is prohibited and shall subject the person to
additional penalties.
(f) A statement that if removal is made within the time limits
specified, notification shall be given in writing to the Zoning
Administrator on or before the deadline date.
(g) A statement of the penalties provided for noncompliance with
such notice, including the potential for enhanced penalties for
additional or continued violations.
§ 335-37 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-37
326:550
ARTICLE V
Exceptions
§ 335-38. Height.
The district height limitations established elsewhere in this chapter may be
exceeded, but such modification shall be in accord with the following:
§ 335-39. Yards. [Amended 4-26-2005]
The yard requirements established elsewhere in this chapter may be
modified as follows:
A. Architectural projections, such as gazebo roofs, spires, steeples,
belfries, parapet walls, cupolas, domes, flues and chimneys are exempt
from the height limitations of this chapter.
B. Special structures, such as elevator penthouses, observation towers
and scenery lofts, manufacturing equipment and necessary mechanical
appurtenances, cooling towers, fire towers, substations and
smokestacks, are exempt from the height limitations of this chapter.
C. Essential services, utilities, water towers, electric power and
communication transmission lines are exempt from the height
limitations of this chapter.
D. Communication structures, such as radio and television transmission
and relay towers and cellular and personal communication system
towers are allowed only in the G-1 Governmental District, and then only
by conditional use permit. Said structures shall not exceed in height
their distance from the nearest lot line. [Amended 10-13-1997]
E. Public or semipublic facilities, such as schools, churches, hospitals,
monuments, sanatoriums, libraries, governmental offices and stations,
may be erected to a height of 60 feet, provided that all required yards
are increased not less than one foot for each foot the structure exceeds
the district's maximum height requirement.
A. Uncovered stairs, landings and fire escapes may project into any yard
but not to exceed six feet and not closer than three feet to any lot line.
B. Architectural projections, such as bay windows, chimneys, flues, sills,
eaves, belt courses and ornaments, may project into any required yard,
but such projection shall not exceed two feet into any setback area.
C. Essential services, utilities, electric power and communication
transmission lines are exempt from the yard and distance requirements
of this chapter.
D. Plant materials are exempt from the yard setback requirements of this
chapter, but shall not be placed in the street right-of-way without
approval of the Director of Public Works.
§ 335-38 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-39
326:551
E. Average street yards. The following rules apply to required street yard
setback calculations: [Amended 10-28-2008]
(1) The required street yard may be decreased in any area of existing
development to the average of the existing street yards of the
abutting structures on each side, but in no case less than 40 feet in
any residential district.
(2) The required street yard shall be increased in any area of existing
development in such a manner that the street yard for new
development does not deviate more than 30 feet from the average
of the existing street yards of the abutting structures on each side.
For corner lots, the street yard toward which the principle
structure’s primary facade is facing shall be subject to this
Subsection E(2); street yard(s) toward which the principle
structure’s side or rear facades are facing are not subject to this
Subsection E(2.).
F. Corner lots. Structures shall provide a street yard as required by this
chapter on the street that the structure faces. A second street yard shall
be provided on the side of the structure abutting a second public or
private street. The owner(s) of a corner lot may designate one yard,
other than a street yard, as a side yard for the property. In the case of
new construction, such designation shall be made prior to submission of
a building permit application. The remaining non-street yard shall then
be deemed a rear yard for purposes of determining setback
requirements under this chapter. Such a designation by the property
owner shall be in recordable form and recorded by the Zoning and
Planning Administrator with the Register of Deeds for Waukesha
County and filed with the Village Clerk upon designation in the case of
an existing structure or upon issuance of an occupancy permit in the
case of a new structure. All owners of the property shall sign the
designation. A side yard designation under this section shall be
irrevocable, and no further designation may be made by the property
owner, or the property owner's successors or assigns, for the life of the
then-existing principal structure or for the life of the proposed principal
structure in the case of new construction. [Amended 6-27-2006]
G. Double-frontage lots. Lots abutting two opposite streets shall provide
the minimum setback required by the district in which the lot is located
from each street upon which the lot abuts.
H. Flag lots. [Added 10-28-200847]
(1) After October 28, 2008, the creation of a flag lot is prohibited
unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:
47.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection H, Existing
substandard lots, as Subsection I.
§ 335-39 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-39
326:552
(a) The flagpole portion of the lot, as depicted in Illustration No. 2
of § 335-94,48 must be owned in fee along with the flag portion
of the lot; and
(b) It must be shown to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission
that the parcel has an environmental or topographical
hardship which prevents a non-flag-configured division of the
property.
(c) It must be shown to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission
that the proposed flag lot will not, for reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation,
unfavorable topography, or for any other reason be harmful to
the health, safety or welfare of the property owner, adjacent
land owners or the community.
(2) No more than one flag lot may be created through the division of a
single parcel.
(3) Flag lots must be created in accordance with all ordinances of the
zoning district in which they are located and in accordance with all
applicable land division ordinances, except for the flagpole portion
of the lot shall have a minimum width of 30 feet.
(4) The Plan Commission shall designate the property line from which
the depth of the street yard on a flag lot will be measured after
considering the optimum orientation of the principal dwelling to
minimize negative impacts on surrounding properties. The
designated property line shall serve as the abutting street right-ofway
for building setback purposes. (See Illustration No. 2,
§ 335-94.)
(5) The lot area requirements of the applicable zoning district must be
satisfied by the flag portion of the lot, exclusive of the flagpole
portion of the lot.
I. Existing substandard lots. [Amended 4-25-2006]
(1) A lot located in a residential district which does not contain
sufficient area to conform to the dimensional requirements of this
chapter, but which is at least 75 feet wide at the front building line
and 9,000 square feet in area, may be used as a single building site,
provided that the use is permitted in the zoning district and
provided that the lot is a lot of record in the County Register of
Deeds Office prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(2) A lot located in the business, manufacturing or institutional
districts which does not contain sufficient area to conform to the
dimensional requirements of this chapter may be used as a building
48.Editor's Note: Illustration No. 2 can be found immediately following the definition of "lot,
flag."
§ 335-39 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-39
326:553
site, provided that the lot is a lot of record in the County Register
of Deeds Office prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(3) Substandard lots granted permits under this section shall be
required to meet the setback and other yard requirements of this
chapter. A building permit for the improvement of a lot with lesser
dimensions and requisites than those stated above shall be issued
only after a dimensional variance by the Board of Appeals.
§ 335-39 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-39
326:554
ARTICLE VI
Signs
[Amended 4-22-2003; 3-27-2007; 4-27-2010]
§ 335-40. Purpose and intent.
§ 335-41. Compliance. [Amended 4-26-2011; 8-23-2011]
A. The purpose of this article is to promote public safety by eliminating
improperly located and poorly constructed or maintained signs; to
avoid the depreciation of property values; to promote compatibility with
surrounding land uses while allowing the expression of the identities of
individual properties; and to preserve the beauty and attractiveness of
the Village of Elm Grove as a whole.
B. Legislative findings. The Village Board of Trustees hereby determines
that:
(1) For reasons of traffic safety considerations, not all publicly
accessible locales constitute a public forum for First Amendment
purposes.
(2) On-premises and off-premises signs should be allowed where an
appropriate relationship exists between the location and the use of
a sign.
A. No sign shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed,
extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without
conforming to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the erection,
construction, alteration, placement, maintenance or location of
nondiscretionary signs, devices and markings of the state, Village or
other governmental authority or the posting of notices required by law.
C. All signs shall be constructed of such a material and posted so as to
remain in place under all weather conditions which are reasonably
likely to occur during the time which the sign is posted.
D. Prohibited signs. The following types of outdoor signs are prohibited in
the Village:
(1) All moving, rotating, flashing or pulsating signs, except for
electronic message boards as provided for in § 335-41D(3) and
those signs which only give information of time and temperature
and which are not closer than 750 feet to another time and/or
temperature sign.
(2) All portable signs, as defined in Article XII of this chapter, are
prohibited within the Village of Elm Grove.
(3) Electronic message board.
§ 335-40 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-41
326:555
§ 335-42. Development/contractor and construction/demolition
signs.
(a) Electronic message board (EMB), as used in this subsection,
means a sign which allows the changing of the content of the
display area by electronic or programming means without the
altering of any physical surface.
(b) An EMB may be permitted for business or institutional zoned
frontage on Bluemound Road, Pilgrim Parkway, and Wall Street
at any point greater than 220 feet east from the center line of
the right of way of Elm Grove Road for freestanding and
permanent ground signage only, with the following
requirements: [Amended 3-26-2013; 7-23-2013]
[1] The electronically changeable area of the EMB may not
exceed 30% of the total sign area as defined in § 335-94.
[2] An EMB must occupy a secondary position to the name of
the business or tenant where placed.
[3] An EMB must display static images only. Flashing,
blinking, moving or other distracting features are
prohibited.
[4] Text or images, or any portions thereof, on an EMB may
change up to, but not more frequently than once every 30
seconds.
[5] A message/image on a EMB shall not flash, scroll, twirl or
otherwise move when changing.
[6] An EMB must be placed and illuminated in a manner so as
to not interfere with, confuse or present any hazard to
traffic.
[7] An EMB may only be used to advertise business activities,
that occur on the property where located.
[8] Display of EMB’s shall follow § 335-48B(4).
A. Development and contractor signs. For purposes of this chapter, the
term "development sign" shall mean any sign used to identify a future
residential or nonresidential development project or a development
project that is currently under construction. The term "contractor sign"
means any sign giving the name or names of principal contractors,
subcontractors, architects and lending institutions responsible for
construction or landscaping on the site where the sign is placed,
together with other pertinent information included thereon.
(1) A development project may have one development sign on each
street that the development abuts. Each sign must be placed on the
property being developed.
§ 335-41 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-42
326:556
(2) No development sign may exceed eight feet in height or 32 square
feet in area. This sign may be single- or double-faced and may be
perpendicular or parallel to the street.
(3) Contractors, subcontractors, architects and/or lending institutions
shall consolidate their signs into one sign having a maximum height
of six feet and a maximum sign area of 32 square feet upon
obtaining a permit from the Building Board.
(4) All development signs shall be removed upon the earliest of:
(a) The expiration of the permit.
(b) Seven days after the issuance of an occupancy permit.
(c) Ninety percent of the units of a residential development having
been sold or rented.
(5) Contractor signs must be removed upon the earliest of the
following:
(a) Seven days after the issuance of an occupancy permit;
(b) Completion of the work by the contractor, subcontractor or
architect referenced in the sign; or
(c) Completion of the work financed by the lending institution
referenced in the sign.
B. Demolition and construction code of conduct signs required.
(1) For purposes of this chapter, the term "code of conduct sign" shall
mean the sign approved by the Village Board of Trustees and
obtained from the Zoning Administrator to notify contractors,
subcontractors, and materialmen of applicable provisions of this
Code of Ordinances pertaining to operation and maintenance sites
involving the demolition, construction, and/or remodeling of the
exterior of any structure or building in the Village.
(2) All persons applying for demolition and/or building permits for the
demolition, construction, or remodeling of the exterior of any
structure or building within the Village shall purchase a code of
conduct sign from the Zoning Administrator at the fee established
from time to time by the Village Board of Trustees prior to issuance
of any building permit.
(3) The code of conduct sign required under this subsection shall be
posted in the ground no closer than seven feet to the roadway
pavement edge and driveway, and no farther than 15 feet from the
roadway pavement edge and driveway, in such a manner as to be
clearly visible from the driveway and roadway. The code of conduct
shall be prominently displayed in this manner throughout the time
§ 335-42 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-42
326:557
§ 335-43. Permits.
§ 335-44. Change of sign.
In the event of a change in the sign construction, design or illumination,
a permit must be secured and shall be handled in the same manner as an
application for a new sign and must meet the requirements of the current
sign ordinances.
§ 335-45. Change to permanent sign.
In the event that a temporary exterior sign shall be in place longer than 15
days, it shall be considered to be a permanent sign, subject to the provisions
of this chapter, and penalties shall apply with equal effect as in the case of
permanent signs.
§ 335-46. Signs allowed in residential districts.
any demolition and/or building permit is required to be displayed
under this Code of Ordinances.
(4) The requirement for purchase and posting of a code of conduct sign
may be waived by the Zoning Administrator in writing based on the
Zoning Administrator finding that proposed construction or
remodeling cannot reasonably be anticipated to cause a
disturbance to occupants of neighboring residential property or
obstruct, damage, or cause material to be deposited on Village
streets.
A. Permits required. A permit shall be required for all signs, except for
those which do not require a permit pursuant to this chapter.
(1) A signed authorization to erect a sign from the building owner, if
the applicant is not the owner, shall be submitted with the permit
application, together with the application fee established by the
Board of Trustees from time to time by resolution.
(2) Considerations in granting permits. In granting a permit to an
applicant, the Village Building Board and Zoning Administrator
shall consider the purpose of said sign, the effect thereof on the
safety of operators of vehicles upon the adjoining streets and
highways, the effect thereof with respect to the danger of human
life because of their falling or combustibility, and the effect thereof
on the security of the premises.
A. No sign shall be allowed in any residential district of the Village without
a permit, except the following:
(1) Real estate sign. A single, nonilluminated advertising sign
pertaining to the lease or sale of real estate shall be allowed on
each fronting public street, provided that such sign(s) does not
exceed six square feet in area and is upon real estate so offered for
§ 335-42 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-46
326:558
§ 335-47. Church function, civic group and special event signs.
lease or sale. Said sign shall be single- or double-sided. Said sign(s)
shall be removed within three days after the closing or 60 days
after a sign indicating that there is an accepted offer for such real
estate, whichever may occur first.
(2) Directory signs indicating an open house may be placed off the
premises of real estate for sale or lease during the hours of the
open house, provided that said sign(s) comply with all the
provisions of this chapter and consent of the property owner where
they are placed is first obtained.
(3) No Trespass Signs may be placed on real estate in accordance with
the requirements of § 943.13, Wis. Stats.
(4) Identification and address signs not exceeding two square feet in
area.
(5) On-premises rummage sale signs, not to exceed two, shall be
allowed. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet in area and
shall be displayed for no more than 72 hours.
(6) Temporary signs, four square feet or less in area not otherwise
prohibited by this chapter. There shall not be more than one
temporary sign located on any single lot in a residential district at
any one time.
(7) Political signs, each being six square feet or less in area, subject to
the following provision:
(a) All political signs on residential properties which address a
particular election may remain erected only during the
pertinent election campaign period as defined in § 12.04(1)(a)
of the Wis. Stats. The person erecting a political sign and the
person on whose residential property said signs are erected
are jointly responsible for their removal within 10 days
following said election.
(8) Home security system signs, 1.5 square feet or less in area. There
shall be no more than two such signs per property.
B. No sign allowed under this section shall be placed less than seven feet
from the edge of the street pavement, nor so close to a pedestrian way
as to hinder or impede passage. Under no circumstances may a sign be
placed in any area between any Village pedestrian pathway and the
edge of any street pavement.
A. Temporary church function or civic group signs not exceeding two in
number advertising civic or church functions shall be permitted on the
premises where such function will be held. One of the two signs may be
a banner sign only to be hung on the facade of the church or civic
§ 335-46 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-47
326:559
building. Such a banner sign may only represent a function directly
sponsored by the church or civic group on which the banner is hung.
Such signs shall reflect aesthetic compatibility with adjacent uses, be
constructed of a suitable material, shall be erected not more than
three weeks prior to the event, and shall be removed within 24 hours
following the event.
B. Off-premises permits for church function, civic group and special event
signs may be issued by the Zoning Administrator upon the approval of a
proper application.
(1) Permit applications must be accompanied by:
(a) Certification by the applicant that the owner of the property
has given consent to the placement of the sign.
(b) Payment of an administration fee.
(c) Certification by the applicant that the sign will only be placed
on private property.
(d) Certification of the date of the advertised event.
(2) Shall be limited to a maximum of six off-premises signs for each
advertised event.
(3) Shall not be displayed without having attached a sticker issued by
the Zoning Administrator that a permit has been issued for such
sign.
(4) Shall not be displayed more than 21 days prior to nor three days
after the advertised event.
(5) Shall each not exceed four square feet in area, unless the sign is a
banner as permitted under § 335-47A.
(6) Shall not exceed more than one sign per off-premises lot.
(7) Special events as permitted under Chapter 241 of the Village of
Elm Grove Code shall be allowed a maximum of two banner signs,
provided:
(a) A temporary sign permit has been obtained from the Zoning
Administrator;
(b) The proposed banner does not exceed 32 square feet in area;
(c) The placement of the proposed banner is reviewed and
approved by the Zoning Administrator or his or her designee to
ensure that the signage does not pose a threat to public safety;
(d) The special event sponsor has no physical premises in the
Village; and
§ 335-47 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-47
326:560
§ 335-48. Signs allowed in nonresidential districts.
(e) A special event permit has been approved and issued by the
Village.
A. No sign shall be allowed in any nonresidential district of the Village
without a permit, except the following:
(1) Sale, lease or rent signs. Allowed sign area for nonresidential sale,
lease or rent signs is only as follows:
(a) Parcels are allowed one sign not exceeding 12 square feet in
area as long as there is a vacancy.
(b) The height of each nonresidential sale, lease or rent sign may
not exceed five feet.
(c) Real estate sign pertaining to the lease or sale of real estate,
not exceeding 12 square feet in area and located on the real
estate offered for sale or lease shall be allowed. Said sign shall
be single- or double-sided. Said sign shall be removed within
three days after the closing or two weeks after a sign
indicating that there is an accepted offer for such real estate,
whichever may occur first.
[1] Real estate signs exceeding 12 square feet in area shall be
allowed upon review and approval from the Building
Board.
(2) No Trespass Signs may be placed on real estate in accordance with
the requirements of § 943.13, Wis. Stats.
(3) Temporary window signs posted on the interior side of a window
cumulatively occupying not more than 50% of the window area and
posted for periods not exceeding 30 days.
(a) Permanent window signs reflecting aesthetic compatibility
with adjacent uses and cumulatively occupying not more than
50% of the window area. Permanent window signs shall be
reviewed and approved by the Building Board. Combined
temporary and permanent signs shall not exceed 50% of the
window area.
(4) Sandwich board signs.
(a) "Sandwich board" shall refer to a hinged or unhinged A-frame,
movable sign.
(b) Only one sandwich board sign is allowed per business. All
sandwich board signs shall be moved indoors during
nonbusiness hours.
§ 335-47 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-48
326:561
(c) All sandwich boards must be displayed within 20 feet of a
doorway. Under no circumstance may a sandwich board sign
be placed on a public pathway, the area between a pathway
and the street, or in a space designated for parking.
(d) A sandwich board sign shall be used to display prices,
descriptions or business-related messages in relation to the
goods or services provided by the business.
(e) No sandwich board sign area shall exceed eight square feet on
any side or face of the board and shall not exceed four feet
from the ground to the top of the sign.
(f) If a business chooses to have a temporary sign, it cannot
display a sandwich board sign simultaneous with the usage of a
temporary sign. Both signs cannot be displayed at the same
time. Once the temporary sign is removed, the sandwich board
sign can be installed.
(5) Utility signs, as defined in Article XII of this chapter, are permitted
if approved by the Building Board and found not to endanger the
public safety.
(6) Political signs, subject to the following provisions:
(a) No political sign shall be placed closer than seven feet from the
edge of the street pavement nor so close to a pedestrian way as
to hinder or impede passage. Under no circumstance may a
political sign be placed in any area between any Village
pedestrian pathway and the edge of any street pavement.
(b) All political signs on nonresidential properties which address a
particular election may remain posted no more than 60 days
prior to and until 10 days after such election.
(c) No political sign placed on nonresidential property shall
exceed 16 square feet in area, and the total area of signage of
all political signs erected on one nonresidential parcel shall not
exceed 80 square feet.
(d) All political signs shall be constructed of such a material and
posted so as to remain in place under all weather conditions
which are reasonably likely to occur during the time which the
sign is posted.
B. Signs requiring permit. It is the intent of this subsection to establish
guidelines for sign allocations predicated on business function, location
and adjacent zoning, aesthetic compatibility with building, business
center or adjoining businesses, along with the need for public service
and information. Various types of signs are required at business
establishments to communicate the nature of the business and to give
direction on location and services. The following guidelines shall be
§ 335-48 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-48
326:562
used by the Building Board to review business sign sizes, height,
numbers, type and illumination:
(1) Maximum size of signs. The size of allowable signs shall be
determined by the Building Board, based on the intent stated in the
introductory paragraph of this subsection and the applicable
requirements, if any, of this subsection. In the absence of such
applicable requirement, the formula to be used in determining
maximum size is either one square foot of sign area per one linear
foot of building frontage, or one square foot of sign area per 200
square feet of usable building area, whichever is greater. The
Building Board shall calculate the sign area of all signs covered by
this chapter, and the total sign area for each business or
professional location shall not exceed the figure determined by the
Building Board.
(2) Measuring signs. The Building Board shall include the sign copy
and any border or frame surrounding that copy to calculate the
area of a sign and determine if it meets the requirement of this
chapter. Supporting members of a sign shall be excluded from the
calculation of area. The area of irregularly shaped signs or signs
containing two or more detached elements shall be determined by
the area of the smallest regular polygon that will encompass all
elements of the sign. For purposes of this subsection, the terms
"area of sign" and "sign area" refer to the surface encompassed
within the perimeter of the sign which forms the outside shape of
the sign. If a sign contains more than one section or part, all
sections and parts shall be included in the total area of the sign.
When calculating the area of the sign, it shall be determined by
measuring the outside perimeter of the sign. When calculating the
area of a sign to determine if it meets the requirements of this
chapter, the area shall include the sign copy and any border or
frame surrounding that copy. For signs that are double-faced, or
have a sign copy on two faces which are back to back and facing in
different directions, each sign face may equal the maximum sign
area allowed under this subsection. Supporting structures of signs
shall not be included in the "area of sign" and "sign area," however,
all ornamental elements however attached to the sign shall be
included in determining the sign area.
(3) Height. A ground sign shall harmonize with the building or activity
it advertises or identifies, and no such ground sign shall be more
than 20 feet above the average ground elevation of the lot or
exceed the height of the building, whichever is lower, except within
50 feet of Bluemound Road where the maximum sign height shall
not exceed 25 feet.
(4) Sign type, illumination, design and area allotment.
(a) The type and amount of illumination is to be approved by the
Building Board.
§ 335-48 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-48
326:563
(b) Overpowering light levels should not be used.
(c) We encourage building facades and identification signs to be
illuminated from dusk to 11:00 p.m.
(d) No sign shall exceed 60 square feet in area regardless of
location, except as stated in § 335-48B(4)(e) of this chapter.
(e) Businesses which front on Bluemound Road may be allowed up
to 1.5 times the sign area normally designated for their
category at the discretion of the Building Board.
(f) Only one projecting hanging sign shall be allowed per business
establishment. Wall-mounted and hanging signs will be allowed
as approved by the Building Board.
(g) Uniform sign format for Business Centers. [Amended
8-24-2015]
[1] Business Centers of four or more tenants shall have a
uniform sign format to be approved by the Building Board,
concurrent with the site plan. In addition to fulfilling all
the requirements of this chapter, the uniform sign format
shall include the following components:
[a] An aesthetically developed theme.
[b] The proposed locations and an example rendering of
all Permanent Signs to be located on the building,
including Exterior Signs and Projecting Signs. Where
possible all Exterior Signs and Projecting Signs shall
be centered over the business establishment.
[c] If proposed for the Business Center, the application
shall include the location of the center identification
Ground Sign and directory Utility Signs. Utility Signs
shall not count towards the total allowable Sign area.
[d] Each business within the center shall be allocated a
Sign area to conform with the requirements under
Subsection B(1) above. Each business Sign within the
center shall contribute a proportionate share of its
Sign allocation toward the center identification or
directory sign.
[e] Each business within the center shall be allowed one
Exterior Sign and one Hanging Sign.
[f] The sign area allotments listed above are considered
the maximum allowable per business unit and may be
reduced at the owner's option or upon the Building
Board's recommendation when inappropriate for a
specific reason or business activity.
§ 335-48 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-48
326:564
[g] When a change is proposed for a Sign located within a
business center with an approved uniform sign
format, the proposed change shall be required to
conform to the requirements of the business center's
uniform sign format. An application to change the
Sign shall be made by the owner or occupant of the
premises and shall be submitted to the Zoning and
Planning Administrator or his/her authorized
designee. The submitted application shall include all
the information listed in Subsection C below. Said
application shall be reviewed by the Zoning and
Planning Administrator or his/her authorized designee
to ensure the Sign change meets the requirements of
the approved uniform sign format for the business
center. If the Sign application meets the requirements
of the business center's uniform format, a permit shall
be issued. The Zoning and Planning Administrator or
his or her duly authorized designee may forward a
permit application on to the Building Board if it is
determined that such review and approval is
necessary.
[h] Business Centers with less than four tenants may
submit for approval of a uniform sign format. Such a
submittal shall be governed in the same manner as
prescribed in this code.
[2] Wholesale-manufacturing-center terminal. Each such
business may be allowed up to one square foot of sign area
per linear foot of building frontage on a public or private
roadway serving its location.
(5) Signs shall be compatible with respect to size, proportions,
materials and color with nearby structures and surroundings.
(6) Signs shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the
structure and site to which it principally relates.
(7) The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be restrained
and harmonious with the structure and site to which it principally
relates.
(8) The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the
minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be
composed in proportion to the area of the sign face.
(9) Project developers, such as shopping centers or structures with
more than one tenant, shall submit a comprehensive description of
a uniform signage system so that individual business or tenant
signs will be harmonious and compatible with the overall design of
the structure and site.
§ 335-48 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-48
326:565
(10) Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos
shall conform to the criteria for all other signs.
(11) Ground sign restrictions.
(a) Only one ground sign per frontage road will be permitted on
each property. No ground signs shall be permitted to extend
into a public street right-of-way without approval of the Village
Board. No approval will be granted absent a lease/license
agreement being entered into and that the petitioner must
provide insurance naming the Village and its officers, agents,
insurers and employees as additional insureds.
(b) Monument signs are preferred where there is adequate room
on site, as determined by the Building Board.
(12) Sign maintenance and safety specifications.
(a) Maintenance. The owner of any sign shall keep it in good
maintenance and repair, which includes restoring, repainting
or replacement of a worn or damaged legally existing sign to
its original condition; and shall maintain the premises on which
the sign is erected in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive
condition, free and clear of obnoxious substances, rubbish,
weeds and grass. The sign owner shall also be responsible for
the removal of any sign within 30 days following the
discontinuance of any business. If any such sign is not removed
within such time, or if the Zoning Administrator shall find that
such sign is not properly maintained and in a good state of
repair, or if a sign has been erected in a manner that is not in
conformance with the original permit, the Zoning
Administrator shall give the property owner written
notification to remove said sign within 15 days, after which
time the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to remove
the sign, and all expenses incurred shall be assessed against
the property owner.
(b) Illuminated signs.
[1] All glass fixtures shall be made of safety glass, wire mesh
or otherwise constructed to prevent broken pieces from
falling to the ground.
[2] Any sign illuminated by artificial light shall be constructed
so as to not create a fire hazard.
(c) Wind pressure and dead loads. All signs shall be designed and
constructed to receive dead loads as required in the Building
Code of the Village.
(d) Safety. No signs or any part thereof or sign anchors, braces or
guide rods shall be attached, fastened or anchored to any fire
§ 335-48 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-48
326:566
escape, fire ladder or standpipe; and no such sign or any
part of any such sign or any anchor, brace or guide rod shall
be erected, put up or maintained so as to hinder or prevent
ingress or egress through a door, doorway or window or so as
to hinder or prevent the raising or placing of ladders against
such building by the Fire Department of the Village, as
necessity therefor may require.
C. Permit application.
(1) An application to erect and construct signs shall be made by the
owner or occupant of the premises and shall be addressed to the
Building Board and shall contain the following information on
forms provided by such Board:
(a) The name and address of the property owner and occupant(s);
(b) The name of the person, firm or corporation which will erect
the sign;
(c) The proposed site of such sign, together with distances from
railroad tracks, streets or highways, structures and property
lines;
(d) The material of which the sign is to be constructed, proposed
colors and drawings to scale of the information to be displayed
upon such sign;
(e) The number of faces on such sign; and
(f) The method of illumination, if any, together with a survey of the
premises on which sign is to be erected.
(2) Decision on permit applications.
(a) Upon approval of an application to erect a sign other than a
temporary sign by the Village Building Board or Zoning
Administrator, a conditional permit therefor shall be issued by
the Village Clerk, which shall become permanent if, six months
thereafter, the applicant shall submit to the Village Clerk an
acceptable color photograph of the sign establishing to the
Clerk's satisfaction that the sign has been erected in
conformity with the conditional permit.
(b) In the event the Building Board shall reject an application, it
shall file such rejection with the Village Clerk and notice
thereof shall be given to the applicant.
D. Exterior temporary signs.
(1) Permits.
(a) Permits for exterior temporary signs shall be issued by the
Zoning Administrator upon approval of a proper application.
§ 335-48 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-48
326:567
§ 335-49. Appeals and variances.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Administrator or Building
Board under this article may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals under
Article IX of this chapter. In considering such an appeal, the Board of
Appeals shall be guided by the standards set forth in this article.
§ 335-49.1. Nonconforming signs.
The Zoning Administrator may issue four nonconsecutive
permits per applicant for exterior temporary signs in the
course of a year. There shall not be more than one exterior
temporary sign located on any single lot at any one time. An
exterior temporary sign permit shall be issued only for the
period of active use of the sign. Exterior temporary signs shall
be permitted in all districts unless otherwise specified and may
not be illuminated. No exterior temporary signs can be placed
in the public right-of-way and shall not exceed 32 square feet
in size. [Amended 10-26-2010]
(b) Unless otherwise specified in this subsection or in the permit
as issued, permits for exterior temporary signs shall expire 15
days after their issuance, except that permits for Grand
Opening Signs shall expire 30 days after issuance. One Grand
Opening Sign is permitted during the lifetime of a business.
The Building Board may issue permits for exterior temporary
signs in excess of 15 days. Any exterior temporary sign erected
without a permit or for which the permit has expired may be
removed by the Village without prior notice.
(2) A business can only display a sandwich board or a temporary sign
at any one time.
(3) The enforcement of § 335-48D(1) may be temporarily suspended by
resolution of the Village of Elm Grove Board of Trustees for a
specified period of time as designated by the Board of Trustees.
Such suspension may only be authorized when the Board of
Trustees makes a finding that a temporary suspension of the
enforcement of § 335-48D(1) of the chapter will likely provide a
significant benefit to the community or that enforcement of the
chapter's § 335-48D(1) will likely cause unnecessary hardship. A
business proposing to place temporary signage shall file
notification of an intent to place such temporary signage before
placement by e-mail, fax or in person on a form provided by the
Zoning Administrator. [Added 10-26-2010]
A. Compliance. Owners of nonconforming signs that obtained permits for
such signs prior to April 12, 1996, must comply with this Sign Article
immediately.
§ 335-48 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-49.1
326:568
§ 335-50. Enforcement.
B. Compliance grandfather clause. Owners of nonconforming signs that
obtained permits for such signs between April 12, 1996, and April 12,
2001, must have complied with this Sign Article by April 12, 2006.
C. Damage to nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs that are
damaged or destroyed to the extent of 50% or more of their reasonable
value, or the use thereof is discontinued for a period of 30 days, the
privilege of continuation herein granted is terminated.
A. Inspections for violations of this article shall be under the direction of
the Zoning Administrator.
B. Removal of illegal signs. Any sign erected or constructed before or after
the passage of this article without the required permit shall be
demolished or removed by the owner of the sign or by the owner or
occupant of the premises.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this article or any rule or
regulation promulgated under this article shall be subject to a penalty
as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 335-49.1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-50
326:569

ARTICLE VIA
Communications Facilities
[Added 9-10-2001]
§ 335-50.1. Wireless telecommunication antennas. [Amended
8-25-2014]
A. Purpose. Wireless telecommunication antennas may be installed,
erected, and maintained pursuant to the provisions of this section. The
purpose of this section is to balance the federal interest concerning the
construction, modification and placement of telecommunication
antennas for use in providing personal wireless service and the
legitimate interest of the Village of Elm Grove in administering local
zoning. The goals of this section are to minimize adverse impacts and
promote public health, welfare and safety.
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meaning set
forth herein and in § 335-94:
CLASS 1 CO-LOCATION — The placement of a new Mobile Service
Facility on an existing Tower or Support Structure such that the owner
of the facility does not need to construct a freestanding Tower or
Support Structure for the Mobile Service Facility but does involve
Substantial Modification.
CLASS 2 CO-LOCATION — The placement of a new Mobile Service
Facility on an existing Tower or Support Structure such that the owner
of the facility does involve constructing a freestanding Tower or
Support Structure for the Mobile Service Facility or involve Substantial
Modifications.
EQUIPMENT COMPOUND — The area surrounding or adjacent to the
base of an existing Support Structure within which a Mobile Service
Facility is located.
MOBILE SERVICE — Shall have the meaning given in Wisconsin
Statutes § 66.040(1).
MOBILE SERVICE FACILITY — Set of equipment, Structures and
network components, including Wireless Communication Antennas,
transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling and
associated equipment, necessary to provide mobile service to a discrete
geographic area, but does not include the underlying support structure.
MOBILE SERVICE PROVIDER — Shall have the meaning as defined
in Wisconsin Statutes § 66.0304. It is a person who provides Mobile
Service.
MOBILE SERVICE SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure
that is designed to support a Mobile Service Facility.
SEARCH RING — Shape drawn on a map to indicate the general area
within which a mobile service Support Structure should be located to
meet radio frequency engineering requirements, taking into account
§ 335-50.1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-50.1
326:571
relevant factors including topography and the demographics of the
service area.
SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION — The modification of a mobile service
Support Structure, including the mounting of a Wireless
Communication Antenna on such structure that does any of the
following:
SUPPORT STRUCTURE — An existing or new Structure that supports
or can support a Mobile Service Facility, or enclose, including a tower,
Structure utility pole, water tower, building or other structure.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and assembled or constructed
for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone,
radio, and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting
lattice towers, guyed towers or monopole towers.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS — Any transmitting or
receiving device used for commercial purposes and placed or mounted
on a Tower, Building or Structure used to radiate or capture wireless
communication signals.
For a structure with an overall height of 200 feet or less, increases
the overall height of the structure by more than 20 feet.
(1)
For a structure with an overall height of more than 200 feet,
increases the overall height of the structure by 10% or more.
(2)
Increases the width of the tower by 20 feet or more (measured at
the level of the appurtenance added to the structure as a result of
the modification), unless a larger area is necessary for co-location.
(3)
Increases the square footage of an existing Equipment Compound
to a total area of more than 2,500 square feet.
(4)
C. Applicability.
(1) All new and existing Wireless Communication Antennas, Towers
and Mobile Service Facilities in the Village of Elm Grove shall be
subject to these regulations.
(2) This section shall be applicable to all Village of Elm Grove zoning
districts.
D. Conditional use permit required.
(1) A conditional use permit shall be required for the construction of
new Towers and Mobile Service Facilities or Substantial
Modifications and Class 1 co-locations that involve existing Towers,
Support Structures and Mobile Service Facilities.
E. Conditional use application shall follow the provisions set forth in
§ 335-86E, or any amendments thereto, of the Village Code of
Ordinances.
§ 335-50.1 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-50.1
326:572
F. General requirements. In addition to the requirements of this section,
and § 335-86E, the following standards shall apply to the placement and
installation of any Wireless Telecommunication Antennas, Towers,
Mobile Service Facilities and Equipment Compounds:
(1) All Wireless Communication Antennas shall meet or exceed current
standards and regulations, as amended from time to time, of the
FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with
the authority to regulate antennas.
(2) Wireless Communication Antennas shall not exceed 10 feet in
height.
(3) The Wireless Communications Antenna, and appurtenant
equipment Mobile Service Facility, and Equipment Compound must
be of neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the Supporting Structure so as to make the antenna
and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
(4) No advertising material or signage other than warning or
equipment information shall be allowed on any Wireless
Communications Antenna, Equipment Compound component,
Tower, or Mobile Service Facility. This includes flags, decorative
signs, streamers, pennants, ribbons, spinners or waving, fluttering
or revolving devices.
(5) Wireless Communication Antennas, Towers and Mobile Service
Facilities shall not be artificially illuminated unless required to
comply with current FAA or FCC standards. If lighting is required,
the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
impacts to the surrounding views.
(6) Any screening necessary to enclose appurtenant antenna
equipment shall be of a material, color and design that will reflect
the character of the surroundings.
G. Installation or modification of a Mobile Service Facility that is defined
as a Class 2 Co-location shall be required to obtain a permit as specified
under Chapter 106 of this Code. The permit applicant shall be required
to provide the following information:
(1) The name, business address of the applicant and the contact
individual for the applicant; and
(2) The location of the affected Tower and proposed facilities.
H. Removal of abandoned Wireless Communication Antennas, Towers and
Mobile Service Facilities. A Wireless Communication Antenna, Tower or
Mobile Service Facility that is not operated for a continuous period of
12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of the
structure upon which such Wireless Communication Antenna, or Mobile
§ 335-50.1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-50.1
326:573
§ 335-50.2. Wireless Telecommunications facilities in the right-ofway.
[Added 10-28-2019]
Service Facility is located shall remove the same within 90 days of
receipt of notice from the Village of Elm Grove.
A. Definitions.
(1) For the purposes of this section, the terms below shall have the
following meanings:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Manager or his or her designee.
APPLICANT — A wireless provider that submits an application.
APPLICATION — A formal request, including all required and
requested documentation and information, submitted by an
applicant to the Village of Elm Grove for a wireless permit.
BASE STATION — The same as in 47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(1), which
defines the term to mean a structure or wireless
telecommunications equipment at a fixed location that enables
FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user
equipment and a communications network. This definition does not
include towers.
CO-LOCATE, CO-LOCATE ON, OR CO-LOCATION — The
placement, mounting, replacement, modification, operation, or
maintenance of a small wireless facility on, or of ground-mounted
antenna equipment adjacent to, a structure.
ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST — The same as in 47 CFR
§ 1.6100(b)(3), which defines the term to mean any request for
modification of an existing tower or base station that does not
substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base
station, involving:
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a highway, as
defined in § 340.01(22), Wis. Stats., other than a federal interstate
highway; sidewalk; utility easement, other than a utility easement
for a cooperative association organized under ch. 185 for purposes
of providing or furnishing heat, light, power, or water to its
members only; or other similar property; including property owned
or controlled by the Department of Transportation.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY — A wireless facility to which all of
the following apply:
(a) Co-location of new transmission equipment;
(b) Removal of transmission equipment; or
(c) Replacement of transmission equipment.
§ 335-50.1 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-50.2
326:574
SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any structure capable of supporting
wireless telecommunications equipment.
TECHNICALLY FEASIBLE — That by virtue of engineering or
spectrum usage, the proposed placement for a small or otherwise
wireless facility, or its design, concealment measures, or site
location can be implemented without a significant reduction in the
functionality of same.
TOWER — The same as in 47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(9), which defines
the term as any structure built for the sole or primary purpose
of supporting any Federal Communications Commission (FCC)-
licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities,
including structures that are constructed for wireless
communications services, including, but not limited to, private,
broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed
wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave
backhaul, and the associated site. This definition does not include
utility poles.
The wireless facility satisfies any of the following:
The wireless facility is mounted on a structure 50 feet or
less in height, including any antenna.
[1]
The wireless facility is mounted on a structure no more
than 10% taller than any other adjacent structure.
[2]
The wireless facility does not increase the height of an
existing structure on which the wireless facility is located
to a height of more than 50 feet or by 10%, whichever is
greater.
[3]
(a)
Each antenna associated with the deployment of the wireless
facility, excluding associated antenna equipment, is no more
than three cubic feet in volume.
(b)
All other wireless equipment associated with the wireless
facility specified in Subsection (a), including the wireless
equipment associated with the antenna and any preexisting
associated equipment on the structure, is no more than 28
cubic feet in volume.
(c)
The wireless facility does not require registration as an
antenna structure under 47 CFR Part 17.
(d)
The wireless facility is not located on tribal land, as defined in
36 CFR 800.16(x).
(e)
The wireless facility does not result in human exposure to
radio frequency in excess of the applicable safety standards
specified in 47 CFR 1.1307.
(f)
§ 335-50.2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-50.2
326:575
UNDERGROUND AREAS — Those areas where there are no
electrical facilities or facilities of the incumbent local exchange
carrier in the right-of-way; or where the wires associated with the
same are or are required to be located underground; or where
the same are scheduled to be converted from overhead to
underground. Electrical facilities are distribution facilities owned
by an electric utility and do not include transmission facilities used
or intended to be used to transmit electricity at nominal voltages
more than 35,000 volts.
UTILITY POLE — A pole that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider; used for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function; or used
for the co-location of small wireless facilities. Utility pole does
not include a wireless support structure or electric transmission
structure.
VILLAGE — The Village of Elm Grove.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER — Any person, other
than a wireless services provider, that builds or installs wireless
communications transmission equipment, antenna equipment, or
wireless support structures.
WIRELESS PERMIT OR PERMIT — A written authorization issued
pursuant to this section allowing the placement or modification
of a wireless telecommunications facility of a design specified in
the permit at a particular location within the right-of-way, and the
modification of any existing support structure to which the wireless
telecommunications facility is proposed to be attached.
WIRELESS PROVIDER — A wireless infrastructure provider or a
wireless services provider.
WIRELESS REGULATIONS — Those regulations adopted pursuant
to Subsection E(2)(a) to implement the provisions of this section.
WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER — An entity that provides wireless
services to end users.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT — Equipment
at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications
network.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY OR FACILITY — A
facility at a fixed location in the right-of-way consisting of a base
station, antennas and other accessory equipment, and a tower and
underground wiring, if any, associated with the base station.
(2) Definitions in this section may contain quotations or citations to 47
CFR §§ 1.6100 and 1.6002. In the event that any referenced section
is amended, creating a conflict between the definition as set forth
in this section and the amended language of the referenced section,
the definition in the referenced section, as amended, shall control.
§ 335-50.2 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-50.2
326:576
B. Purpose. In the exercise of its police powers, the Village has priority
over all other uses of the right-of-way. The purpose of this section is to
provide the Village with a process for managing, and uniform standards
for acting upon, requests for the placement of wireless
telecommunications facilities within the right-of-way consistent with
the Village's obligation to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare; to manage the right-of-way; and to ensure that the public's use
is not obstructed or incommoded by the use of the right-of-way for the
placement of wireless telecommunications facilities. The Village
recognizes the importance of wireless telecommunications facilities to
provide high-quality communications and Internet access services to
residents and businesses within the Village. The Village also recognizes
its obligation to comply with applicable federal and state laws
regarding the placement of wireless telecommunications facilities in
the right-of-way, including, without limitation, the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq.), Section 6409(a) of the Middle
Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, §§ 182.017 and 196.58,
Wis. Stats., and this section shall be interpreted consistent with those
provisions.
C. Scope.
(1) Applicability. Unless exempted by Subsection C(2), below, every
person who wishes to place a wireless telecommunications facility
in the right-of-way or modify an existing wireless
telecommunications facility in the right-of-way must obtain a
wireless permit under this section.
(2) Exempt facilities. The provisions of this section (other than
Subsections J through N) shall not be applied to applications for the
following:
(a) Installation of a small wireless facility on the strand between
two utility poles, provided that the cumulative volume of all
wireless facilities on the strand shall not exceed one cubic foot,
and provided further that the installation does not require
replacement of the strand, or excavation, modification, or
replacement of either of the two utility poles linked by the
strand.
(b) Installation of a mobile cell facility (commonly referred to as
"cell on wheels" or "cell on truck") for a temporary period in
connection with an emergency or event, but no longer than
required for the emergency or event, provided that installation
does not involve excavation, movement, or removal of existing
facilities.
(c) Placement or modification of a wireless telecommunications
facility on structures owned by or under the control of the
Village.
§ 335-50.2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-50.2
326:577
(d) Placement or modification of a wireless telecommunications
facility by Village staff or any person performing work under
contract with the Village.
(e) Modification of an existing wireless telecommunications
facility that makes no material change to the footprint of a
facility or to the surface or subsurface of a public street if the
activity does not disrupt or impede traffic either vehicular or
pedestrian in the traveled portion of a street, and if the work
does not change the visual or audible characteristics of the
wireless telecommunications facility.
D. Nondiscrimination. In establishing the rights, obligations, and
conditions set forth in this section, it is the intent of the Village to treat
each applicant and right-of-way user in a competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory manner, to the extent required by law, while taking
into account the unique technologies, situation, and legal status of each
applicant or request for use of the right-of-way.
E. Administration.
(1) Village Manager. The Village Manager is responsible for
administering this section.
(2) Powers. As part of the administration of this section, the Village
Manager may:
(a) Adopt and amend wireless regulations and fee schedules
governing the placement and modification of wireless
telecommunications facilities, which shall be deemed ratified
by the Village Board 30 days after notification by the Village
Manager of the adoption of any amendments thereto if no
trustee requests that any part of an amendment be
reconsidered by the entire Board, in addition to but consistent
with the requirements of this Chapter, including regulations
governing co-location, the resolution of conflicting applications
for placement of wireless telecommunications facilities, and
aesthetic standards.
(b) Interpret the provisions of this chapter and the wireless
regulations.
(c) Develop forms and procedures for submission of applications
for wireless permits consistent with this section.
(d) Establish and update fees which encompass all direct and
indirect costs and expenses attributable to the evaluation,
monitoring and administration of the placement of a small
wireless facility, including but not limited to any related permit
or fee associated with its placement or installation within any
right-of-way.
§ 335-50.2 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-50.2
326:578
(e) Collect any fees associated with the administration of any
applicable Village chapter or regulation.
(f) Require, as a condition of completeness of any application,
notice to members of the public, at the sole expense of the
applicant, that may be affected by the placement or
modification of the wireless telecommunications facility that is
the subject of the wireless permit application.
(g) Establish deadlines for submission of information related to an
application, and extend or shorten deadlines where
appropriate and consistent with federal laws and regulations.
(h) Issue notices of incompleteness or requests for information in
connection with any wireless permit application.
(i) Select and retain, at the sole expense of the applicant,
independent consultant(s) or attorney(s) with expertise in
telecommunications to review any issue that involves
specialized or expert knowledge in connection with any permit
application.
(j) Coordinate and consult with other Village staff, committees,
and governing bodies to ensure timely action on all other
required permits under Subsection F(2)(i) of this section.
(k) Subject to appeal as provided in Subsection H(4) of this
section, determine whether to grant, grant subject to
conditions, or deny an application.
(l) Take such other steps as may be required to timely act upon
wireless permit applications, including issuing written
decisions and entering into agreements to mutually extend the
time for action on an application.
F. Application.
(1) Format. Unless the wireless regulations provide otherwise, the
applicant must submit both a paper copy and an electronic copy (in
a searchable format) of any application, as well as any amendments
or supplements to the application or responses to requests for
information regarding an application, to the Village Manager. An
application is not complete until both the paper and electronic
copies are received by the Village Manager.
(2) Content. In order to be considered complete, an application must
contain:
(a) All information required pursuant to this and other relevant
chapters, the wireless regulations and forms and procedures
applicable thereto.
§ 335-50.2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-50.2
326:579
(b) A completed application cover sheet signed by an authorized
representative of the applicant, agreeing to all necessary
permit conditions.
(c) The complete legal name of the applicant (including any
corporate or trade name), and the name, address, email
address, and telephone number of the main office of the
applicant and of a local representative including his/her cell
phone number. If the applicant is a wireless infrastructure
provider, the name, address, email address, and telephone
number of the main office and contact information for the
wireless service provider(s) that will be using the wireless
telecommunications facility must also be provided.
(d) A statement of which shot clock or shot clocks apply to the
application and the reasons the chosen shot clocks apply.
(e) A separate and complete description of each proposed wireless
telecommunications facility and the work that will be required
to install or modify it, including but not limited to detail
regarding proposed excavations, if any; detailed site plans
showing the location of the facility and technical specifications
for each element of the facility, clearly describing the site and
all structures and facilities at the site before and after
installation or modification and identifying the owners of such
preexisting structures and facilities; and describing the
distance to the nearest residential dwelling unit. Before and
after 360° photo simulations must be provided for each facility.
(f) At least four photographs taken of each site, support structure,
tower or utility pole that is proposed to be used by the
applicant showing a view of same from a North, South, East
and West perspective.
(g) Proof that the applicant has mailed to the owners of all
property within 300 feet of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility a notice that the applicant is
submitting an application to the Village for placement or
modification of a wireless telecommunications facility in the
right-of-way, which notice must include:
[1] The proposed location of the facility;
[2] A description and scale image of the proposed facility; and
[3] An email address and phone number for a representative
of the applicant who will be available to answer questions
from members of the public about the proposed project.
(h) A copy of the FCC license for the facility or a sworn written
statement from the applicant attesting that the facility will
comply with current FCC regulations.
§ 335-50.2 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-50.2
326:580
(i) To the extent that filing of the wireless permit application
establishes a deadline for action on any other permit that may
be required in connection with the wireless
telecommunications facility, the application must include
complete copies of applications for every required permit
(including, without limitation, electrical permits, building
permits, traffic control or interruption permits, and excavation
permits), with all engineering completed and with all fees
associated with each permit.
(j) A certification for each support structure by a registered and
qualified engineer that the installation can be supported by
and does not exceed the tolerances of the structure on which it
will be mounted and that the specific place on the support
structure where the wireless telecommunications facility is
intended to be placed or mounted is in a suitable condition for
such purpose and that all elements of the wireless
telecommunications facility comply with applicable safety
standards.
(k) Payment of all required fees.
(l) If an applicant should contend that denial of the application
would prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of service in
violation of federal law, or otherwise violate applicable law, the
application must provide all evidence on which the applicant
relies in support of that claim. Applicants may not supplement
submitted evidence if doing so would prevent the Village from
complying with any deadline for action on an application.
(m) If the application is an eligible facilities request, the
application must contain information sufficient to show that
the application qualifies as an eligible facilities request under
47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(3), including evidence that the application
relates to an existing tower or base station that has been
approved by the Village. Before and after 360° photo
simulations must be provided with detailed specifications
demonstrating that the modification does not substantially
change the physical dimensions of the existing approved tower
or base station.
(3) Waivers. Requests for waivers from any requirement of this
Subsection F shall be made in writing to the Village Manager. The
Village Manager may grant a request for waiver if it is
demonstrated that, notwithstanding the issuance of the waiver:
(a) The Village will be provided with all information necessary to
understand the nature of the construction or other activity to
be conducted pursuant to the wireless permit sought; and
§ 335-50.2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-50.2
326:581
(b) The Village will be able to conclude that the Village's obligation
to promote the public health, safety and welfare is not
compromised by the granting of a waiver.
(4) Fees. The applicant must provide an application fee and shall be
required to pay all costs reasonably incurred in reviewing the
application, including costs incurred in retaining outside
consultants. Fees shall be reviewed periodically and adjusted based
on the costs the Village expects to incur, with a review commencing
by the first anniversary of the effective date of this section.
(5) Public records. Applications are public records that may be made
publicly available pursuant to state and federal public records law.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the applicant may designate
portions of the application materials that it reasonably believes
contain proprietary or confidential information by clearly marking
each portion of such materials accordingly, and the Village shall
endeavor to treat the information as proprietary and confidential,
subject to applicable state (§§ 19.31 through 19.39, Wis. Stats.) and
federal public records law and the Village Manager's determination
that the applicant's request for confidential or proprietary
treatment of the application materials is reasonable. The Village
shall not be required to incur any costs to protect the application
from disclosure but can tender the defense of any public records
complaint/action to the applicant.
G. General standards.
(1) Generally. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall meet the
minimum requirements set forth in this Chapter and the wireless
regulations, in addition to the requirements of any other applicable
law or regulation.
(2) Regulations. The wireless regulations and decisions on wireless
permits shall, at a minimum, ensure that the requirements of this
Chapter are satisfied, unless it is determined that the applicant has
established that denial of an application would, within the meaning
of federal law, prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of
telecommunications or personal wireless services, or otherwise
violate applicable laws or regulations. If that determination is
made, the requirements of this Chapter and the wireless
regulations may be waived, but only to the extent required to avoid
the prohibition.
(3) Standards.
(a) Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed and
modified in a manner that:
[1] Minimizes risks to public safety;
§ 335-50.2 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-50.2
326:582
[2] Ensures that placement of facilities on existing structures
is within the tolerance and suitability of those structures in
consideration of all other fixtures planned for or existing
thereon;
[3] Avoids, where technically feasible, placement of facilities
in aboveground areas, installation of new support
structures or equipment cabinets in the public right-ofway,
or placement in residential areas when commercial
areas are reasonably available;
[4] Maintains the integrity and character of the
neighborhoods and corridors in which the facilities are
located;
[5] Ensures that installations minimize the intrusion on the
right-of-way;
[6] Ensures that the Village bears no risk or liability as a result
of the installations; and
[7] Ensures that the applicant's use does not inconvenience
the public, interfere with the primary uses of the right-ofway,
or hinder the ability of the Village or other
government entities to improve, modify, relocate, abandon,
or vacate the right-of-way or any portion thereof, or to
cause the improvement, modification, relocation, vacation,
or abandonment of facilities in the right-of-way.
(b) No wireless permit shall be issued unless:
[1] The wireless service provider applicant has immediate
plans to use the proposed facility; or
[2] The wireless infrastructure applicant has a contract with a
wireless service provider that has immediate plans to use
the proposed facility.
(c) In no event may ground-mounted equipment interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic and at all times must comply
with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990.49
(d) Aesthetic standards. Schedule 1 attached hereto50 constitutes
the aesthetic regulations adopted as part of this section subject
to Subsection E(2)(a) of this section.
(4) Standard permit conditions. All wireless permits under this section
are issued subject to the following minimum conditions:
49.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
50.Editor's Note: Said schedule is included as an attachment to this section.
§ 335-50.2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-50.2
326:583
(a) Compliance. The permit holder shall at all times maintain
compliance with all applicable federal, state, and Village
ordinances and regulations, and other rules. Violation of such
provisions may result in forfeitures under Village of Elm Grove
Code, § 1-16.
(b) Term. A wireless permit issued pursuant to an eligible facilities
request shall expire at the same time the permit for the
underlying existing wireless telecommunications facility
expires. Otherwise, wireless permits shall be valid for a period
of five years from the date of issuance unless revoked pursuant
to Subsection I(2) of this section.
(c) Contact information. The permit holder shall at all times
maintain with the Village accurate contact information for the
permit holder and all wireless service providers making use of
the facility, which shall include an office and cell phone
number, mailing address, and email address for at least one
natural person and his or her backup who shall be available 24/
7 in the event of any emergency.
(d) Emergencies. The Village shall have the right to support,
repair, disable, or remove any elements of the facilities in
emergencies or when the facility threatens imminent harm to
persons or property.
(e) Indemnities. The permit holder, by accepting a permit under
this section, agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless
the Village, its elected and appointed officials, officers,
employees, agents, representatives, and volunteers
(collectively, the "indemnified parties") from and against any
and all suits, actions, legal or administrative proceedings,
claims, demands, damages, liabilities, interest, attorneys' fees,
costs, and expenses of whatsoever kind or nature in any
manner caused in whole or in part, or claimed to be caused in
whole or in part, by reason of any act, omission, fault, or
negligence, whether active or passive, of the permit holder or
anyone acting under its direction or control or on its behalf,
even if liability is also sought to be imposed on one or more of
the indemnified parties. The obligation to indemnify, defend,
and hold harmless the indemnified parties shall be applicable
even if the liability results from or in part from an act or failure
to act on the part of one or more of the indemnified parties.
However, the obligation does not apply if the liability results
from the willful misconduct of an indemnified party.
(f) Adverse impacts on adjacent properties. The permit holder
shall undertake all reasonable efforts to avoid undue adverse
impacts to adjacent properties and/or uses that may arise from
the construction, operation, maintenance, modification, or
§ 335-50.2 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-50.2
326:584
removal of any wireless facility, support structure or wireless
telecommunications equipment.
(g) General maintenance. The wireless communications facility or
equipment and any associated structures shall be maintained
in a neat and clean manner and in accordance with all
approved plans and conditions of approval.
(h) Graffiti removal. All graffiti on facilities shall be removed at the
sole expense of the permit holder within 48 hours after
notification from the Village.
(i) Relocation. At the request of the Village pursuant to
Subsection J of this section, the permit holder shall promptly
and at its own expense without right of reimbursement
permanently remove and relocate any wireless
telecommunications facility in the right-of-way.
(j) Abandonment. The permit holder shall promptly notify the
Village whenever a facility has not been in use for a continuous
period of 60 days or longer and must comply with Subsection K
of this section.
(k) Restoration. A permit holder who removes or relocates a
facility from the right-of-way must restore the right-of-way in
accordance with Subsection L of this section.
(l) Record retention. The permit holder shall retain full and
complete copies of all permits and other regulatory approvals
issued in connection with the facility, which includes without
limitation all conditions of approval, approved plans,
resolutions, and other documentation associated with the
permit or regulatory approval. In the event the Village cannot
locate any such full and complete permits or other regulatory
approvals in its official records, and the permit holder fails to
retain full and complete records in the permit holder's files,
any ambiguities or uncertainties that would be resolved
through an examination of the missing documents will be
conclusively resolved against the permit holder.
(m) Radio frequency emissions. Every wireless facility shall at all
times comply with applicable FCC regulations governing radio
frequency emissions, and failure to comply with such
regulations shall be treated as a material violation of the terms
of a permit issued pursuant to this section.
(n) Certificate of insurance. A certificate of insurance (except an
Accord 25) and all necessary endorsements demonstrating to
the satisfaction of the Village Attorney that the applicant has
named the Village, its officers, agents and employees as an
additional insured on a primary and contributing basis for
general liability in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 and
§ 335-50.2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-50.2
326:585
has provided statutory workers compensation coverage for
liability that might arise out of the presence of the facility in
the right-of-way.
H. Application processing and appeal.
(1) Rejection for incompleteness. Notices of incompleteness shall be
provided in conformity with state, local, and federal law, including
47 CFR § 1.6003(d), as amended.
(2) Processing timeline. Wireless permit applications [including
applications for other permits under Subsection F(2)(i) necessary
to place or modify the facility] and appeals will be processed in
conformity with the shot clocks set forth in state, local, and federal
law, as amended.
(3) Written decision. In the event that an application is denied [or
approved with conditions beyond the standard permit conditions
set forth in Section 7(d)], the Village Manager shall issue a written
decision with the reasons therefor, supported by evidence
contained in a written record.
(4) Appeal to Village Board. Any person adversely affected by the
decision of the Village Manager may appeal to the Village Board of
Trustees in writing detailing the basis for the appeal. An appeal by
a wireless infrastructure provider must be taken jointly with the
wireless service provider that intends to use the wireless
telecommunications facility.
(5) Deadline for appeal.
(a) Appeals that involve eligible facilities requests must be filed
within three business days of the written decision of the Village
Manager.
(b) All other appeals not governed by Subsection H(5)(a), above,
must be filed within 10 business days of the written decision of
the Village Manager, unless the Village Manager extends the
time therefor. An extension may not be granted where
extension would result in approval of the application by
operation of law.
(6) Decision deadline. All appeals shall be conducted so that a timely
written decision may be issued in accordance with the applicable
shot clock.
I. Expiration and revocation.
(1) Expiration. A wireless permit issued pursuant to an eligible
facilities request shall expire at the same time the permit for the
underlying existing wireless telecommunications facility expires.
Otherwise, wireless permits shall be valid for a period of five years
§ 335-50.2 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-50.2
326:586
from the date of issuance. Upon expiration of the wireless permit,
the permit holder must either:
(a) Remove the wireless telecommunications facility; or
(b) Submit an application to renew the permit at least 90 days
prior to its expiration. The facility may remain in place until the
renewal application is acted on by the Village and any appeals
from the Village's decision are exhausted.
(2) Revocation for breach. A wireless permit may be revoked for failure
to comply with the conditions of the permit or applicable federal,
state, county or Village ordinance or regulations or rules. Upon
revocation, the wireless telecommunications facility must be
removed within 30 days of receipt of written notice from the
Village. All costs incurred by the Village in connection with the
revocation, removal, and right-of-way restoration shall be paid by
the permit holder.
(3) Failure to obtain permit. Unless exempted from permitting by
Subsection C(2) of this section, a wireless telecommunications
facility installed without a wireless permit must be removed within
30 days of receipt of written notice from the Village. All costs
incurred by the Village in connection with the notice, removal, and
right-of-way restoration shall be paid by entities who own or
control any part of the wireless telecommunications facility.
J. Relocation. Except as otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, a
permit holder shall promptly, and at its own sole expense without right
of any reimbursement, with due regard for seasonal working
conditions, permanently remove and relocate any of its wireless
telecommunications facilities in the right-of-way whenever the Village
requests such removal and relocation. The Village may make such a
request to prevent the facility from interfering with a present or future
Village use of the right-of-way or on a utility pole for designated
services per § 66.0414(1)(y), Wis. Stats.; a public improvement
undertaken by the Village; an economic development project in which
the Village has an interest or investment; when the public health, safety,
or welfare require it; or when necessary to prevent interference with
the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permit holder shall not be required to
remove or relocate its facilities from any right-of-way that has been
vacated in favor of a nongovernmental entity except an abutting
property owner, unless and until that entity pays the reasonable costs of
removal or relocation to the permit holder.
K. Abandonment.
(1) Cessation of use. In the event that a permitted facility within the
right-of-way is not in use for a continuous period of 60 days or
longer, the permit holder must promptly notify the Village and do
one of the following:
§ 335-50.2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-50.2
326:587
(a) Provide information satisfactory to the Village Manager that
the permit holder's obligations for its facilities under this
section have been lawfully assumed by another permit holder.
(b) Submit to the Village Manager a proposal and instruments for
dedication of the facilities to the Village. If a permit holder
proceeds under this Subsection K(1)(b), the Village may, at its
option:
[1] Accept the dedication for all or a portion of the facilities;
[2] Require the permit holder, at its own expense, to remove
the facilities and perform the required restoration under
Subsection L; or
[3] Require the permit holder to post a letter of credit or
provide payment sufficient to reimburse the Village for
reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing
the facilities and undertaking restoration under
Subsection L.
(c) Remove its facilities from the right-of-way within six months of
notifying the Village of nonuse for 60 days and perform the
required restoration under Subsection L, unless the Village
Manager waives this requirement or provides a later deadline.
(2) Abandoned facilities. Facilities of a permit holder who fails to
comply with Section 11(a) and which, for six months, remain
unused shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are
deemed to be a public nuisance. In addition to any remedies or
rights it has at law or in equity, the Village may, at its option:
(a) Abate the public nuisance and recover the cost from the permit
holder or the permit holder's successor in interest;
(b) Take possession of the facilities; and/or
(c) Require removal of the facilities by the permit holder or the
permit holder's successor in interest.
L. Restoration. In the event that a permit holder removes or is required to
remove a wireless telecommunications facility from the right-of-way
under this section (or relocate it pursuant to Subsection H), the permit
holder must restore the right-of-way to its prior condition in accordance
with Village specifications. However, a support structure owned by
another entity authorized to maintain that support structure in the
right-of-way need not be removed but must instead be restored to its
prior condition. If the permit holder fails to make the restorations
required by this Subsection L, the Village at its option may do such
work. In that event, the permit holder shall pay to Village, within 30
days of billing therefor, the cost of restoring the right-of-way.
§ 335-50.2 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-50.2
326:588
M. Placement on Village-owned or-controlled structures. The Village may
negotiate agreements for placement of wireless telecommunications
facilities on Village-owned or -controlled structures in the right-of-way.
The agreement shall specify the compensation to the Village for use of
the structures. The person or entity seeking the agreement shall
reimburse the Village for all costs the Village incurs in connection with
its review of and action upon the request for an agreement.
N. Severability. If any section, subsection, clause, phrase, or portion of this
section is for any reason held to be illegal or otherwise invalid by any
court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such illegal or
invalid portion shall be severable and shall not affect or impair any
remaining portion of this section, which shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 335-50.2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-50.2
326:589

ARTICLE VII
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
§ 335-51. Existing nonconforming uses and structures. [Amended
6-24-2003; 7-22-2003; 5-24-2005; 8-22-2006]
The lawful nonconforming principal use of a building, premises, structure,
fixture, land or water existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of
this chapter may be continued although the principal use does not conform
to the provisions of this chapter. (NOTE: For purposes of this section, a
"fixture" is defined in accordance with the Wisconsin case law rule. The rule
which has developed in Wisconsin case law as to what constitutes a fixture
is not really a comprehensive definition but rather a statement of the factors
that are to be applied to the facts and circumstances of a particular case to
determine whether or not the property in question does constitute a fixture:
"...Whether articles of personal property are fixtures, i.e., real estate, is
determined in this state, if not generally, by the following rules or tests: 1)
Actual physical annexation to the real estate; 2) Application or adaptation
to the use or purpose to which the realty is devoted; and 3) An intention
on the part of the person making the annexation to make a permanent
accession to the freehold.") A principal structure used in accordance with
applicable zoning regulations that does not conform to applicable frontage,
width, height, area, yard, parking, loading or setback requirements shall be
considered to be a nonconforming structure but not a nonconforming use.
A. Nonconforming uses.
(1) Only that portion of the land or water in actual use may be so
continued, and a nonconforming use may not be extended or
enlarged.
(2) If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 12 months,
any future use of the building, structure, fixture or premises shall
conform to the chapter.
(3) Uses that are merely casual and occasional or accessory or
incidental to the principal use cannot acquire a nonconforming use
status.
B. Nonconforming structures.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsection B(4) of this section,
structural additions and enlargements to existing legal
nonconforming structures are permitted to the extent that such
structural additions and enlargements do not create or increase
nonconformity with applicable setback lines or applicable yard,
height, parking, loading or access provisions of this chapter.
[Amended 6-26-2012]
(2) The Village Plan Commission may, in its discretion, upon receipt of
the Building Board's recommendations and following a public
hearing noticed by a Class 2 notice, grant a special exception to
§ 335-51 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-51
326:591
allow a structural addition or enlargement that encroaches into the
setback requirements.
(a) No application for a special exception shall be considered
unless the Zoning Administrator has received the fee
established by the Village Board of Trustees from time to time,
by resolution, together with a completed application and the
information required under § 335-88D(1) of this chapter.
(b) No application for a special exception shall be granted unless
the Plan Commission determines that all of the following
conditions are satisfied:
[1] The subject structure is legally conforming with respect to
use.
[2] No point on the proposed addition or enlargement shall
have a distance to a lot line that is shorter in length than
the distance from the same lot line to the closest point on
the subject structure as it existed at the time of the
request for a special exception.
[3] The proposed addition or enlargement is not contrary to
the public interest or detrimental to public health or
safety.
[4] The proposed addition or enlargement shall not be
detrimental to the character or property values of the
surrounding area.
[5] For corner lots, the Board shall also determine that the
proposed addition or enlargement will not impair a
reasonable vision clearance for traffic on adjacent
streets.51
(3) Subject to Subsection B(4), a damaged or destroyed nonconforming
structure may be restored to the size, location, and use that it had
immediately before the damage or destruction occurred, without
limitation as to the costs of repair, reconstruction, or improvement,
if all of the following apply: [Amended 6-26-2012]
(a) The nonconforming structure was damaged or destroyed on or
after March 2, 2006.
(b) The damage or destruction was caused by violent wind,
vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation.
(4) A damaged or destroyed nonconforming structure that meets the
requirements under Subsection B(3) may be restored to a larger
51.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), concerning the allowable amount of total lifetime
structural repairs or alterations, was repealed 6-26-2012, which ordinance also
redesignated former Subsection B(4) and (5) as Subsection B(3) and (4).
§ 335-51 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-51
326:592
§ 335-52. Abolishment or replacement. [Amended 8-22-2006]
If such nonconforming use is discontinued or terminated for a period of 12
months, any future use of the building, premises, structure, fixture, land or
water shall conform to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 335-53. Wetland nonconforming uses.
Notwithstanding § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats, the repair, reconstruction,
renovation, remodeling or expansion of a legal nonconforming structure,
or any environmental control facility related to a legal nonconforming
structure, located in the W-1 Wetland District and in existence at the time
of adoption or subsequent amendment of this chapter is permitted pursuant
to § 61.351(5), Wis. Stats.
size than it was immediately before the damage or destruction
if necessary for the structure to comply with applicable state or
federal requirements. [Amended 6-26-2012]
§ 335-51 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-53
326:593

ARTICLE VIII
Performance Standards
§ 335-54. Compliance required.
This chapter permits specific uses in specific districts; and these
performance standards are designed to limit, restrict and prohibit the
effects of those uses outside their premises or district. All structures, lands,
air and waters shall hereafter, in addition to their use, site and sanitary
regulations, comply with the following performance standards.
§ 335-55. Property maintenance.
No person in any district shall allow or permit the exterior areas of any
structure, lot or parcel to remain in a condition that is not in accordance
with the following:
§ 335-56. Snowplowing and disposal.
It is unlawful for any person or contractor in any district, except an
employee of the Public Works Department of the Village of Elm Grove, to
deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on or against any fire
hydrant or mailbox, or upon any paved right-of-way or other public place in
any manner so as to restrict access to or use or maintenance of such fire
hydrant, mailbox, paved public right-of-way or other public place.
§ 335-57. Air pollution.
No person or activity shall emit any fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists
or gases in such quantities so as to substantially contribute to exceeding
established state or federal air pollution standards.
A. All exterior areas or surfaces of any premises shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition, free from any accumulation of refuse or any
similar material which would or may cause fire, safety or health hazards
or a serious blighting influence, except usable uncontaminated
firewood stored in an orderly fashion which does not pose any safety or
health hazard.
B. Refuse on public property. It is unlawful for any person to throw or
deposit refuse upon any public place within the Village of Elm Grove
except in authorized public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles for collection.
C. Refuse on private property. It is unlawful for any person to throw,
deposit, keep, maintain or accumulate refuse on any private property
within the Village of Elm Grove in such a manner as to create a
blighting influence.
§ 335-54 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-58
326:595
§ 335-58. Fire and explosive hazards.
All activities involving the manufacturing, utilization, processing or storage
of flammable and explosive materials shall be in accordance with
established state and federal regulations.
§ 335-59. Glare and heat.
No activity shall emit glare or heat that is visible or measurable outside its
premises. All operations producing intense glare or heat shall be conducted
within a completely enclosed structure. Exposed sources of light shall be
shielded so as not to be visible outside their premises.
§ 335-60. Water quality protection.
§ 335-61. Noise.
No activity in any district shall produce a sound level outside its premises
that exceeds the standards set forth in Chapter 208, Peace and Good Order,
of the Code of the Village of Elm Grove.
§ 335-62. Odors.
No activity shall emit any odorous matter of such nature or quantity as to
be offensive, obnoxious or unhealthful outside their premises in accordance
with the applicable state and federal regulations.
§ 335-63. Radioactivity and electrical disturbances.
No activity shall emit radioactivity or electrical disturbances outside its
premises that are dangerous or adversely affect the use of neighboring
premises in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations.
§ 335-64. Vibration.
No activity in any district shall emit vibrations which are discernible without
instruments outside its premises.
A. No activity shall locate, store, discharge or permit the discharge of any
treated, untreated or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous or solid
materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity or
temperature that might run off, seep, percolate or wash into surface or
subsurface waters so as to contaminate, pollute or harm such waters or
cause nuisances, such as objectionable shore deposits, floating or
submerged debris, oil or scum, color, odor, taste or unsightliness or be
harmful to human, animal, plant or aquatic life.
B. In addition, no activity shall withdraw water or discharge any liquid or
solid materials so as to exceed or contribute toward the exceeding of
the minimum standards and those other standards and the application
of those standards set forth in the Wisconsin Administrative Code
§ 335-58 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-65
326:596
§ 335-65. Outdoor lighting.
A. Purpose, applicability and goals.
(1) The purpose of this section is to improve the health, safety and
general welfare of areas by restricting the nighttime emission of
light rays which are the source of light trespass and/or unnecessary
glare, and/or are detrimental to the safety and/or security of
persons, property or vehicular traffic, and/or are detrimental to the
traditional aesthetic values of the Village, and/or unnecessarily
restrict persons from the peaceful enjoyment of their property.
(2) The provisions of this section shall apply to all outdoor luminaires
used, installed, replaced, altered, moved or repaired after the
effective date of this chapter, except as this applicability is
specifically expanded or reduced herein.
(3) The goal of this section is to have all outdoor lighting be located,
sized and directed so that the light emitted from the luminaires
does not constitute light trespass, as defined herein.
B. Effect on other codes. The provisions of this section are intended to
supplement other applicable codes and requirements. Compliance with
all applicable provisions of building, zoning, electrical and other codes
must be observed. In the event of a conflict between the requirements
of this section and other requirements, the more stringent requirement
shall apply.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of illuminance on a surface that is everywhere
one foot from a uniform point source of light of one candle and equal to
one lumen per square foot.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light emitted by a luminaire that shines beyond
the boundaries of the property on which the luminaire is located.
LIGHT SHIELD — Any attachment which interrupts and blocks the path
of light emitted from a luminaire or fixture.
LUMINAIRE — The complete lighting system, including lamp and the
fixture.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIALLY ZONED NEIGHBORHOOD — Any
area in the Village of Elm Grove zoned Rs-1; Rs-2; Rs-3; or Rs-4.
D. Requirements.
(1) All outdoor luminaires shall be located, sized, shielded and/or
directed in such a manner that they do not constitute light trespass
as described below. [Refer to Section § 335-88D(6)(i) for further
guidance on outdoor lighting.]
§ 335-65 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-65
326:597
§ 335-65.1. Portable Outdoor Storage Containers. [Added
4-27-2015]
(a) Light trespass within or adjacent to the boundaries of singlefamily
residentially zoned district may not exceed an intensity
greater than one-half footcandle at a point four feet above the
ground at the property boundary line.
(b) No light trespass in any other zoning district within the Village
of Elm Grove may exceed one footcandle at a point four feet
above the ground at the property line.
(2) No outdoor luminaire may be operated in such manner as to
constitute a hazard or danger to persons or to safe vehicular
operation.
(3) In the case of state and national flags, statues, entranceway
markers, or other top-of-pole mounted objects which cannot be
illuminated with downward directed lighting, upward directed
lighting may be used only in the form of one or two narrow-cone
spotlights which confine the illumination to the object of interest,
and provided that the lighting is restricted to an angle of not less
than 75° up from horizontal.
E. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter, to the extent described as follows:
(1) Motion detector security lights, which are normally off and which
are activated on for less than four minutes occasionally when
motion is detected, are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) Outdoor luminaires used to provide illumination within public
street rights-of-way are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter.
F. Temporary exemptions. Requests for temporary exemptions from the
provisions of this chapter may be submitted to the Village Board in
written form describing the reason for the request and the nature of the
request. If approved and granted in writing by the Village Board, such
exemption shall be in force for not more than 30 days. Requests for a
maximum of a thirty-day renewal may be made in a similar manner. The
Village Board may terminate any temporary exemption for any
reasonable cause, including but not limited to, concerns about safety or
light trespass.
A. A Portable Storage Container is any container, storage unit, shed-like
container or other portable structure, other than an Accessory Building,
yard maintenance building or shed, that complies with all the
requirements of this code, that can be or is used for the storage of
personal property of any kind and which is located for such purposes
outside an enclosed building.
§ 335-65 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-65.1
326:598
B. Use. The use of Portable Storage Containers is allowed in all zoning
districts, provided that the conditions listed hereunder are met.
(1) No more than one Portable Storage Container shall be on a
property at any given time. Exemptions to exceed the number of
allowable containers may be given as prescribed under Subsection
D below.
(2) A Portable Storage Container shall not be larger than 10 feet wide,
20 feet long and 10 feet high.
(3) A Portable Storage Container shall not remain on a property in
excess of 60 consecutive calendar days and shall not be placed at
any one property in excess of 60 days in a twelve-month period.
Extensions or exemptions to these requirements may be allowed as
defined hereunder.
(4) A Portable Storage Container shall not be placed closer than five
feet to all property lines and five feet to the nearest wall of a
building. The Portable Storage Container shall not, at any time, be
placed in the Village right-of-way.
(5) Preferably, the Portable Storage Container should be placed on a
hard surface such as asphalt or concrete. If such a container is not
able to be placed on a hard surface, then the placement on a
nonhard surface may be approved by the Village.
(6) The Portable Storage Container shall only be delivered between the
hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. No
Portable Storage Containers shall be delivered on Sundays or
federal holidays on which the Village Hall is closed.
(7) Portable Storage Containers are permitted for a total period of up
to 180 days on a property for which a building permit has been
issued and shall be exempt from the provisions of Subsection B(1)
through (5) above. Nevertheless, such Portable Storage Containers
must be removed from that property within seven calendar days of
a final inspection pursuant to the building permit.
(8) An extension to the time limit for placement of a Portable Storage
Container may be granted, provided that such extension shall not
be more than 30 days and that no more than two extensions shall
be granted in any given year.
C. Permit required. A person engaged in the leasing, maintaining or
transporting of a Portable Storage Container and the owner of the
property, where one is placed, shall both be responsible to complete an
application for the placement of the Portable Storage Container. A
permit application shall be submitted to the Village, together with a fee
established by the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 335-65.1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-65.1
326:599
(1) In addition to satisfying the permit requirements in this Subsection
C, Portable Storage Containers used on properties zoned as
business, institutional or manufacturing must also receive approval
for the use of Portable Storage Containers from the Plan
Commission.
(2) A permit issued for the use of a Portable Storage Container shall be
valid only for the location for which the permit was issued.
(3) A permit shall be issued for not longer than 60 consecutive
calendar days, unless an extension under Subsection B(8) or an
exemption under Subsection D has been granted. The allowable
storage time limit for which a permit is issued may be extended, as
described in this section, provided that a permit application and fee
for the extension is submitted to the Village.
D. Temporary Exemptions. A limited Exemption from the provisions of this
section may be granted by the Village Manager, or his or her designee,
upon a request submitted in writing substantiating a non-self-created
hardship. If approved, such Exemption may be granted for a specified
period of time. Requests for an additional limited Exemption shall be
made in the same manner as the original request. The Village Manager
may terminate any limited Exemption for any reasonable cause.
E. Penalty. Any person who is in violation of any provision within this
section or a rule or regulation promulgated under this section shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 335-65.1 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-65.1
326:600
ARTICLE IX
Board of Appeals
§ 335-66. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Board of Appeals for the Village of Elm Grove
for the purpose of hearing appeals and applications and granting variances
and exceptions to the provisions of this chapter consistent with the purpose
and intent of this chapter.
§ 335-67. Membership; terms; oaths; vacancies.
The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the Village
President and approved by the Village Board. The Village President shall
appoint a Village Board Trustee as an ex officio member of the Board of
Appeals for a one-year term. In addition:
§ 335-68. Organization. [Amended 8-22-2006]
The Village Board herein adopts rules for the conduct of the business of
the Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
Board of Appeals may adopt further rules as necessary.
A. Terms shall be for staggered three-year periods.
B. Two alternate members may be appointed by the Village President for
terms of three years and shall act only when a regular member is absent
or is unable to vote because of conflict of interest. The Village Clerk
shall attend all meetings for the purpose of providing technical
assistance when requested by the Board of Appeals.
C. Official oaths shall be taken by all members in accordance with § 19.01,
Wis. Stats., within 10 days of receiving notice of their appointments.
D. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as
appointments for a full term.
A. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and shall be open
to the public.
B. Minutes of the proceedings and a record of all actions shall be kept by
the Board, showing the vote of each member upon each question, the
reasons for the Board’s determination, and its finding of facts. These
records shall be immediately filed in the office of the Village Board and
shall be a public record.
C. The presence of four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. If
a quorum is present, a majority vote shall be necessary to correct an
error; grant a variance; make an interpretation; and permit a
temporary, unclassified or substituted use. If there are less than four
members present, the matter must be rescheduled.
§ 335-66 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-69
326:601
§ 335-69. Powers.
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
§ 335-70. Appeals and applications.
Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or
by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the Village affected with
respect to this Zoning Chapter. Such appeals shall be filed in the Office
of the Village Clerk within 90 days after the date of written notice of the
decision or order of the Village Clerk. Applications may be made by the
owner or lessee of the structure, land or water to be affected at any time
and shall be filed in the Office of the Village Clerk. Such appeals and
application shall include the following:
A. Errors. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made with respect to
this chapter.
B. Variances. To hear and authorize appeals for variances where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement will result in practical difficulty
or unnecessary hardship. Such variance shall not be contrary to the
public interest and shall be so conditioned that the spirit and purposes
of this chapter shall be observed and the public safety, welfare and
justice secured.
C. Interpretations. To hear and decide applications for interpretations of
the zoning regulations and the location of the boundaries of the zoning
districts, after the Plan Commission has made a review and
recommendation.
D. Permits. The Board may reverse, affirm wholly or partly or modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may
make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made.
E. Assistance. The Board may request assistance from other Village
officers, departments, commissions, committees and boards.
F. Oaths. The Clerk may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
A. Name and address of the appellant or applicant and all abutting and
opposite property owners of record.
B. Plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in the State of
Wisconsin or other map drawn to scale and approved by the Zoning
Administrator, showing all of the information required under § 335-84
of this chapter for a building permit.
C. Additional information required by the Zoning Administrator, the Board
of Appeals or the Village Plan Commission.
§ 335-69 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-71
326:602
§ 335-71. Hearings.
§ 335-72. Findings required to grant variance.
No variance to the provisions of this chapter shall be granted by the Board
unless it finds beyond a reasonable doubt that all the following facts and
conditions exist and so indicates in the minutes of its proceedings:
A. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time and place for the
hearing, post a notice for at least 14 days before the hearing thereof
and shall give due notice to the parties in interest, the Zoning
Administrator and the Village Plan Commission. At the hearing the
appellant or applicant may appear in person, by agent or by attorney.
[Amended 4-22-2008]
B. Notice of all hearings held on appeals, variance applications or
floodland or wetland disputes in a floodland district or in the shoreland
portion of a W-1 Wetland District shall be mailed to the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) at least 10 days prior to the
hearing. Final action on floodland/shoreland appeals, variances and
boundary disputes shall not be taken for 30 days, or until the DNR has
made its recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all Board of
Appeals decisions on floodland/shoreland appeals, variances and
boundary disputes shall be transmitted to the DNR within 10 days of the
effective date of such decision.
A. Preservation of intent. No variance shall be granted that is not
consistent with the purpose and intent of the regulations for the district
in which the development is located. No variance shall have the effect
of permitting a use in any district that is not a stated permitted use,
accessory use or conditional use in that particular district.
B. Exceptional circumstances. There must be exceptional, extraordinary
or unusual circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or parcel,
structure, use or intended use that do not apply generally to other
properties or uses in the same district and the granting of the variance
would not be of so general or recurrent nature as to suggest that the
Zoning Chapter should be changed.
C. Economic hardship and self-imposed hardship not grounds for variance.
No variance shall be granted solely on the basis of economic gain or
loss. Self-imposed hardships shall not be considered as grounds for the
granting of a variance.
D. Preservation of property rights: that such variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by
other properties in the same district and same vicinity.
E. Absence of detriment: that the variance will not create substantial
detriment to adjacent property and will not materially impair or be
contrary to the purpose and spirit of this chapter or the public interest.
§ 335-71 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-73
326:603
§ 335-73. Decision; conditions; expiration of variances.
The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals and applications within 30
days after the final hearing and shall transmit a signed copy of the Board's
decision to the appellant or applicant and the Zoning Administrator. In
addition:
§ 335-74. Review by court of record.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals
may present to the court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth
that such decision is illegal and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such
petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the
decision in the offices of the Board.
A. Conditions may be placed upon any zoning permit ordered or
authorized by this Board.
B. Variances granted by the Board shall expire within six months unless
substantial work has commenced pursuant to such grant.
§ 335-73 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-74
326:604
ARTICLE X
Changes and Amendments
§ 335-75. Authorization to amend.
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning
practice require, the Village Board may, by ordinance, change the district
boundaries or amend, change or supplement the regulations established by
this chapter or amendments thereto. Such change or amendment shall be
subject to the review and recommendation of the Village Plan Commission.
§ 335-76. Initiation of amendment.
A change or amendment may be initiated by the Village Board, Village Plan
Commission or by a petition of one or more of the owners or lessees of
property within the area proposed to be changed.
§ 335-77. Petitions for amendment.
Petitions for any change to the district boundaries or amendments to the
regulations shall be filed with the Village Clerk, who shall present each
petition to the Village Board. The petition shall describe the premises to be
rezoned or the regulations to be amended, list the reasons justifying the
petition, specify the proposed use and have attached the following:
§ 335-78. Recommendations of Plan Commission.
The Village Board shall submit each petition to the Village Plan Commission,
and the Plan Commission shall review all proposed changes and
amendments within the corporate limits and recommend that the petition
be granted as requested, modified or denied. The recommendation shall be
made in writing to the Village Board.
§ 335-79. Hearings upon changes. [Amended 4-22-2008]
The Village Board shall hold a public hearing upon each proposed change
or amendment recommended by the Plan Commission, giving notice of the
time, place and the change or amendment proposed by posting a notice for
at least 14 days prior to the public hearing, pursuant to Ch. 985, Wis. Stats.
The Village Board shall also give at least 10 days' prior written notice to the
A. Plot plan, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, showing the area
proposed to be rezoned, its location, its dimensions, the location and
classification of adjacent zoning districts and the location and existing
use of all properties within 300 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned.
B. Owners' names and addresses of all properties lying within 100 feet of
the area proposed to be rezoned.
C. Additional information required by the Plan Commission or Village
Board.
§ 335-75 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-79
326:605
clerk of any municipality within 1,000 feet of any land to be affected by the
proposed change or amendment.
§ 335-80. Village Board actions.
Following such hearing and after careful consideration of the Plan
Commission's recommendations, the Village Board shall vote on the
passage of the proposed change or amendment.
§ 335-79 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-80
326:606
ARTICLE XI
Administration
§ 335-81. Plan Commission.
The Village Plan Commission shall have the duties and responsibilities
set forth in Chapter 7, Art. III, of the Code of the Village of Elm Grove.
The Commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its
functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys. In
general, the Plan Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary
to enable it to perform its function and promote municipal planning.
§ 335-82. Building Board.
The Village Building Board shall have the duties and responsibilities set
forth in Chapter 7, Art. I of the Code of the Village of Elm Grove. In general,
the Building Board shall review all building plans for any building or sign
constructed or erected in the Village of Elm Grove.
§ 335-83. Zoning Administrator designated; duties.
The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated as the administrative and
enforcement officer for the provisions of this chapter. The duty of the Zoning
Administrator shall be to interpret and administer this chapter and to issue,
after on-site inspection, all permits required by this chapter. The Building
Inspector shall assist the Zoning Administrator in the administration and
enforcement of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall further:
A. Maintain records of all permits issued and inspections made.
B. Record the lowest floor elevations of all structures erected, moved,
altered or improved in the floodland districts.
C. Provide for the inspection of all structures, lands and waters as often as
necessary to assure compliance with this chapter.
D. Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures
and the use of structures, lands and waters, give notice of all violations
of this chapter to the owner, resident, agent or occupant of the
premises, and report uncorrected violations to the Village Attorney in a
manner specified by him.
E. Assist the Village Attorney in the prosecution of ordinance violations.
F. Be permitted access to premises and structures during reasonable
hours to make those inspections as deemed necessary by him or her to
ensure compliance with this chapter. If, however, he or she is refused
entry after presentation of his or her identification, he or she may
procure a special inspection warrant in accordance with § 66.122, Wis.
Stats.52
§ 335-81 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-83
326:607
§ 335-84. Building permit.
Applications for a building permit shall be made to the Building Inspector
and shall include such plans and information as required by § 106-3 of the
Code of the Village of Elm Grove. In addition:
G. Prohibit the erection or use of any structure, land or water through the
issuance of a stop order, which order shall halt any work on the
structure, or bar any use or prohibit occupancy of any structure, land or
water until the Zoning Administrator has inspected and approved such
use or erection.
H. Request assistance and cooperation from the Village Police Department
and Village Attorney as deemed necessary.
I. Make available to the public, to the fullest extent possible, all reports
and documents concerning the Village's comprehensive plan and
ordinances. In addition, information in the form of reports, bulletins,
maps and engineering data shall be readily available and widely
distributed. The Plan Commission may set fees necessary to recover the
cost of providing information to the public. Where useful, the Zoning
Administrator, or his or her agent, may set marks on bridges or
structures or other markers which show the depth of the one-hundredyear
recurrence interval flood; or may set marks delineating the
boundaries of wetlands.
A. Residential site and building plans to be submitted to the Building
Board. Every builder of any residential structure hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall, before a building permit is issued, present
detailed site plans pertaining to the proposed structure to the Village
Building Board, which will approve said plans only after determining
that the proposed structure will not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent property or substantially increase the danger of fire
or traffic congestion, or otherwise endanger the public health or safety
or substantially diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood. Site plans shall show, as a minimum: proposed ingress
and egress to the site; a parking plan showing the amount and
arrangement of parking and proposed potential locations of covered
parking; and an open space utilization and landscaping plan.
B. Business, industrial and site plans other than residential to be
submitted to the Building Board and Plan Commission. Every builder of
any structure, other than residential structures, hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall, before a building permit is issued, present
detailed site plans pertaining to the proposed structure to the Village
Building Board and the Village Plan Commission, each of which will
approve said plans only after determining that the proposed structure
will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property
52.Editor's Note: Section 66.122 was renumbered as § 66.0119 by 1999 Act 150, §§ 287
through 290.
§ 335-83 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-84
326:608
§ 335-85. Plans of operation. [Amended 10-24-2006]
or substantially increase the danger of fire or traffic congestion, or
otherwise endanger the public health or safety or substantially diminish
or impair property values within the neighborhood. Site plans shall
show, as a minimum: proposed ingress and egress to the site; a parking
plan showing the amount and arrangement of parking and proposed
potential locations of covered parking; and an open space utilization
and landscaping plan.
A. Plan of operation review and approval requirements.
(1) No person shall operate, and no property owner shall allow the
operation of, a commercial enterprise, industry, home business,
church, school, nonprofit organization or other nonresidential use
without first obtaining the approval of a plan of operation from the
Plan Commission as set forth in this section, and no residential or
nonresidential activity shall be engaged in or carried on, except as
approved in the plan of operation permit. All plans of operation as
required by this chapter shall include written verification of the
nature and scope of the proposed use from the property owner or
his registered agent. For activities that require a plan of operation,
property owner(s) and business operator(s) shall have a joint,
ongoing obligation to obtain, maintain, and amend plans of
operation pursuant to the requirements of this section for all such
activities occurring on the owner's property.
(2) As persons or entities requiring a plan of operation change the
nature of the person's or entity's activity so as to change the
category of its use as defined by § 335-32J, approval of an amended
plan of operation shall be required.
(3) The Zoning Administrator is permitted to approve plans of
operation where the nonresidential use does not change and the
new business at that same location would not result in additional
employees, changes in hours of operation or a significant increase
in the flow of traffic.
(4) If implementation of an approved plan of operation has not been
initiated within one year from the date of issuance, said plan of
operation shall become void.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 335-85A(4), an extension may
be granted by the Plan Commission should circumstances warrant.
The applicant for the plan of operation and the property owner or
his registered agent shall be jointly responsible for timely securing
such an extension.
B. Temporary plan of operation permits. Temporary plan of operation
permits are required for seasonal business operations, such as fruit and
vegetable stands. In addition, a temporary plan of operation permit
§ 335-84 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-85
326:609
shall be required for any business operation that seeks to temporarily
deviate from its approved hours of operation or plan of operation on file,
excepting special events as may be permitted under Chapter 241 of the
Village Code. The length of the temporary permit shall be established
at the time of permit issuance. The Zoning Administrator may approve
a temporary plan of operation permit unless s/he determines that the
proposed event is of such a magnitude that it warrants additional
review, in which case the Zoning Administrator shall have discretion
to refer said temporary plan of operation to the Plan Commission for
review and consideration.
C. Plan of operation permit exemptions. The following public uses are
exempt from plans of operation permit requirements:
(1) Municipal facilities.
(2) Public schools.
D. Required information for a plan of operation permit. All plans of
operation shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms
supplied by the Village. The applications for plan of operation permits
shall show the following information:
(1) Name, type and address of the business or institution.
(2) Name, address, and contact information of the property owner.
(3) Name and address of the business owner (name partners for a
partnership and directors for a corporation or L.L.C.).
(4) Name, address, and contact information of the operator of the
activity at the identified premises, if other than the property owner.
(5) The proposed hours of operation and activities to occur both inside
and outside all principal and accessory structures.
(6) The number of full-time and number of part-time employees,
including the average number of employees per shift.
(7) Verify that the Village has current site and floor plan information on
file. If such records do not exist, current site and floor plan
information, with dimensions, shall be provided for all commercial
buildings.
(8) Parking, as required by this chapter.
(9) Description of business activity and processes, including the use of
any hazardous and flammable materials (as identified within SARA
Title III: The Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
Act) or equipment that emits noise or vibration audible from the
outside of the building.
(10) Signage and illumination of building exterior.
§ 335-85 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-85
326:610
(11) Such additional information as may be determined by the Plan
Commission or Zoning Administrator for plan of operation
approval.
E. Criteria for plan of operation approval. The following criteria will be
used by the Plan Commission in reviewing applications for plan of
operation permits:
(1) Proximity to residential neighborhoods and the potential for
disturbing and disrupting residential uses.
(2) Adequacy of the principal structure and other structures on the site
for the proposed activity. Plan of operation permits will only be
issued to businesses to be conducted in permanent structures.
Temporary plan of operation permits may be issued, at the
discretion of the Plan Commission, for temporary structures or
facilities not on a permanent foundation, such as wheeled-trailers,
vendor carts and seasonal stands.
(3) Availability of adequate parking to meet the needs of employees
and customers.
(4) Adequacy of street access.
(5) Compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
F. Hours of operation.
(1) Authority. Based upon the impact on residential areas in proximity
to commercial uses and the cost of police protection and other
public services necessary to adequately serve the business with
extended hours of operation, the Village Board finds that it is
necessary to limit hours of operation for all businesses.
(2) Hours allowed. The plan of operation required by this section shall
contain a proposal for hours of operation. No business may be open
to the public between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. except
for the following uses:
(a) Gasoline stations.
(b) Gasoline stations with incorporated food marts (under 5,000
square feet).
(c) Hotels and motels.
(d) Twenty-four-hour package and delivery service.
(e) Restaurants and taverns.
(f) Any other business entity if approved by the Board of Trustees.
§ 335-85 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-85
326:611
§ 335-86. Conditional use permit.
(3) Setback from residences. All twenty-four-hour operations approved
by the Village after the effective date of this chapter shall conform
to a setback of 200 feet from any abutting residential property line.
G. Enforcement and penalties. Any property owner, tenant or other person
who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in § 335-92.
(1) In the case of multi-tenant buildings, no plans of operation shall be
reviewed or issued if the building owner or registered agent is
found in violation of this chapter.
H. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning
Administrator or Plan Commission under this subsection may appeal to
the Board of Appeals pursuant to § 335-70.
I. All business operators and property owners in the Village are required
to file a complete and updated plan of operation to the Zoning and
Planning Administrator, consistent with the requirements of § 335-85 of
the Village Code, within 120 days of the effective date of this section.
A. Conditional use permits. The Village Board may authorize the Zoning
Administrator to issue a conditional use permit for conditional uses
after review and a public hearing, provided that such conditional uses
and structures are in accordance with the purpose and intent of this
chapter and are found to be not hazardous, harmful, offensive or
otherwise adverse to the environment or the value of the neighborhood
or community.
B. Application. Applications for conditional use permits shall be made in
duplicate to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning
Administrator and shall include the following information:
(1) Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect,
professional engineer and/or contractor, and all opposite and
abutting property owners of record.
(2) Description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded
subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site;
type of structure; proposed operation or use of the structure or
site; number of employees; and the zoning district within which the
subject site is located.
(3) Survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing the
location, property boundaries, dimensions, uses and size of the
following: subject site; existing and proposed structures; existing
and proposed easements, streets and other public ways; off-street
parking, loading areas and driveways; existing highway access
restrictions; existing and proposed street, side and rear yards; and
areas subject to inundation by floodwaters. The survey shall also
§ 335-85 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-86
326:612
show the location, elevation and uses of any abutting lands and
their structures that are located with 40 feet of the subject site; soil
mapping unit lines, types and slopes; ground surface elevations;
mean and historic high-water lines on or within 40 feet of the
subject premises; and existing and proposed landscaping when so
required by the Plan Commission.
(4) In areas subject to inundation by floodwaters, the survey provided
by the applicant shall also include first floor elevations, utility
elevations, historic and probable future floodwater elevations,
depth of inundation, floodproofing measures and plans for
proposed structures with dimensions and elevations pertinent to
the determination of the hydraulic capacity of the structures or
their effect on flood flows. Where floodproofing is required, the
applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect attesting to the adequacy of the
floodproofing measures to withstand flood forces and velocities
associated with a one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood. Prior
to the issuance of a certificate of compliance, the applicant shall
also submit a certification by the licensed professional engineer
that the finished floodproofing measures were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(5) Additional information as may be required by the Village Board,
Village Plan Commission, Village Engineer or the Zoning
Administrator.
C. Plan Commission review.
(1) The Village Plan Commission shall review all applications for
conditional use permits. The Plan Commission shall review the site,
existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring
uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic
generation and circulation, drainage, sound and vibration
generation, sewerage and water systems and the proposed plan of
operation for compliance with the Code of Ordinances and the
purpose and intent of this chapter.
(2) The Plan Commission shall report its findings to the Village Board
within 60 days and may recommend conditions, such as
landscaping, architectural design, type of construction,
construction commencement and completion dates, sureties,
lighting, fencing, drainage, sound and vibration generation
reduction or elimination, planting screens, operational control,
hours of operation, improved traffic circulation, deed restrictions,
highway access restrictions, increased yards and parking
requirements, where such conditions are deemed necessary to
fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter.
D. Public hearing. The Village Board shall hold a public hearing upon each
application after receiving the recommendation from the Plan
§ 335-86 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-86
326:613
Commission. A notice shall be posted for at least 14 days prior to the
public hearing giving the time and place for the hearing, and due notice
shall be given to the parties in interest. At the hearing, the applicant
may appear in person or by his or her agent or attorney. [Amended
4-22-2008]
E. Village Board action. Following the public hearing, and after
consideration of the Plan Commission's recommendations, the Village
Board may grant the conditional use permit as applied for, grant the
conditional use permit with conditions deemed appropriate by the
Board or deny the permit. In addition:
(1) Compliance with all other provisions of this chapter, such as lot
width and area, yards, height, parking, loading, traffic and highway
access shall be required of all conditional uses unless a variance
has been granted under Article IX of this chapter; provided,
however, that the Village Board may, with the recommendation of
the Plan Commission, authorize the reconstruction of a lawful preexisting
detached garage at its current location and in its current
dimensions, notwithstanding noncompliance with the setback and
minium square footage requirements of this chapter.
(2) Amendments. Changes subsequent to the initial issuance of a
conditional use permit that result in a need to change the initial
conditions shall require an amendment to the conditional use
permit. Enlargement of a conditional use shall not be considered an
amendment. The process for amending a permit shall generally
follow the procedures for granting a conditional use permit.
(3) Revocation of conditional use permit. In the event an applicant or
its heirs or assigns fail to comply with the conditions of the
conditional use permit, or if the use, or characteristics of the use, is
changed without prior approval by the Plan Commission, the
conditional use permit may be revoked by the Village Board of
Trustees. The process for revoking a permit shall generally follow
the procedures for granting a permit.
F. Existing conditional uses. Lawful uses existing at the effective date of
this chapter that would be classified as a conditional use in the
particular district concerned if they were established after the effective
date of this chapter shall be considered legal conditional uses without
further action of the Village. Changes to or substitution of such
conditional uses shall be subject to review and approval by the Village
Board of Trustees in accordance with this section.
G. Notice to Department of Natural Resources. The Zoning Administrator
shall transmit a copy of each application for a conditional floodland use
or shoreland W-1 District conditional use to the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources (DNR) for its review and comment. Action on such
applications shall not be taken for 30 days or until the DNR has made its
recommendation, whichever occurs first. A copy of floodland
§ 335-86 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-86
326:614
conditional use permits and shoreland W-1 District conditional use
permits shall be transmitted to the DNR within 10 days of the effective
date of such permit.
H. Conditional use review of communication structures. The following
procedures and standards are applicable to proposed communication
structures identified as conditional uses within this chapter. Terms
within this section shall have the meanings found in § 335-50.1 and
§ 335-94. [Added 10-13-1997; amended 8-25-2014]
(1) Application and review. The Village Manager shall determine an
application to be complete and eligible for formal presentation to
the Plan Commission and establishment of public hearing date only
after the applicant has submitted information as required under
this chapter.
(2) Fees and deposits. The Village Manager shall identify and estimate
the need of the Village to engage expertise to assist the Village
staff, the Plan Commission and the Board of Trustees in reviewing
the application. Per the requirements set forth in § 30-3, the Village
Manager shall inform the applicant of these requirements, and the
amounts that the applicant will be required to pay shall be
confirmed by the Plan Commission at its initial formal review and
may be modified by the Plan Commission if additional expertise
needs to be engaged. These amounts shall be due and payable by
the applicant to the Village within the timetable established by the
Village per § 30-3.
(3) Application documentation. The applicant shall submit in writing as
part of its application the following documentation:
(a) The name and business address of, and the contact individual
for, the applicant.
(b) Construction plan showing the location of the proposed or
affected wireless Tower; and renderings showing site and
structural features, including network components, Wireless
Communication Antennas, transmitters, receivers, base
stations, power supplies, cabling and any other associated
equipment that is necessary to provide wireless
communication service.
(c) If the application is a substantial modification of an existing
Tower or Mobile Service Facility, the applicant shall submit a
construction plan which describes the proposed modifications,
including equipment and network components, antennas,
transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling
and related equipment associated with the proposed
modifications.
(d) If the application is to construct a new Tower and/or a New
Mobile Service Facility, a construction plan which describes
§ 335-86 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-86
326:615
the proposed structure and the equipment and network
components, including antennas, transmitters, receiver's base
stations, power supplies, cabling and related equipment to be
placed on or around the new wireless tower.
(4) Co-location preference; public site preference.
(a) As a matter of municipal policy, the Village of Elm Grove
strongly supports co-location (single locations accommodating
multiple Wireless Communication Antennas and related
facilities on a single Mobile Service Support Structure or
groupings of Mobile Service Support Structures) and location
of facilities on public property. Applicants proposing locations
not conforming with these policy preferences shall have the
burden of demonstrating the necessity of location on private
property and/or as single-use or single-system Mobile Service
Facilities. Sites and Mobile Service Facilities proposed for
approval shall generally be sized and designed to allow
flexibility for addition of more facilities by the same applicant
entity or other entities, and the Village may negotiate terms
and conditions facilitating co-location. Once approved,
additional antennas and accessory facilities may be added to a
site in accordance with the sharing conditions of the
conditional use approval.
(b) Permittees shall exercise good faith in co-locating and/or
clustering with other communication companies and sharing
the permitted site, provided such shared use does not give rise
to a substantial technical level or quality-of-service impairment
of the permitted use (as opposed to a competitive conflict or
financial burden). In the event a dispute arises as to whether
the permittee has exercised good faith in accommodating other
users, the Village may require a third-party technical study at
the expense of either or both the applicant and complaining
user.
(c) If an application seeks to construct a new Tower and Mobile
Service Facility the applicant shall provide a written
explanation, in addition to the other required submittal
materials, as to the reason for the proposed location instead of
co-location with an existing Mobile Service Facility. This
explanation shall include a sworn statement by the individual
who has the responsibility over the placement of the wireless
Tower attesting that co-location is not possible due to the
following factors;
[1] Co-location would not result in the same communication
service functionality, coverage and capacity;
[2] Co-location is technologically infeasible; and
§ 335-86 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-86
326:616
[3] Co-location creates an unreasonable economic burden to
the wireless communication service provider.
(5) Additional criteria and requirements for conditional use permit.
(a) All changes made to towers exceeding what was requested in
the original application or otherwise legally existing at the date
of adoption of this subsection, including, but not limited to,
adding microwave dishes, or increasing the height, or profile,
shall require review and approval by the Plan Commission.
(b) All towers and sites shall be properly maintained and shall be
kept in a condition as not to become a public nuisance or
eyesore. Proper maintenance shall include, but not be limited
to, regular lawn and landscaping care, painting of an accessory
building, fences, and tower. Additionally, the site shall be kept
clear of junk and trash.
(c) Landscaping requirements.
[1] For all commercial towers over 50 feet in height, the tower
base, accessory building, anchor points, and parking area
shall be screened with a four-foot-tall (at time of planting)
evergreen hedge consistent with the landscaping
requirements for nonresidential properties.
[2] For towers of 180 feet or greater, at least one row of
deciduous trees not less than a caliper of 2 1/2 inches'
diameter at breast height (dbh) shall be planted between
the tower and public rights-of-way and residential
properties. The type and amount of required landscaping
shall be determined by the Plan Commission on a case-bycase
basis.
[3] The Plan Commission may allow an alternative
landscaping or screening plan or waive the landscape
requirements if it is determined that the landscaping will
not serve a functional value based on existing topography
or surrounding land uses.
(d) Every three years, beginning with the adoption of this
subsection or following completion of construction of a tower,
whichever is later, the owner of the tower shall submit to the
Village Engineer a report from a structural engineer or other
expert acceptable to the Village Engineer reflecting the fact
that such tower is structurally sound and does not pose any
threat to life or property.
(e) No apparatus shall be attached to any tower except as
approved by the Plan Commission. Apparatus attached legally
to existing towers prior to enactment of this subsection may
remain but not be increased in any way except with approval of
§ 335-86 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-86
326:617
the Plan Commission. Approval of the Plan Commission for
additional apparatus will be granted only after the applicant
demonstrates a need for additional apparatus.
(f) Prior to final approval for new towers or within one year of the
date of adoption of this subsection for existing towers, the
tower owner shall furnish a financial guarantee, in the form of
a letter of credit, to the Village in the amount of $20,000. The
amount of such financial guarantee may be reviewed by the
Plan Commission at any time to determine the sufficiency of
such amount to remove the tower and restore the site upon
which it is located. Funds from the financial guarantee letter of
credit may be used by the Village to pay any professional fees
associated with the removal of the tower and/or restoration of
the site upon which it is located.
(g) Prior to final approval for new towers or within one year of the
date of adoption of this subsection for existing towers, the
owners shall furnish proof of liability insurance which protects
against losses due to personal injury or property damage
resulting from the construction, operation or collapse of the
tower, antennas or accessory building in a form satisfactory to
the Village Attorney.
(h) This subsection applies to both towers existing at the time of
adoption of this subsection and those constructed thereafter.
(6) Conditions. Conditional use approvals shall contain conditions
addressing issues such as maintenance, including allocation of
responsibilities and costs for maintenance in co-location situations,
mandatory removal of towers upon termination of their use,
security features and provisions allowing municipal access for
inspection purposes, and related issues.
I. Short-term rentals. [Added 5-30-2019]
(1) The purpose of this subsection is to ensure that the quality of shortterm
rentals operating within the Village is adequate for protecting
public health, safety and general welfare, to protect the residential
character, and stability of all areas within the Village of Elm Grove;
to provide minimum standards necessary for the health and safety
of persons occupying or using buildings, structures or premises;
and provisions for the administration and enforcement thereof.
(2) Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following words
and phrases shall have the following definitions:
CLERK — The Village Clerk of the Village of Elm Grove or designee.
DWELLING UNIT/AREA — A space within a structure which a
natural person can use as a sleeping place. "Dwelling unit" as used
in this subsection shall be as defined in Village of Elm Grove Code
§ 335-94.
§ 335-86 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-86
326:618
PROPERTY OWNER — The owner of a short-term rental unit/area.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property having a dwelling unit/
area located within a zoning district, consisting of the following
zoning districts: RS-I, RS-2, R-II, RS-3, RS-4, RM-1, and RM-2
districts.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNIT/AREA — A dwelling unit/area on a
residential property that is offered for rent for consideration and
for fewer than 29 consecutive days, as defined in § 66.0615(1)(dk),
Wis. Stats.
VILLAGE — The Village of Elm Grove, Wisconsin.
(3) Operation of short-term rental unit/area
(a) Any person maintaining, managing, offering, or providing a
short-term rental unit/area for more than six consecutive days
within each 365-day year, commencing on the first day of
rental of a dwelling unit/area, shall obtain for such short-term
rental unit/area a conditional use permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of Village of Elm Grove § 335-86.
(b) Each short-term rental area requires a valid:
[1] State of Wisconsin tourist rooming house license where
operation of the short-term rental unit/area exceeds 10
nights within a consecutive 365-day period;
[2] Seller's permit issued by the Wisconsin Department of
Revenue;
[3] A conditional use permit issued pursuant to the provisions
of Village of Elm Grove Code § 335-86 per Subsection
I(3)(a) above.
(c) Operation of a short-term rental unit/area shall comply with all
of the following:
[1] The total number of days that all dwelling unit/areas
within a residential property may be collectively rented
shall not exceed 180 days during any consecutive 365-day
period.
[2] The residential property owner shall notify the Clerk in
writing not less than 24 hours before the first rental within
a 365-day period begins.
[3] Vehicular traffic shall not be generated that is greater than
normally expected in the residential neighborhood, and
provision shall be made for all vehicles associated with any
person remaining overnight at a short-term rental unit/
area to be parked within the residential property where
the short-term rental unit/area is located.
§ 335-86 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-86
326:619
[4] There shall not be excessive noise, fumes, glare, or
vibrations generated during the period of dwelling unit/
area use, including any activity, event or social function
held outside the interior of the dwelling unit/area as
described and restricted in § 335I(3)(c)[6] hereafter.
[5] No recreational vehicles (RVs), camper, tent, or other
temporary lodging arrangement shall be permitted in any
zoning district as a means of providing additional
accommodations for persons using the residential
property where the short-term rental unit/area is located.
[6] Any activity, event or social function held outside the
interior of a residential property where the short-term
rental unit/area is located or opened to the outside by the
use of a patio, balcony, back or side yard, veranda or deck
shall last no longer than one day occurring between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. No outdoor music shall
be allowed between 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. All activities
shall be in compliance with other noise regulations of the
Village. All property owners of a residential property
where the short-term rental unit/area is located are
responsible for complying with all regulations of any
applicable room tax.
[7] There shall be compliance with all applicable state, county,
and Village codes and ordinances.
[8] The property owners of a residential property where the
short-term rental unit/area is located shall maintain for
two past years the following written records for each
rental of the dwelling unit/area: the full name and current
address of any person(s) renting the residential property,
the time period for that rental, cell phone number and email
address and the monetary amount or consideration
paid for that rental and a description of value.
(4) Granting of short-term rental conditional use permit. For a shortterm
rental the application shall also contain the following
information:
(a) Identify all the residential property owners' contact
information including mailing address, e-mail address, physical
address, cell phone number of property owner, and twentyfour-
hour phone number available seven days a week;
(b) Specify the maximum number of dwelling units/areas within a
residential property available for individual rentals.
(c) A copy of State of the Wisconsin license for a tourist rooming
house issued under § ATCP 72.04, Wis. Adm. Code, for each
short-term rental unit/area;
§ 335-86 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-86
326:620
(d) A copy of a completed state lodging establishment inspection
form for the entire residential property issued not more than
six months before the date of the conditional use permit
application.
(e) Short-term rental conditional use permits shall be issued for a
one-year period and must be renewed annually subject to
Village approval or denial.
(5) Issuance of a conditional use permit.
(a) A conditional use permit may be issued to the residential
property owner(s) after review and a public hearing by the
Village Plan Commission and upon approval by the Village
Board. Transfer of a conditional use permit because of transfer
or sale of a residential property is not permissible. Should such
residential property be sold, then the conditional use permit
shall automatically become void.
(b) The conditional use permit shall be reviewed on an annual
basis by the Village Plan Commission to ensure compliance
with all conditional use requirements.
[1] Such residential property may be inspected by the Police
Department, Fire Department, Building Inspector or other
authorized personnel of the Village to investigate and
determine if any violations exist.
[2] A holder of a conditional use permit, in addition to being
subject to a forfeiture prosecution for an ordinance
violation arising, may have such permit revoked by the
Village Board upon the holding of a hearing and finding of
a repeated or substantial violation of any applicable
provision of law.
(c) No conditional use permit shall be issued or renewed if the
owner of, or the residential property which is the subject of an
application, has any unpaid fees, taxes or forfeitures of any
kind owed to any governmental unit.
(d) A conditional use permit for a short-term rental unit/area may
be revoked by the Village Board for any of the following
reasons:
[1] Failure to make payment for any unpaid fees, taxes or
forfeitures of any kind owed to any governmental unit;
[2] Three or more calls for police service, building inspection
or the Health Department for nuisance activities or other
law violations in a consecutive twelve-month period;
[3] Failure to satisfy any required Village, county, and state
licensing requirements;
§ 335-86 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-86
326:621
§ 335-87. Other permits.
It is the responsibility of the permit applicant to secure all other necessary
permits required by any state, federal or local agency. This includes, but
is not limited to, a water use permit pursuant to Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., or a
wetland fill permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act.
§ 335-88. Site plan and building plan approval.
[4] Any violation of local, county, or state laws that
substantially harm or adversely impact the predominantly
residential uses and nature of the Village;
[5] Failure by a residential property owner to properly dispose
of trash upon the departure of a short-term renter, and in
all cases to arrange for trash removal not less than once a
week in addition to collecting on a daily basis all trash on
outside of the residential property not in trash containers.
(6) Room tax.
(a) Pursuant to § 66.0615(1m)(a), Wis. Stats., a tax is imposed on
the privilege of furnishing at retail, rooms or lodging to
customers by persons furnishing accommodations that are
available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is
required for the use of the accommodation.
(b) Such tax shall be at the rate of 7% of the gross receipts from
such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging.
(c) Such tax shall be collected from the customer when the
customer's bill is paid, and shall be paid by the residential
property owner to the Village Clerk on a quarterly basis: each
March, June, September, and December.
(d) Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed
by § 77.52(2), Wis. Stats. The proceeds of such tax shall be
remitted to and received by the village treasurer on or before
the 20th day of the month when due.
(e) Records retention. Every person liable for the tax imposed by
this subsection shall keep or cause to be kept such records,
receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as
required by the Village Clerk.
A. Intent. Site and building plan approval is required for certain types of
land uses permitted in this chapter. The approval of a site and building
plan is required for the following reasons:
(1) To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village.
§ 335-86 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-88
326:622
(2) To enhance the values of property throughout the Village.
(3) To avoid and prevent deterioration of the general appearance of
buildings, structures, signs, landscaping and open areas.
(4) To encourage and promote an efficient use of the land.
(5) To assure that site development takes into account the efficient
provision of vehicular and pedestrian access, public utilities,
stormwater management facilities and other elements of public
infrastructure and public facilities.
(6) To encourage and promote acceptability, attractiveness,
cohesiveness and compatibility of new structures, development,
remodeling and additions.
(7) To preserve and protect the appearance and aesthetic quality of the
Village.
B. Site and building plan approval requirements.
(1) No person shall commence any use, erect any structure or portion
thereof or obtain a building permit without first obtaining the
approval of site and building plans by the Building Board and Plan
Commission, as set forth in this section. All structures, unless
specifically excepted in this section, require site and building plan
review and approval by the Building Board. All structures, other
than single-family residences, also require site and building plan
review and approval by the Plan Commission.
(2) The Building Board and Plan Commission may require setbacks
larger than those required in the foregoing Zoning Districts.
C. Exemptions from site and building plan approval requirements. The
following facilities and uses are exempt from the site and building plan
approval requirements: [Amended 4-25-2006]
(1) Interior alterations that do not affect the structure's exterior
dimensions. Minor maintenance or repairs such as re-painting, residing,
re-roofing, window replacement and other repairs to the
exterior of a structure that do not alter the color, size, shape,
architectural character or illumination of the property or that do
not exceed $15,000.
(2) Signs that replace existing sign panels without changing the
dimensions or character of the sign and type or intensity of lighting
or illumination.
(3) Play structures, except as provided in § 335-88D(6)(k). Seasonal
play structures as defined in § 335-88D(6)(k)[1], swing sets,
basketball hoops, flagpoles, and ground barbecues. [Amended
3-25-2008]
§ 335-88 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-88
326:623
(4) Decorative fences pursuant to § 335-88(D)(6)(g).
(5) Retaining walls pursuant to § 335-88(D)(6)(h).
D. Procedure for site and building plan review and approval.
(1) Application. An applicant for a building permit that requires site
and building plan review shall apply to the Village for a certificate
of site and building plan approval on forms provided by the Zoning
Administrator and shall provide 15 eight-and-one-half-by-fourteeninch
copies and three eleven-by-seventeen-inch copies, at a scale of
1/8 inch or larger, of all submittal materials as described below,
together with the fee established by the Village Board of Trustees:
(a) A certified survey map prepared by a certified land surveyor or
plat map is required unless an exception is granted by the
Zoning Administrator. If an exception is granted, the applicant
must at least provide the boundary dimensions and lot area of
the legal parcel on which the structure is located.
(b) Existing and proposed grades, stormwater management basins
and drainage systems and structures with topographic
contours at intervals not exceeding two feet. The Zoning
Administrator may waive the grading map in situations where
there will be no alteration of existing grades.
(c) The shape, size, location, height and floor area of all structures
and the floor area and finished ground and basement floor
grades.
(d) Total acres of lot.
(e) Location and species of all existing trees over four inches in
diameter at a height of five feet from the ground.
(f) Natural features, such as wood lots, drainage ways, streams
and lakes or ponds, and man-made features, such as existing
roads and structures, with indication as to which are to be
retained and which are to be removed or altered.
(g) Adjacent properties and their uses shall be identified.
(h) Proposed streets, driveways, parking spaces, sidewalks and
other pedestrian or vehicular circulation facilities, with
indication of direction of travel for one-way streets and drives
and inside radii of all curves. The width of streets, driveways
and sidewalks and the total number of parking spaces shall be
shown.
(i) Architectural plans showing all exterior elevations and general
floor plans shall be provided for all new buildings. These
drawings and plans shall provide sufficient detail to indicate
the architectural design of the proposed buildings.
§ 335-88 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-88
326:624
(j) Landscape plan showing all new plantings and retained
existing plant materials. The landscape plan shall include the
number, species and size of materials at installation.
(k) The front elevation of the principal structures and samples of
exterior structure materials and colors.
(l) The location, general design and dimension of all signs,
including ground signs, wall signs, roof signs and directory
signs.
(m) The location, height, design, type and power of all exterior
lighting.
(n) The size and location of all existing and proposed public and
private utilities on the site.
(o) The name, address and telephone number of the owner,
developer and designer.
(p) For multifamily residential projects, the number and size of
dwelling units, anticipated resident population and the
anticipated population under 18 years of age.
(q) For nonresidential projects, the amount of floor area, the
number of anticipated employees and number of parking stalls.
(r) A tree root system preservation plan shall be submitted for
construction activity that requires a permit under this chapter
whenever conditions exist where a tree or trees on properties
that abut the construction site may be affected by the
construction activity. The plan shall indicate the methods that
are to be used to protect the existing tree root system. The
following items shall be identified on the tree root system
preservation plan: [Amended 1-26-2015]
[1] Trees located on abutting properties which are located
closer to the shared property line or lines than the
required building yard setback for the applicable zoning
district in which the properties are located.
[2] Areas on the property where proposed construction
activity is likely to occur and proposed building areas.
[3] Location of areas where building materials, spoils and
construction debris are to be placed or stored.
[4] The location of construction vehicle and equipment access
points, and areas where construction vehicles and
equipment are likely to be used and stored.
[5] Location of erosion control measures.
§ 335-88 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-88
326:625
[6] Any additional information that may be required by the
Village to obtain a more complete understanding of the
site.
(s) Any other information necessary to establish compliance with
this chapter and other applicable Village ordinances. [Added
1-26-2015]
(2) Schedule Building Board and Plan Commission meetings. Upon
receipt of a complete application, required submittal materials and
all applicable fees for a site and building plan approval, the Zoning
Administrator shall place the application on the agenda for the next
available Building Board meeting and, if applicable, on the next
available Plan Commission meeting. The applicant shall be given an
opportunity to make a presentation, and any interested party shall
be given the opportunity to comment.
(a) Preapplication review conference. Any applicant or
prospective applicant for any permit that requires site and
building plan approval may request a preliminary review
conference with the Zoning Administrator and Village staff. At
such conference, the staff shall review the preliminary exterior
drawings, sketches or photographic examples, landscape and
site plans and materials on a specific project and provide the
applicant with guidance in the development of a plan which
would be consistent with the requirements and purposes of
this section.
(b) Building Board and Plan Commission actions. The Building
Board and Plan Commission may approve, deny or approve
changes in the site plan and exterior design features, subject to
conditions established by the Building Board or Plan
Commission that are reasonably necessary to accomplish the
general purpose of this section.
[1] Decisions. The Building Board shall make a decision to
grant a building permit, deny a building permit or
schedule a public hearing on each application. Such
decision shall be reported in writing to the Village Clerk
within 48 hours following the Building Board meeting at
which an application is considered. The Village Clerk shall
report the Building Board's decision to the Building
Inspector.
[2] When the Building Board determines that a public hearing
is necessary to make a decision on any application, the
Village Clerk shall post a notice at least seven days before
the public hearing giving the time and place of the hearing
and the matters to be considered. All parties in interest, as
defined in this chapter, shall be mailed notice of the public
hearing. The Building Board shall grant or deny a building
§ 335-88 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-88
326:626
permit within 48 hours following the public hearing and
shall report its decision in writing to the Village Clerk.
[Amended 4-22-2008]
(3) Issuance of a certificate of site and building plan approval.
[Amended 9-24-2013]
(a) Upon approval of the site and building plans by the Building
Board and Plan Commission, as required in this chapter, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of site and
building plan approval. One copy of the application and
submittal materials upon which the certificate was granted
shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator and a second
copy shall be retained by the Building Inspector.
(b) Plans that have been approved by the Building Board and Plan
Commission and have been issued a certificate of site and
building plan approval shall not have any deviation. Any
deviation shall constitute a violation of this section.
(c) It shall be the Building Inspector and/or Zoning
Administrator’s responsibility to determine, while construction
is in progress and upon its completion, that there have been no
material deviations from the approved site and building plans.
(d) The Building Inspector and/or Zoning Administrator, or any
duly appointed officers of the Village, shall have the authority
to enter a property for which a certificate of site and building
plan approval has been issued to ensure compliance with the
approved site and building plan. In the event that there is a
refusal by the party in charge of a property to allow entry by
the Building Inspector and/or Zoning Administrator, an
application for a Special Inspection Warrant pursuant to Wis.
Stat. § 66.0119 shall be pursued.
(4) Issuance of a stop order. [Added 9-24-201353]
(a) A stop order may be issued by the Zoning Administrator and/or
Building Inspector for construction that is found to have
materially deviated from an approved site and building plan.
(b) While a stop order remains in effect, all construction,
demolition, or other activities shall be halted on the premises.
(c) The stop order shall remain in effect until site and building
plans, with demonstrated changes from previously approved
plans, have been resubmitted and approved by the Building
Board and/or Plan Commission as required by this chapter.
53.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection D(4), (5) and (6) as
Subsection D(6), (7) and (8), respectively.
§ 335-88 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-88
326:627
(d) If the Building Inspector finds that certain improvements
cannot be completed due to seasonal or other factors beyond
the control of the party performing the work and that
temporary occupancy prior to completion will not pose a health
or safety hazard, the Building Inspector may issue a temporary
occupancy permit bearing an expiration date which allows
reasonable time for completion of all required improvements.
(5) Revocation of building permits issued pursuant to site and building
plan approval. [Added 9-24-2013]
(a) An applicant or representative of an applicant who has been
issued a building permit for site and/or building plans
approved by the Building Board and/or Plan Commission may
have the permit revoked by the Building Inspector, with the
concurrence of the Zoning Administrator for failure to comply
with a stop order, upon issuance of multiple stop orders, or
upon more than two significant deviations from approved
plans.
(b) Revocation of permits shall follow the procedure as described
in § 106-3G.
(6) Occupancy permit. [Amended 9-24-2013]
(a) Before any occupancy permit may be issued authorizing the
use of any improvements constructed under the provisions of
this section, a final inspection of the premises must be
obtained. An occupancy permit will not be issued unless the
completed work is found to be in compliance with plans upon
which the certificate of site and building plan approval was
issued.
(b) Improvements in existence as of the effective date of this
section shall be in compliance with this section, but such
improvements shall be continuously maintained in a state of
good repair. The Building Inspector shall have the same
powers and authority to effectuate the proper maintenance of
preexisting improvements in a manner similar to
improvements for which a certificate has been issued.
(7) Letter of credit or cash deposit. The Village may require a letter of
credit or cash deposit guaranteeing that all grading, erosion
control, stormwater facilities, landscaping and restoration and
other site improvements required as a condition of site and
building plan approval will be installed. Said letter of credit or cash
deposit shall be for 110% of the estimated cost of installation based
on cost estimates provided by the Village Engineer. Such letter of
credit or cash deposit shall be retained by the Village until all
improvements have been approved by the Village Engineer, and
§ 335-88 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-88
326:628
accepted by the Village, if they are public improvements.
[Amended 9-24-2013]
(8) Criteria for site and building plan reviews. The Building Board and
Plan Commission in reviewing site and building plans will use
criteria that is not intended to restrict imagination, innovation or
variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles that can
result in creative solutions that will develop satisfactory visual
appearance within the Village, preserve taxable values and
promote the public health, safety and welfare. [Amended
6-24-2002; 4-26-2005; 4-25-2006; 3-25-2008; 10-28-2008;
6-26-2012; 9-24-2013]
(a) Landscape and site treatment.
[1] Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute
to beauty and do not detract from the utility of a
development, they shall be preserved and developed.
[2] Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance
architectural features, improve appearance, screen
parking areas and miscellaneous structures, provide
wildlife habitat, provide shade and enhance the
streetscape.
[3] Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain
plant varieties and other materials and by coordination
with landscaping or materials on adjacent developments.
[4] Plant materials shall be selected on the basis of size at
maturity, hardiness, tolerance for site specific
environmental conditions, screening value, wildlife habitat
values and all season appearance.
[5] Use of plants that are indigenous to the area shall be
encouraged.
[6] Nonnative plants that are considered a nuisance or
invasive species, such as purple loose strife, honeysuckle
and buckthorn shall not be used as plant materials.
[7] Plant specimens shall be of sufficient size and quality to
provide screening and landscape benefits within three
growing seasons from the time of planting. Trees planted
in front yard areas or in other highly visible areas where
they serve as a visual screen, should be at least two inches
in diameter and eight feet high at the time of planting.
Evergreens should be a minimum of six feet high at the
time of planting. Shrubs should be balled and burlapped
and a minimum of 18 inches high at the time of planting.
§ 335-88 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-88
326:629
[8] Irregular clusters of vegetation are generally preferable to
isolated specimens or regularly spaced rows of plantings.
[9] In locations where they will be susceptible to injury by
pedestrian or motor traffic, plants shall be protected by
appropriate curbs, tree guards or other devices.
[10] Planting in parking lot islands is required to break up
large expanses of parking stalls. Parking lots of over 24
vehicles shall have a minimum of one tree island not less
than 180 square feet for each 24 parking stalls or an
equivalent number of perimeter plantings or tree rows
that are designed as part of an overall landscape plan
acceptable to the Plan Commission.
[11] Large parking areas shall be treated with decorative
screens consisting of building wall extensions, plantings,
berms or other innovative means so as to screen parking
areas.
[12] Screening of service yards and other places that tend to be
unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing,
planting or combinations of these. Screening shall be
equally effective in winter and summer. Screens shall be
compatible and harmonious with the landscaping and site
treatments on neighboring properties.
[13] Prohibition of disturbing steep slopes. Steeply sloped
terrain with a natural grade of 25% or more may not be
regraded, built upon or otherwise disturbed. The Planning
Commission and Building Board may grant an exception to
this requirement where the area proposed for disturbance
is an isolated area no more than 20,000 square feet in size,
and provided that such disturbance is necessary for the
development to occur and does not alter the overall
topographical character of the site.
(b) Building design.
[1] Evaluation of appearance of a project shall be based on
quality of its design and relationship to surroundings.
Applicants are encouraged to consider architectural styles
and traditions appropriate to the area of the Village.
[2] Structures shall be compatible with neighboring
properties with respect to scale, proportion and materials.
[3] Structure design or exteriors shall not be so identical with
neighboring structures so as to create excessive monotony
or drabness.
§ 335-88 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-88
326:630
[4] Structures shall not be so out of character or incompatible
with respect to neighboring properties. The project should
enhance and contribute to the overall aesthetic qualities of
the neighborhood.
[5] Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of
structures and the design in which they are used. In
developments with multiple structures, all structures shall
be constructed with the same materials or those that are
architecturally harmonious.
[6] Residential principal structures shall exhibit design
continuity. Predominant materials, architectural
components, and details shall be repeated on all
elevations. A deviation for design purposes may be
considered if detailed materials, such as stone, brick or
stucco are used sparingly and only to establish a focal
point of interest to the design.
[7] Materials shall be of durable quality.
[8] Structure components, such as windows, doors, eaves and
parapets shall be proportionally related to one another.
[9] Exterior chimneys shall be anchored to the ground and
predominantly constructed of masonry products.
[10] Principal structure colors and color accents used on trims,
fascia and signage shall be coordinated and harmonious.
[11] Design, scale, architectural features, and materials used
for additions to principal structures shall be closely tied to
the architecture of the existing structure.
[12] Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware shall be
fully screened with materials that are coordinated with the
colors of the principal structure.
[13] Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage
yards and exterior work areas shall be screened on all
sides. Screening materials shall be coordinated with and
harmonious to the overall architectural character of the
principal structure. Screening materials meeting the
definition of accessory structure used in refuse and waste
removal areas, shall be exempt from side yard setback
requirements, rear yard setback requirements and
maximum square footage requirements of accessory
structures to allow for appropriate placement and size of
such screening materials.
(c) Additional considerations for accessory structures in the
nature of yard maintenance buildings.
§ 335-88 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-88
326:631
[1] Such structure shall not exceed 10 feet in height and shall
not exceed 150 square feet in area. No residential
property shall be allowed more than one such structure.
[2] All such structures shall be anchored to a permanent
concrete foundation.
[3] All such structures shall be constructed of materials and of
colors aesthetically consistent with those of the principal
structure so as not to cause, in the judgment of the
Building Board, a substantial depreciation in the property
values of neighboring properties. However, unattached
yard maintenance buildings having a roof or sides, using
metal sheets as an exterior, shall not be erected under this
chapter.
[4] Yard maintenance buildings shall comply with all the
setback and yard requirements of this chapter, including
requirements in § 335-11C(1). However, if any person shall
desire to erect a structure closer to the lot line than the
district setback and yard requirement, the applicant shall
present to the Building Board written consent of such
location from each adjoining neighbor to which the
structure shall be visible at any time of the year. If such
written permission is not obtained and presented to the
Building Board, then the Building Board shall delay the
approval of the building permit until a subsequent
meeting, and each affected adjoining property owner shall
be notified of the time, date and place of a public hearing
to be held on the matter.
[5] Bushes, trees and shrubs may be required, if deemed
necessary by the Building Board, to enhance the
appearance of or to adequately screen such structures.
(d) In-ground private swimming pools. In-ground private
swimming pools are permitted in any district, except the
floodland and wetland districts, provided that:
[1] All private swimming pools constructed, installed or
enlarged within the Village of Elm Grove shall be located
within a completely enclosed, permanent structure, except
as provided herein.
[2] No person shall construct, install or enlarge or alter a
private swimming pool unless a building permit shall have
first been obtained from the Building Inspector.
Application for a pool permit, accompanied by a permit fee
as determined from time to time by the Village Board, shall
be on forms provided by the Building Inspector and shall
be accompanied by plans drawn to an accepted
engineering or architectural scale showing pool
§ 335-88 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-88
326:632
dimensions and volume of water in gallons; location and
type of wastewater disposal system; location of the pool
on the lot and distances from lot lines; and fencing and
landscaping plan or a combination thereof.
[3] All private swimming pools shall be constructed, installed,
enlarged or altered in accordance with the following
requirements:
[a] Private swimming pools shall comply with all the
setback and yard requirements of this chapter.
[b] The private swimming pool shall be completely fenced
before filling by a fence or wall which complies with
§ 335-88D(6)(g) of this chapter, at least 36 inches in
height, constructed of a material approved by the
Building Board. Access to the swimming pool shall be
controlled by a gate which shall be equipped with selfclosing
and self-latching devices at the top of the gate.
Fence posts shall be decay- or corrosion-resistant and
shall be set in concrete bases.
[c] No direct connection shall be made to the sanitary
sewer or septic system.
[d] No gaseous chlorination shall be permitted.
[e] There shall be an unobstructed concrete areaway
around the entire pool of at least three feet in width on
in-ground pools.
[f] Heating units, pumps and filter equipment shall in no
case be less than 20 feet from any property line and
shall be adequately housed and muffled so that the
equipment is inaudible at the property line.
[g] No water shall be discharged from a private swimming
pool onto an adjacent property.
[h] Existing pools are exempt from these requirements;
however, the failure to fill an existing private pool with
an amount of water normally required for its proper
use and the failure to actually use the private
swimming pool for a minimum period of five days
within a period of one year shall be considered a
discontinuation of use and shall thereafter require
compliance with the above regulations.
[4] All electrical installations provided for, installed or used in
conjunction with a private swimming pool shall be in
conformance with Chapter ILHR 16 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code and NEC 680. No current carrying
§ 335-88 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-88
326:633
conductors shall cross private swimming pools, either
overhead or underground, or within 15 feet of such pools.
All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent
to swimming pools, which might become electrically alive
as a result of broken overhead conductors or from other
cause, shall be effectively grounded.
[5] No private swimming pool shall be so operated, used or
maintained so as to create a nuisance or otherwise result
in a substantial adverse effect on neighboring properties
with respect to compatible appearance and value, or to be
in any other way detrimental to the public health, safety
and welfare. The Building Inspector shall refer all
complaints or questions under this section to the Building
Board, which shall have the authority to issue an
appropriate order to terminate the condition complained
of. The Building Board, by delegation of authority through
this chapter, shall have the jurisdiction to approve, deny or
impose appropriate changes or safeguards. Its decision
shall be based upon the avoidance of a substantial adverse
effect upon property values in the neighborhood.
[6] A swimming pool and its appurtenant facilities shall be
kept clean and in a sanitary condition.
(e) Above-ground swimming pools are permitted in any district
except the floodland and wetland districts, provided that:
[1] No private swimming pool capable of having an
aboveground water depth of more than two feet shall be
initially constructed, installed, enlarged or altered in the
Village of Elm Grove after December 31, 1997, and no
permit shall be granted for such purposes. For purposes of
this chapter, the aboveground depth of water shall be
measured from the lowest elevation of the ground at which
any vertical surface of the swimming pool is exposed to the
uppermost edge of the swimming pool.
[2] Any aboveground pool constructed or installed prior to
December 31, 1997, shall constitute a nonconforming
structure, and total lifetime repairs shall not exceed 50%
of the current value of the pool. If destroyed or damaged to
the extent of more than 50% of its current value, the
above-ground pool shall not be restored except so as to
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
[3] This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the
construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of hot
tubs.
(f) Private tennis courts are permitted in any district except the
floodway and wetland districts, provided that:
§ 335-88 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-88
326:634
[1] All building permit applications for private tennis courts
shall be reviewed by the Building Board;
[2] A permit fee, as determined from time to time by the
Village Board, shall be required for each permit;
[3] All tennis courts may have a backstop on each end and side
fencing, as defined in Article XII of this chapter, and side
fences;
[4] Lighting installed around a tennis court shall be in
accordance with § 335-65;
[5] All tennis courts shall be maintained in a safe and clean
condition, and shall be operated in such a manner that
they will not create a nuisance or otherwise result in an
adverse impact on neighboring properties; and
[6] All tennis courts shall comply with the setback and other
yard requirements in the district in which they are located.
(g) Fences. [Amended 2-23-2015]
[1] Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the
following terms shall have the following meanings:
ARCHITECTURAL SCREENING DEVICE — Any standing
Fence or wall-type structure, connected directly to a
principal structure employed for screening, ornamental,
decorative, signage, or landmark purposes.
FENCE — A structure which creates an enclosure, barrier
or boundary, having a set or permanent location in the
ground, or which is attached to something having a
permanent location in the ground. All Fences shall be
constructed in such a manner that structural support
components shall be placed on the interior side of the
Fence in order to minimize their visibility off premises.
Fences include Architectural Screening Devices,
Decorative Fences, Garden Fences, Open Fences and Solid
Fences.
DECORATIVE FENCE — A fence that is an Open Fence
designed to decorate, accent or frame a feature of the
landscape or premises and that is not longer than 40 feet
in linear length in the aggregate.
GARDEN FENCE — Any structure in the nature of a Fence,
which defines the boundary of a garden or planting bed,
does not exceed 36 inches in height and is intended to
be used to impede access by wildlife to the planted area.
A Garden Fence shall not enclose a cumulative area of
more than 750 square feet on one property and may be
§ 335-88 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-88
326:635
constructed of wire-type materials, except for razor or
barbed wire or chain-link-type fence.
OPEN FENCE — Open Fences are those with more than
50% of their surface area open for free passage of light
and air. The meaning of 50% open space shall be that
for a given width of fence material (i.e., an individual
picket), an equal or greater amount of open space is to be
provided in between said fence material. Examples of such
Fences include picket, rail, and wrought iron, which are
not merely ornamental.
SOLID FENCE — Solid Fences are those with 50% or less
surface open for free passage of light and air and designed
to conceal from view the area behind them. Examples
of such Fences are stockade, board-on-board, board and
batten, basket weave and louvered fences.
[2] Fences are permitted in all districts, except the Floodway
and Wetland Districts, provided that:
[a] No person shall erect or construct any type of Fence
except a "Garden Fence" as defined in this section, on
any property in the Village of Elm Grove without first
having submitted an application and fee therefor; and
obtained a permit for such fence construction.
[b] All applications to construct an Architectural
Screening Device, a Decorative Fence, or an Open
Fence shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator
or his or her duly authorized designee, who thereafter
may issue a building permit. In the event that the
Zoning Administrator or his or her duly authorized
designee concludes that the proposed Fence does not
qualify as an Architectural Screening Device,
Decorative Fence, or an Open Fence, the Building
Board shall conduct a review of the associated
application and approve or deny issuance of a building
permit.
[3] Open Fences, Architectural Screening Devices and
Decorative Fences Requirements.
[a] All Open Fences and Decorative Fences located closer
to a property line than the required setback and other
yard requirements for the district in which they are
located shall not exceed four feet in height. The height
of a fence shall be measured from the average existing
grade beginning at its lowest level at ground level on
the outside of the fence. In the event that a fence is
constructed on a hill or berm, it shall be reduced in
height to compensate for the height of the berm or hill
§ 335-88 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-88
326:636
to avoid exceeding the overall fence height. Structural
ornamental posts protruding no more than six inches
above the maximum allowed height of a fence may be
permitted.
[b] Open Fences and Decorative Fences which comply
with the required setback and other yard
requirements for the district in which they are located
shall not exceed 6 1/2 feet in height. Structural
ornamental posts protruding no more than six inches
above the maximum allowed height of a fence may be
permitted.
[c] Open Fences, Decorative Fences and Architectural
Screening Devices shall be constructed of wood, or
other wood-simulated natural-appearing materials,
wrought iron or other metal materials generally
employed to achieve an aesthetically consistent
appearance. Except as otherwise provided in
Subsection D(8)(g)[1], "Garden Fence," no barbed
wire, chain link or other wire-type material shall be
used in any fence hereafter constructed within the
Village of Elm Grove unless a variance for such
material has been granted.
[d] No Open Fence or Architectural Screening Device
shall project forward of the rear line of the principal
building, except for Decorative Fences. In the event
that there is more than one rear line present on a
principal building, that rear line closest to the front of
the building shall be considered the rear line for
purpose of this section.
[e] An Architectural Screening Device may be
constructed with less than 50% of its surface area
open for free passage of light and air, provided that:
[i] The device is directly connected to an existing
principal structure;
[ii] The device complies with setback requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located;
[iii] The height shall not exceed six feet; and
[iv] The linear length, in aggregate, shall not be
greater than 20 feet.
[f] In addition to complying with other provisions of this
section, Decorative Fences may be located in a side,
rear or street yard setback, provided that they do not
exceed 4 1/2 feet in height. Decorative Fences that
§ 335-88 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-88
326:637
comply with setback requirements may not exceed
6 1/2 feet in height.
[i] Any Fence in excess of 40 feet in linear length
shall be regulated as either an Open Fence or
Solid Fence and be subject to the requirements
under this chapter.
[g] It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
demonstrate on a certified plat of survey the exact
location of the proposed fence, but excluding garden
fences as defined by this section.
[4] Solid Fences, or any Open Fence proposal at variance with
the aforesaid standards, shall be examined by the Building
Board. A variance from the terms of this chapter may be
granted by the Building Board, but only after a public
hearing before said Board.
[a] The Building Board, in reviewing a proposed Fence,
shall take into consideration the character or shape of
the lot or parcel of land and the placement of the
residence thereon, the architectural appearance,
including the compatibility with adjourning structure
and landscaping; and if the proposed fence is to be
located on a residential parcel, whether a hardship is
demonstrated as a result of its proximity to parcels
zoned as B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1, or I-1 or any active
railroad property, or any state or county highway.
[b] Upon receipt of such a fence application, notice of the
public hearing shall be given via U.S. Mail to any
adjoining neighbor located in a radius of 100 feet from
the proposed fence. Notice of the public hearing shall
require a Class 2 publication notice. The notice shall
invite each neighbor to offer reasons for approval or
disapproval of the application as submitted. The
reason should be communicated to the Village, in
writing, or given testimony at the review meeting. All
position statements received shall be included with
the review materials and shall be considered during
the review.
[c] After the public hearing, the Building Board may grant
or reject such request for a variance.
[5] Upon the destruction of any fence in the Village of Elm
Grove, or deterioration by the elements or otherwise to
more than 50% of its condition or extent when originally
erected, no fence may be constructed in place of such
destroyed or deteriorated fence without having first
complied with the terms and requirements of this section.
§ 335-88 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-88
326:638
[6] Any fence erected or constructed after August 10, 1959,
and for which a permit was not secured under the terms of
the Building Code of the Village of Elm Grove, which first
incorporated a requirement for a permit for the
construction of a fence as of such date, and which did not
comply with the terms relating to fences in the Building
Code as of such date, shall be brought into compliance
with this fence ordinance on or before August 1, 1978,
unless an application for the granting of a variance shall
be made to the Building Board and the Building Board has
granted such requested variance in the manner described
in this present fence ordinance.
(h) Retaining walls.
[1] Definition. For purpose of this section, a retaining wall or
like structure is one used for a gardening, screening,
stabilizing, ornamental, drainage, decorative or landmark
purpose. Included in this definition are monuments,
columns and other similar property entrance features. For
retaining walls, "height" is defined as the vertically
exposed surface area of the wall.
[2] Permit required.
[a] No person shall construct, install, enlarge, reconstruct
or replace any retaining wall or like structure unless a
permit therefor has first been obtained from the
Zoning and Planning Administrator or his/her
authorized designee and all other provisions of this
section are complied with; provided, however, that the
following types of retaining walls shall not be required
to obtain a permit:
[i] Edgings. Edgings less than six inches in height of
stone, brick, decorative concrete block or other
materials around driveways, patios, gardens,
flowerbeds, plantings or trees.
[ii] Decorative walls. Decorative walls not in excess of
30 inches in height and located at least five feet
from the lot line used around gardens, plantings,
trees, patios or driveways and constructed of
natural stone, decorative concrete block or brick.
[b] Applications for such permit shall be on forms
provided by the Village and shall be accompanied by a
fee prescribed by the Village Board of Trustees via
resolution and such other items as are deemed
necessary or appropriate. The Zoning and Planning
Administrator or his/her authorized designee shall
have the authority, as a condition to granting such
§ 335-88 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-88
326:639
permit, to require such additions, changes and
safeguards as he/she determines to be necessary or
appropriate to carry out the provisions of this section.
[3] Requisite submittal materials. All applications for
structural retaining walls and like structures shall include
the following information:
[a] A certified plat of survey of the affected property,
including identification of the proposed location of the
structure;
[b] A scaled drawing of what the structure will look like
upon completion, unless an exception is granted by
the Zoning and Planning Administrator or his/her
authorized designee;
[c] A listing of materials to be used;
[d] A topographic map illustrating drainage flow
conditions both before and after installation
(applicable only to retaining walls), unless an
exception is granted by the Zoning and Planning
Administrator or his/her authorized designee; and
[e] Any other information deemed reasonable/necessary
in order to effectuate a competent review of the
application.
[4] Administration of applications.
[a] The Zoning and Planning Administrator or his/her
authorized designee may issue a permit for a retaining
wall or like structure which conforms to all of the
following:
[i] Not more than four feet in height and one foot or
more from a property line;
[ii] Not constructed in a drainageway, drainage swale
or drainage easement;
[iii] Is of structurally sound materials, form and color
that are harmonious with the surroundings; and
[iv] Is properly and safely installed per the
manufacturer's guidelines.
[b] Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Zoning
Administrator or his or her duly authorized designee
may forward a permit application on to the Building
Board if it is determined that such review and
approval is necessary.
§ 335-88 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-88
326:640
[5] Prohibited materials. Railroad ties and other similar
materials that may pose environmental safety concerns
are prohibited as materials for use when constructing
retaining walls and like features in the Village of Elm
Grove.
[6] Any application for a permit under this section for any
retaining wall or like structure designed to be more than
four feet high or proposed to be located closer than one
foot to a property line shall be referred to the Building
Board. Furthermore, any application proposing the
construction of a retaining wall greater than four feet in
height shall be accompanied by detailed plans approved by
a professional engineer licensed in the State of Wisconsin.
No permit shall be issued unless and until the Building
Board approves the proposed retaining wall or like
structure as to appearance, materials, location, structural
integrity and drainage. Said referral shall be done in a
manner consistent with § 335-88D(6)(g)[3].
(i) Signs.
[1] Signs shall be compatible with respect to size, proportions,
materials and color with nearby structures and
surroundings.
[2] A signs shall be designed as an integral architectural
element of the structure and site to which it principally
relates.
[3] The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be
restrained and harmonious with the structure and site to
which it principally relates.
[4] The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to
the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message
and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign
face.
[5] Developers of projects, such as shopping centers or
structures with more than one tenant, shall submit a
comprehensive description of a uniform signage system so
that individual business or tenant signs will be harmonious
and compatible with the overall design of the structure
and site.
[6] Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation
logos shall conform to the criteria for all other signs.
(j) Accessory structures, lighting, street furniture and utility
service.
§ 335-88 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-88
326:641
[1] Accessory structures, street furniture and lighting shall be
designed to be harmonious with the architectural
character, concept and style of the primary structure.
Materials shall be compatible with respect to size,
proportion, materials and colors of the principal structure.
[2] All exterior lighting must conform to the requirements in
§ 335-65D.
[3] All commercial exterior parking areas must be illuminated.
[4] Illuminating curb cuts and entrances to parking areas is
encouraged.
[5] All exterior lighting shall be energy efficient and shall be
located, oriented and of an intensity to illuminate only the
building site or lot, where located, without detrimentally
affecting activity on adjacent sites or lots or traffic on
streets and highways.
[6] Lighting shall not be located on the roofs of buildings. Any
lights affixed to a building shall be oriented downward at
an angle from the vertical so as to light only areas of the
site.
[7] Lights may not flash, pulsate, be so bright as to impair or
hinder vision on public streets or adjacent building sites or
otherwise constitute a nuisance.
[8] Mixing of lighting types (i.e., sodium vapor, incandescent,
mercury vapor and metal halide) should be avoided.
[9] Integration of similar lighting fixtures is encouraged.
[10] Lighting in connection with parking areas and
miscellaneous structures shall be part of the architectural
concept. Fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories
shall be harmonious with structure design.
[11] Exterior lighting shall be designed and located to minimize
its illumination and glare as seen from neighboring
properties and public rights-of-way.
[12] Where feasible, utility service lines and associated boxes
and hardware shall be installed underground. Where
placement underground is not feasible, utility service and
hardware shall be located and designed to be as
unobtrusive as is feasible.
[13] Area floodlighting shall not be mounted on the building
except at the loading dock, in which case a hooded light
fixture will be used to direct lighting downward rather
than toward adjoining properties.
§ 335-88 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-88
326:642
[14] Lighting fixtures should match the color, style and height
of streetscape light fixtures, where appropriate.
[15] The use of colored light bulbs or spotlights is discouraged.
[16] Exterior lighting should be presented in a lighting plan
which identifies all exterior lighting features, either
mounted on the building or freestanding, along with
dispersion pattern, intensity of light and cut-off shielding
that reflects away from the roadway. Light distribution
should not spill over between adjacent parcels. Passersby
should not be able to see the light source, and glare should
be minimized.
[17] Overpowering light levels should not be used.
[18] Lighting highlighting landscaping is encouraged.
(k) Play structure; play house.
[1] Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
PLAY STRUCTURE — A detached structure which can be
or is intended to be used by minors to engage in commonly
accepted play activities.
PLAY HOUSE — A play structure or component thereof,
which is covered or partially covered and which has at
least three walls or sides, and is placed on or attached to
the ground and not entirely located on and supported by a
tree, such as a tree house.
SEASONAL PLAY STRUCTURE — A play structure that
is not permanently attached to the ground, is ordinarily
not intended for year-round usage because of its design or
limited usefulness and is removed during the off season of
use.
[2] General regulations.
[a] Play structures shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Any
play structure taller than 15 feet in height at any point
shall be subject to Plan Commission review and
approval.
[b] A play house shall not have a footprint area exceeding
100 square feet or a height greater than 10 feet,
unless it is part of a multi-use play structure, in which
case § 335-88D(6)[2][a] applies. Any play house
exceeding these dimensions shall be considered an
accessory structure and shall be subject to all
ordinances governing accessory structures. Any play
house with electrical or water capabilities shall be
§ 335-88 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-88
326:643
subject to all applicable building permits and
inspections and shall be subject to Plan Commission
review and approval.
[c] Seasonal play structures shall be exempt from the
requirements set forth in this § 335-88D(6)(k).
[d] Play houses shall not be used as yard maintenance
buildings. No more than one yard maintenance
building and one play house shall be allowed on any
residential property. No residential property shall
have more than one play house.
[e] Play structures and play houses shall not be located in
street yards.
[f] Play houses and play structures shall comply with the
setback requirements of the applicable zoning district.
At no point shall any portion of a play house or play
structure project into a required setback area unless
written consent is provided by all abutting property
owners and filed with the Zoning Administrator. Such
written consent must contain original signatures
accompanied by [a] a reasonable depiction of the
proposed play structure or play house and its
placement, including dimensions and property
boundaries and [b] a brochure or other documentation
which identifies and illustrates height, width, length,
features, construction material list, and completed
appearance of the proposed play house or play
structure.
[3] Plan Commission review. Any play structure or play house
which is not clearly exempted from review under
§ 335-88D(6)(k)[2] shall be referred to the Plan
Commission. Each abutting property owner shall be
notified of the time, date, and place of the relevant Plan
Commission meeting. The Plan Commission may deny,
approve, or conditionally approve the proposed play
structure or play house. The Plan Commission shall have
discretion, in the absence of a self-imposed hardship
situation, to grant a conditional approval which deviates
from the requirements of § 335-88D(6)(k)[2] only after
considering potential screening, layout modifications,
impact on neighboring properties and imposing removal
timelines.
[4] Minimum standards for maintenance. All play structures
shall be properly maintained or otherwise protected to
prevent deterioration or a negative impact upon
neighboring properties.
§ 335-88 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-89
326:644
§ 335-89. Development agreement.
Any development that requires site plan review or public improvement
may require the execution of a development agreement. The development
agreement shall be a written contract in recordable form.
§ 335-90. Appeals.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decisions of the Building Board
related to plan review may appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Such appeal shall be filed with the Village Clerk, together with the
applicable fee, as determined from time to time by the Village Board, within
30 days after filing of the decision with the Zoning Administrator.
A. The purpose of the development agreement shall be to guarantee to the
Village of Elm Grove the timely completion of development projects in
compliance with all Village ordinances and to guarantee the
reimbursement of all out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Village.
B. The development agreement shall require timely completion of the
public and private improvements in the project and, in the event of the
failure thereof, completion by the Village at the property owner's
expense. The development agreement shall require the property owner
to reimburse the Village of Elm Grove for any expenses previously or
thereafter incurred by it in connection with the project or the
development agreement, including, but not limited to, legal fees,
administrative fees, engineering fees, architectural fees, appraisal fees,
inspection fees and surveying expenses. The development agreement
shall further require adequate collateral in favor of the Village of Elm
Grove in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit or other suitable
security to assure payment of all Village expenses and the completion of
the public improvements in the project at no cost to the Village in the
event of a default by the property owner. The development agreement
shall deem it to be an event of default if the letter of credit or security is
at any time less than 110% of the estimated cost to complete the public
improvements in the project, or is allowed to come within 15 days of
expiration without renewal thereof, on the same terms and conditions.
The development agreement may contain such other terms, conditions
or requirements as may be deemed appropriate by the Village of Elm
Grove.
C. Prior to the execution of any development agreement by the Village of
Elm Grove, all expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the
project or the development agreement shall be reimbursed to the
Village.
D. A development agreement shall not be required in any situation where
the Plan Commission so determines by resolution, provided that it
determines that the nature of the undertaking does not involve land in
excess of two acres and/or a project cost in excess of $500,000.
§ 335-89 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-91
326:645
§ 335-91. Permit fees; review fees; other fees; fee schedules.
§ 335-92. Violations and penalties.
A. Permit fees; review fees; other fees.
(1) Permit fees. All persons, firms or corporations performing work
which by this chapter requires the issuance of a permit shall pay a
permit fee for such permit to the Village Clerk to defray the cost of
administration, investigation, advertising and processing of
permits and variances. The fee for permits shall be nonrefundable
and shall be set by the Village Board from time to time.
(2) Review fees. Applicants for permits will also be charged review
fees equivalent to the cost to the Village for reviews conducted by
the consulting Village Planner, Village Engineer, Village Attorney or
any other consultants engaged by the Village to review an
application or development proposal. The Village may require
permit applicants to pay a deposit toward such review fees. Any
portion of the deposit that is not used by the Village for review fees
shall be returned to the applicant.
(3) Other fees. Applicants shall also be required to pay fees equivalent
to the cost to the Village for legal work associated with drafting
development agreements or other documents associated with the
application and engineering, design and inspection fees for public
improvements that are associated with the permit
B. Fee schedules shall be approved and periodically updated by the Village
Board by resolution. [Amended 6-27-2016]
A. It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land or to use
water or air in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. In case
of any violation, the Village Board, the Zoning Administrator or the Plan
Commission may institute appropriate action.
B. The Zoning Administrator or the Building Inspector may issue a stop
order as described in § 335-83G of this chapter to halt progress or
occupancy on improvements or use which violates any of the provisions
of this chapter, or proceedings to enjoin a violation of this chapter or
cause a structure to be vacated or removed.
C. Remedial actions. Whenever an order of the Zoning Administrator has
not been complied with within the time specified within the written
notice mailed to the owner, resident agent or occupant of the premises,
the Village Board, the Zoning Administrator or the Village Attorney may
institute appropriate legal action or proceedings to prohibit such
owner, agent or occupant from using such structure, land or water.
D. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions
of this chapter or any order of the Zoning Administrator issued in
§ 335-91 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-92
326:646
§ 335-92.1. Comprehensive Plan. [Added 11-27-2007]
accordance with this chapter or resists enforcement shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
A. Pursuant to § 62.23(2) and (3) of the Wisconsin Statutes, the Village of
Elm Grove is authorized to prepare and adopt a Comprehensive Plan as
defined in § 66.1001(1)(a) and 66.1001(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes,
and has been working with the Ad Hoc Comprehensive Planning
Committee and Planning and Design Institute (a consultant) in
preparing a Comprehensive Plan for the Village.
B. The Village Plan Commission and the Village Board have adopted
written procedures designed to foster public participation during
preparation of the Village's Comprehensive Plan as required under
§ 66.1001(4)(a) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
C. The Village Plan Commission has held a public hearing on the proposed
Comprehensive Plan on Wednesday August 1, 2007, in compliance with
the requirements of § 66.1001(4)(d) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
D. The Village Plan Commission of the Village of Elm Grove, by majority
vote of the entire Commission as recorded in its official minutes, has
adopted a resolution on Monday, August 6, 2007, recommending to the
Village Board the adoption of the Village of Elm Grove Comprehensive
Plan,54 containing all of the required elements specified in § 66.1001(2)
of the Wisconsin Statutes.
E. The Village Board of the Village of Elm Grove, Wisconsin, does, by
enactment of this section, formally adopt the document entitled "Village
of Elm Grove Comprehensive Plan" pursuant to § 66.1001(4)(c) of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
54.Editor's Note: The Village of Elm Grove Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Village
offices.
§ 335-92 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-92.1
326:647

ARTICLE XII
Definitions
§ 335-93. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall be used.
Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
includes the plural number; and the plural number includes the singular
number. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
§ 335-94. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A ZONES — Areas of potential flooding, shown on the Village's Flood
Insurance Rate Map, which would be inundated by the regional flood as
defined herein. These numbers are AO, A1 to A99 or are unnumbered A
Zones. The A Zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending
on the availability of data for a given area.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A detached structure, including, but not limited
to, a yard maintenance or storage building, subordinate to the principal use
of a structure or land and located on the same lot or parcel and serving a
purpose that is customarily incidental to the principal use of the land or the
principal structure.
ACCESSORY USE — A use subordinate to the principal use of a structure,
land or water and located on the same lot or parcel serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the principal use or the principal structure.
ACRE, NET — A quantity of land containing 160 square rods, 4,840 square
yards or 43,560 square feet of land, in whatever shape, but which does not
include land dedicated for purposes of a public right-of-way (including, but
not limited to, a public street).
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial portion
of its stock-in-trade for sale, rent, lease, inspection or viewing books, films,
videocassettes, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating
to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below,
and, in conjunction therewith, having facilities for the presentation of adult
entertainment, as defined below, including adult-oriented films, movies or
live performances, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT CABARET — A cabaret which features topless dancers, go-go
dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar
entertainers.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any motion pictures, live
performance, display or dance of any type which has, as a significant
or substantial portion of such performance, or is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on, any actual or simulated performance of
specified sexual activities or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical
§ 335-93 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-94
326:649
areas, as defined below, appearing unclothed or the removal of articles of
clothing to reveal specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of fewer than 50 persons used for presenting material having as
its dominant theme, or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on,
matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material having as
its dominant theme, or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on,
matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Includes, but is not limited to,
adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult mini-motion-picture
theaters or adult cabarets and further means any premises to which public
patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically
arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls
separate from the common area of the premises for the purposes of viewing
adult-oriented motion pictures or wherein an entertainer provides adult
entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, whether or
not such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for
a profit, direct or indirect. Adult-oriented establishment further includes,
without being limited to, any adult entertainment studio or any premises
that is physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or
represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance
studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other
term of like import.
ARCHITECTURAL SCREENING DEVICE — Shall have the meaning found
under § 335-88D(8)(g).[Added 2-23-2015]
ARTERIAL STREET — A public street or highway used or intended to
be used primarily for through traffic. Arterial streets and highways shall
include freeways and expressways as well as parkways.
BACKSTOP — A fence, wire screen or net intended to stop a ball from going
too far, as in baseball or tennis. Because of their function, backstops are
usually greater in height than other fences provided for in this chapter.
BASEMENT — That portion of any structure which is below grade, or which
is partly below and partly above grade but so located that the vertical
distance from the grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance
from the grade to the ceiling.
BLIGHTING INFLUENCE — A condition having an adverse effect on the
health, safety, welfare or economic value of surrounding properties or the
Village of Elm Grove in general or which endangers life and property by fire
or other causes.
§ 335-94 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-94
326:650
BUFFER YARD — A minimum offset area between any building, off-street
parking or landing space and any residential district which shall serve to
buffer, protect, screen and/or shield residential property from adjacent land
which allows a use which might have a negative impact on the protected
property.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
equipment, machinery or materials.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — See "accessory building."
BUILDING AREA — The total area bounded by the exterior walls of the
principal structures and all accessory structures on a parcel.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The distance measured from the grade line or
ground elevation at its lowest intersect with the building foundation on the
side of the structure where the principal entrance is located to the highest
point of the structure.[Amended 9-10-2001]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which the principal use of the lot on
which it is located is conducted.
BUILDING, YARD MAINTENANCE — A detached structure used for the
storage of garden and cultivating tools, lawn mowers, snow blowers, yard
maintenance equipment and similar tools and supplies.
BUSINESS — An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies
time, attention, labor and materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited or
sold, or where services are offered, other than home occupations.
BUSINESS CENTER — A unified development in single or common
ownership or control which includes two or more establishments with a
common or separate entrances in a building or buildings of integrated and
harmonious design, together with adequate and properly arranged traffic,
parking and landscape facilities.
BUSINESS SITE — A property and/or structure in single or common
ownership or control on which one or more business establishments are
located with one main common entrance.
CARPORT — A shelter that has open sides for the storage of cars and that
is directly attached to the side of a principal dwelling structure.[Added
12-15-2014]
CHANNEL — Those floodlands normally occupied by a stream, lake bed or
other body of water under average annual high-water flow conditions while
confined within generally well-established banks.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which collects traffic from local streets
and conveys it to arterial streets and highways, including the principal
entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation
within such a development.
COMMUNICATION FACILITIES — Transmitting towers, receiving towers,
cellular tower facilities, relay facilities and microwave stations.
§ 335-94 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-94
326:651
COMMUNITY-BASED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY (CBRF) — Shall have the
meaning as indicated and as defined in Wisconsin Statutes § 50.01 as
existing on or before September 28, 2011, except that as amended herein. It
is a State of Wisconsin licensed care facility where five or more adults who
are not related to the operator or administrator and who do not require care
above intermediate-level nursing care reside and receive care, treatment
or services that are above the level of room and board but that include no
more than three hours of nursing care per week per resident or additional
hours as authorized under Wisconsin Statutes § 50.035(10). Services such
as a commercial kitchen, recreational activities, financial services, general
store, transportation, and health and beauty services which may be services
available to a resident of the CBRF and are not expressly open to the public
shall not be considered as a separate use within the I-1 Zoning District but
may only be allowed if each service is specifically approved as a part of the
conditional use by the Village Board. “Community-based residential facility"
does not include any of the following:[Added 11-22-2011]
A convent or facility owned or operated by members of a religious order
exclusively for the reception and care or treatment of members of that
order.
A.
A facility or private home that provides care, treatment, and services
only for victims of domestic abuse, as defined in Wisconsin Statutes
§ 49.165(1)(a), and their children.
B.
C. A shelter facility as defined in Wisconsin Statutes § 16.308(1)(d).
place that provides lodging for individuals and in which all of the
following conditions are met:
Each lodged individual is able to exit the place under emergency
conditions without the assistance of another individual; and
(1)
No lodged individual receives from the owner, manager or operator
of the place or the owner's, manager's or operator's agent or
employee any of the following:
Personal care, supervision or treatment, or management,
control or supervision of prescription medications; or
(a)
Care or services other than board, information, referral,
advocacy or job guidance; location and coordination of social
services by an agency that is not affiliated with the owner,
manager or operator, for which arrangements were made for
an individual before he or she lodged in the place; or, in the
case of an emergency, arrangement for the provision of health
care or social services by an agency that is not affiliated with
the owner, manager or operator.
(b)
(2)
D.
E. An adult family home.
F. A residential care apartment complex.
§ 335-94 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-94
326:652
CONDITIONAL USES — Uses of a special nature as to make impractical
their predetermination as a principal use in a district.
DECORATIVE FENCE — Shall have the meaning found under
§ 335-88D(8)(g).[Added 2-23-2015]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, construction of or additions or
substantial improvements to building, other structures or accessory uses,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations
or disposition of materials.
DISTRICT, BASIC — A part or parts of the Village for which the regulations
of this chapter governing the use and location of land and buildings are
uniform (such as the Residential, Commercial and Industrial District
classifications).
DISTRICT, OVERLAY — Provide for the possibility of superimposing certain
additional requirements upon a basic zoning district without disturbing
the requirements of the basic district. Unless otherwise provided, in the
instance of conflicting requirements, the stricter of the conflicting
requirements shall apply.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — An establishment used for the sale, dispensing
or serving of food, refreshments or beverages in or on disposable plates
and cups; including those establishments where customers may serve
themselves and may eat and drink the food, refreshments and beverages on
or off the premises.
DRYLAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the regional
flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land
which is outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above
the regional flood elevation and wide enough to accommodate wheeled
vehicles.
DWELLING — A building designed or used exclusively as a residence or
sleeping place, but does not include boarding or lodging houses, motels,
hotels, tents, cabins or mobile homes.
DWELLING, EFFICIENCY — A dwelling unit consisting of one principal
room with no separate sleeping rooms.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A residential building designed for or
occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence
not to exceed the number of dwelling units provided.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, SPLIT-LEVEL — A multi-level dwelling with one or more levels
above grade, and one level half above grade and half below grade. A portion
of the lower level is commonly devoted to utility functions, such as the
home heating system and the laundry. The lowest level may or may not have
exterior access. A split-level dwelling may also be called a "bi-level" or "trilevel"
dwelling.
§ 335-94 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-94
326:653
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building containing two separate
dwelling (or living) units, designed for occupancy by not more than two
families.
DWELLING UNIT — A group of rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling,
which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living
quarters for one family.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, building, use or development in the
floodway.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Services provided by public and private utilities
that are necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the
principal structure. These services include underground, surface or
overhead transmission lines and service connections for gas, electrical,
steam, water, sanitary sewerage, storm water drainage and communication
systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires, mains,
drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water storage
tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals,
pumps, lift stations and hydrants, but not including buildings,
communication transmission towers, wireless equipment communication
towers, radio and television towers or other similar communication facilities
unrelated to providing direct service connections to individual residences
or businesses.
FAMILY — The body of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or
not more than four unrelated persons who live together in one dwelling unit
as a single housekeeping entity.
FENCE — Shall have the meaning found under § 335-88D(8)(g).[Added
2-23-2015]
FLEA MARKET — Any premises where the principal use is the sale of new
or used household goods, personal effects, tools, art work, small household
appliances and similar merchandise, equipment and objects, in small
quantities, in broken lots or parcels, not in bulk, for use or consumption
by the immediate purchaser. Flea markets may be conducted within a
structure or in the open air. Rummage sales and garage sales are not
considered to be flea markets.
FLOOD — A temporary rise in streamflow or stage that results in water
overtopping its banks and inundating areas adjacent to the channel.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — An examination, evaluation, and
determination of flood hazards, and if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations; or an examination, evaluation, and determination of
mudslide or mud flow, and/or flood related erosion hazards. Such studies
shall result in the publication of a Flood Insurance Rate Map showing the
intensity of flood hazards in either numbered or unnumbered A Zones.
FLOODLANDS — All lands contained in the regional flood or one-hundredyear
recurrence interval flood. For the purpose of zoning regulation, the
floodlands are divided into the Floodway Overlay District and the Floodland
Fringe Overlay District.
§ 335-94 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-94
326:654
FLOODPLAIN FRINGE — Those floodlands, outside the floodway, subject
to inundation by the one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood. For the
purpose of this chapter, the floodplain fringe includes the Floodland Fringe
Overlay District.
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph showing the relationship of the floodwater
surface elevation of a flood event of a specified recurrence interval to the
stream bed and other significant natural and man-made features along a
stream.
FLOODPROOFING — Measures designed to prevent and reduce flood
damage for those uses which cannot be removed from or which, of
necessity, must be erected in the floodplain, ranging from structural
modifications through installation of special equipment or materials to
operation and management safeguards, such as the following:
reinforcement of basement walls; underpinning of floors; permanent sealing
of all exterior openings; use of masonry construction, erection of permanent
watertight bulkheads, shutters and doors; treatment of exposed timbers;
elevation of flood vulnerable utilities; use of waterproof cement; provision
of adequate fuse protection; sealing of basement walls; installation of sump
pumps; placement of automatic swing check valves; installation of sealtight
windows and doors; installation of wire-reinforced glass; relocation
and elevation of valuable items; waterproofing, disconnecting, elevation or
removal of all electric equipment; avoidance of the use of flood-vulnerable
areas; temporary removal or waterproofing of merchandise; operation of
emergency pump equipment; closing of backwater sewer valve; placement
of plugs and flood drain pipes; placement of movable watertight bulkheads;
erection of sandbag levees; and shoring of weak walls or structures.
Floodproofing of structures shall be extended at least to a point two feet
above the elevation of the regional flood. Any structure that is located
entirely or partially below the flood protection elevation shall be anchored
to protect it from larger floods.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — A point two feet above the water
surface elevation of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood. This
safety factor, also called "freeboard," is intended to compensate for the
many unknown factors that contribute to flood heights greater than those
computed. Such unknown factors may include ice jams, debris
accumulation, wave action and obstructions of bridge openings.
FLOODWAY — A designated portion of the one-hundred-year flood that
will safely convey the regulatory flood discharge with small, acceptable
upstream and downstream stage increases, limited in Wisconsin to 0.01 foot
unless special legal measures are provided. The floodway, which includes
the channel, is that portion of the floodplain not suited for human
habitation. All fill, structures and other development that would impair
floodwater conveyance by adversely increasing flood stages or velocities or
would itself be subject to flood damage should be prohibited in the floodway.
FLOOR AREA — The square feet of floor area within the total interior usable
space, including the total of all usable space on all floors of a building.
Floor area does not include porches; parking/storage garages; hallways;
§ 335-94 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-94
326:655
noncustomer storage; restrooms and other common areas; or space in a
basement or cellar when said space is used only for storage or incidental
uses.[Amended 10-24-2006]
FLOOR AREA, NET — The horizontal area of a floor or several floors of
a building or structure, excluding those areas not directly devoted to the
principal or accessory use of the building or structure, such as storage
areas or stairwells, measured from the exterior faces of exterior or interior
walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (OR F.A.R.) — Used to indicate the total floor area of
buildings allowed on a given lot, expressed as a percentage ratio to the total
area of the lot; i.e., an F.A.R. of 100% allows a floor area equal to the lot, an
F.A.R. of 0.50 allows a floor area of 1/2 the total area of the lot, etc. A floor
area ratio of 0.50 could be applied to a one-story building occupying 50% of
the lot or a two-story building occupying 25% of the lot.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of illuminance on a surface that is everywhere one
foot from a uniform point source of light of one candle and equal to one
lumen per square foot.
FRONTAGE — The smallest dimension of a lot abutting a public street
measured along the street line.
FRONT BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the street right-of-way line
at any story level of the building's primary facade and representing the
minimum distance which all or any part of the building is set back from said
right-of-way line.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A totally enclosed structure or indoor area on a
single-family, two-family, or multifamily residential lot for the parking and
storing of motor vehicles of the property owner or tenant.[Amended
12-15-2014]
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or indoor area for parking, storing or
servicing of motor vehicles incidental to the conduct of a business.
GARAGE SALE — See "rummage sale."
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GARDEN FENCE — Shall have the meaning found under
§ 335-88D(8)(g).[Added 2-23-2015]
HOME OCCUPATIONS — Any occupation for gain or support conducted
entirely within buildings by resident occupants which is customarily
incidental to the principal use of the premises, does not exceed 25% of the
area of any floor and uses only household equipment. A home occupation
includes uses such as millinery, dressmaking, canning, laundering and
crafts, but does not include the display of any goods nor such occupations
as barbershops or beauty shops, massage parlors, tattoo parlors or bodypiercing
parlors. No signs are permitted. Home occupations do not result in
the coming and going of persons and/or vehicles.
§ 335-94 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-94
326:656
HOTEL — A structure offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public.
HOT TUB — An artificial container of water, also referred to as a "spa" or
"whirlpool," in which one or more persons may soak with a liquid capacity
greater than 100 gallons and designed with a mechanical air injection
system and/or recirculating device along with all of the following
characteristics:
HOUSEHOLD PET — Animals no larger than the largest dog which have
been bred and/or raised to live in or about the habitation of humans and are
dependent on humans for food and shelter.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — The total amount of area within a parcel covered
by the principal and accessory structures, driveway, loading area, sidewalk
and all other surfaces covered with asphalt, concrete, or other similar
impervious surfaces, that prevent rain, surface water runoff, or melting
snow from infiltrating into the ground below.[Amended 3-24-2014]
INTERMEDIATE LEVEL NURSING CARE — Shall have the meaning as
indicated and as defined in Wisconsin Statutes § 50.01 as existing on or
before September 28, 2011, except as amended herein. This term means
basic care that is required by a person who has a long-term illness or
disability that has reached a relatively stable plateau.[Added 11-22-2011]
JUNK — Any old or scrap metal, metal alloy, synthetic or organic material
or waste, or any abandoned, junked, ruined, dismantled or wrecked motor
vehicle or machinery, or any part thereof, whether salvageable or not,
or discarded household goods or appliances. An unlicensed motor vehicle
shall be construed to be a junked motor vehicle as set forth in § 335-37A,
definition of "junked motor vehicle" of this chapter.
KENNEL — The use of land, including related buildings or structures,
for the breeding, rearing, sale or boarding of dogs, cats or other animals
usually considered to be pets; or the keeping of dogs for sporting purposes.
For the purpose of this chapter, the care and keeping of more than four
animals over the age of four months is considered a kennel.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA) — Official notification from the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), that a Flood Hazard
Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map has been amended.
LIGHT SHIELD — Any attachment which interrupts and blocks the path of
light emitted from a luminaire or fixture.
A. Ceramic, acrylic, fiberglass and/or wood construction;
An integral gas or electric heater capable of maintaining a constant
water temperature of between 101° and 104°;
B.
One or more integral water jets capable of causing a rapidly rotating
current of water; and
C.
Has a cover which is locked at all times when an adult is not using the
unit.
D.
§ 335-94 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-94
326:657
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light emitted by a luminaire that shines beyond the
boundaries of the property on which the luminaire is located.
LIVING AREA — The total area bounded by the exterior walls of a building
at the floor levels, but not including basement, utility rooms, garages,
porches, breezeways and unfinished attics.
LOADING AREA — A completely off-street space or berth on the same lot
for the loading or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and
egress to a public street.
LOCAL STREET — A street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting
property and to discourage through traffic.
LOT — A parcel of land having frontage on a public street or other approved
way, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use and
sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area and other open
space provisions of this chapter.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection,
provided that the corner of such intersection shall have an angle of 135° or
less, measured on the lot side.
LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE — A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines
along two substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a
through lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT, FLAG — A nontrapezoidal lot having a flag portion that does not
entirely front on a public or private street and may be at least partially
located behind another lot, where access of the flag portion to a public or
private street is achieved by a flagpole portion either owned in common
with the flag portion or by means of a private right-of-way easement. (See
Illustration No. 2.)[Amended 10-28-2008]
§ 335-94 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-94
326:658
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot situated on a single street which is bounded by
adjacent lots along each of its other lines
LOT OF RECORD — A platted lot of a recorded subdivision, certified survey
map or parcel of land for which the deed, prior to the adoption of this
chapter, is on record with the Waukesha County Register of Deeds and
which exists as described therein.
LOT, SUBSTANDARD — A parcel of land held in separate ownership, having
frontage on a public street, occupied or intended to be occupied by a
principal structure or structure, together with accessory structures and
uses, having insufficient size to meet the lot width, lot area, yard, off-street
parking areas or other open space provisions of this chapter.
LOT WIDTH — The width of a parcel of land measured at the street yard
setback line.
LUMINAIRE — The complete lighting system, including the lamp and the
fixture.
§ 335-94 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-94
326:659
MOBILE HOME — A vehicle designed to be towed as a single unit or in
sections upon a highway by a motor vehicle and equipped and used or
intended to be used, primarily for human habitation, with walls of rigid
uncollapsed construction. A mobile home exceeding 45 feet in length shall
be considered a primary housing unit.
MOTEL — A structure providing transient accommodations containing six
or more rooms with at least 25% of all rooms having direct access to the
outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the
building.
MOTOR HOME — A motor vehicle designed to be operated upon a highway
for use as a temporary or recreational dwelling and having the same
internal characteristics and equipment as a mobile home.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled.
NAVIGABLE WATER —
NET ACRE — See "acre, net."
NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL — Material that cannot be burned.
NONCONFORMING USES OR STRUCTURES — Any structure, use of land,
use of land and structure in combination or characteristic of use (such
as yard requirement or lot size) which was existing at the time of the
effective date of this chapter or amendments thereto. Any such structure
conforming in respect to use but not in respect to frontage, width, height,
area, yard, parking, loading or distance requirements shall be considered a
nonconforming structure and not a nonconforming use.
NURSING CARE — Shall have the meaning as indicated and as defined in
Wisconsin Statutes § 50.01 as existing on or before September 28, 2011,
except as amended herein. This term means nursing procedures, other
than personal care, that are permitted to be performed by a registered
nurse under Wisconsin Statutes § 441.01(3) or by a licensed practical nurse
Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within Wisconsin
and all rivers, streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters
within the territorial limits of this state, including the Wisconsin portion
of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state.
The Wisconsin Supreme Court has declared navigable all bodies of
water with a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and with levels
of flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the
shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis. [Muench v. Public
Service Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952), and deGaynor and Co., Inc.
v. Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis. 2d 936 (1975)]
A.
For the purpose of this chapter, rivers and streams will be presumed to
be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent
waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps
until such time that the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
has made a determination that the waterway is not, in fact, navigable.
B.
§ 335-94 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-94
326:660
under Wisconsin Statutes § 441.001(3), directly on or to a resident.[Added
11-22-2011]
NURSING HOME — Shall have the meaning as indicated and as defined in
Wisconsin Statutes § 50.01 as existing on or before September 28, 2011,
except as amended herein. This term means a place where five or more
persons who are not related to the operator or administrator reside, receive
care or treatment and, because of their mental or physical condition,
require access to twenty-four-hour nursing services, including limited
nursing care, intermediate level nursing care and skilled nursing services.
"Nursing home" does not include any of the following:[Added 11-22-2011]
OPEN FENCE — Shall have the meaning found under
§ 335-88D(8)(g).[Added 2-23-2015]
PARKING LOT — A structure or premises containing parking spaces open
to the public.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Includes all abutting property owners, all
property owners within 100 feet and all property owners of opposite
frontages of the property which is the subject of the proceedings.
PARTY WALL — A wall containing no opening, which extends from the
elevation of building footings to the elevation of the outer surface of the roof
or above, and which separates contiguous buildings but is in joint use for
each building.
PERMEABLE SURFACE — Except for vegetation, a material or materials
and accompanying subsurface treatments designed and installed
specifically to allow movement of rain, surface water or melting snow
into the material, thereby reducing the volume of stormwater runoff from
the surfaced area. Permeable surfaces may include, without limitation,
porous asphalt, permeable paver blocks, grasscrete or similar structural
support materials, pervious concrete or asphalt and permeable concrete or
asphalt.[Added 3-24-2014]
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PERSONAL CARE — Shall have the meaning as indicated and as defined
in Wisconsin Statutes § 50.01 as existing on or before September 28, 2011,
except as amended herein. This term means assistance with the activities of
daily living, such as eating, dressing, bathing and ambulation, but does not
include nursing care.[Added 11-22-2011]
A convent or facility owned or operated exclusively by and for members
of a religious order that provides reception and care or treatment of an
individual.
A.
A hospice, as defined in Wisconsin Statute Section 50.90 (1), that
directly provides inpatient care.
B.
C. A residential care apartment complex.
D. A community-based residential facility.
§ 335-94 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-94
326:661
PLAN OF OPERATION — A document consisting of text and/or maps,
intended to identify, in reasonable detail, how a business or other activity
will function in the Village of Elm Grove. The plan of operation may contain,
but is not limited to, the names and addresses of principal owners and/or
operators, the nature of a business activity, products sold or manufactured,
number of employees and number of work shifts, hours of operation, days
of operation and special utility or police/fire protection needs. A site plan,
parking plan, landscaping plan, fencing plan, lighting plan and/or signage
plan may accompany and be made part of the plan of operation.
PRIMARY FACADE` — The side of the dwelling containing the front door or
main entryway.[Added 10-28-2008]
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or partially, for private residential purposes
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk or driveway appurtenant to such
dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — A receptacle for water, or an artificial pool
of water, regardless of the temperature of the water, which has at any
point a depth of more than two feet, whether above or below the ground,
used or intended to be used by the owner thereof or invitees for bathing,
muscle relaxation or swimming, and includes all structures, appurtenances,
equipment, appliances and other facilities appurtenant thereto and
intended for the operation and maintenance of a private swimming pool.
Included within this definition are all receptacles for water commonly
known as "hot tubs and whirlpools" unless such units are covered and
locked at all times when an adult is not using the unit.
PROFESSIONAL HOME OFFICES — Residences of doctors of medicine,
dentists, clergymen, business consultants, architects, landscape architects,
lawyers, manufacturers' representatives, professional engineers, registered
land surveyors, real estate agents, insurance brokers, artists, teachers,
authors, musicians or other recognized professions used to conduct their
professions where the office does not exceed 25% of the area of one floor of
the residence and there are no nonresident employees. The principal use of
the structure must remain residential in nature. A professional home office
does not include a massage parlor, tattoo parlor or body-piercing parlor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all public rights-of-way, whether improved or
not, and any and all public parks, grounds and buildings.
RAISED DECK — A structure without a roof, directly adjacent to a principal
structure, which is six inches or greater from the finished grade.
REAR YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth
of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal
structure. (See Illustration No. 1.)
ILLUSTRATION NO. 1
LOCATION OF YARDS ON TYPICAL
INTERIOR, CORNER, AND DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS
§ 335-94 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-94
326:662
ILLUSTRATION NO. 1
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A transportation structure, self-propelled or
capable of being towed by a passenger car, station wagon or small pickup
truck, of such size and weight as not to require any special highway
movement permits and primarily designed or constructed to provide
temporary, movable living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.
The term "recreational vehicle" shall also include, but not be limited to, allterrain
vehicles, campers, camping trailers, motor homes, boats, personal
watercraft, snowmobiles and their trailers and mobile homes not exceeding
45 feet in length.
REFUSE — All solid waste, putrescible and nonputrescible, combustible and
noncombustible, including garbage, ashes and solid material and industrial
wastes, including but not limited to, rubbish and junk.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have generally occurred in Wisconsin and which may
be expected to occur on a particular stream because of like physical
characteristics. The flood frequency of the regional flood is once in every
100 years; this means that in any given year there is a one-percent chance
that the regional flood may occur or be exceeded. During a typical thirtyyear
mortgage period, the regional flood has a twenty-six-percent chance of
occurrence.
RESIDENTIAL CARE APARTMENT COMPLEX (RCAC) — Shall have the
meaning as indicated and as defined in Wisconsin Statutes § 50.01 as
existing on or before September, 28, 2011, except as amended herein. It is
a State of Wisconsin licensed care facility where five or more adults reside
that consists of independent apartments, each of which has an individual
lockable entrance and exit, a kitchen, including a stove, and individual
bathroom, sleeping and living areas, and that provides services that are
supportive, personal, and include nursing services to a person who resides
in the RCAC, provided such services do not exceed more than 28 hours
§ 335-94 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-94
326:663
per week per person. An RCAC does not include a nursing home or a
community-based residential facility or any treatment center, but may be
physically part of a structure that is a nursing home or community-based
residential facility. In the definition of an RCAC, a "stove" means a cooking
appliance that is a microwave oven of at least 1,000 watts or that consists
of burners and an oven. Services such as recreational activities, financial
services, general store, transportation, and health and beauty services
which may be available to the residents of the RCAC, and are not expressly
open to the public, shall not be considered as a separate use within the
I-1 Zoning District but may only be allowed if each service is specifically
approved as a part of the conditional use by the Village Board.[Added
11-22-2011]
RESTAURANT DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOW WITH TAKE-AWAY SERVICE
— A physical arrangement on the exterior of a restaurant which allows
a customer to drive continuously, with brief stops, to order, pay for, and
receive food items. This form of convenience service requires that the
customer not exit his/her vehicle and not be rendered any other form of
service by an agent of the restaurant.[Added 11-22-2011]
RUBBISH — Any combustible or noncombustible waste material or debris,
except refuse, including, but not limited to, broken concrete, bricks, blocks
or other mineral material; bottles, porcelain and other glass or crockery;
boxes, lumber (new and used), posts, sticks or other wood, paper, rags,
cardboard, excelsior, rubber, leather, plastic, wire, cans and metal items,
leaves and grass clippings, except when being composted, tar paper,
residues from burning or any similar materials.
RUMMAGE SALE — The occasional sale of personal property at a residence
conducted by one or more families in a neighborhood. Rummage sales do
not exceed four consecutive days in length and are not conducted more
often than three times per year. Rummage sales do not involve the resale
of merchandise acquired for that purpose. Rummage sales are also known
as "garage sales" and "yard sales." Flea markets, defined elsewhere in this
section, are not considered to be rummage sales.
SEAT — Furniture upon which to sit, having a linear measurement not less
than 24 inches across the surface used for sitting.
SERVANT QUARTERS — Living quarters, which may include kitchen
facilities, that are either attached or detached from the principal residence,
used as a residence by persons employed to provide domestic services to
the occupants of the principal residence.
SHORELANDS — Those lands lying within the following distances from the
ordinary high-water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond
or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of
the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Shorelands shall not include
those lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches where such lands are not
adjacent to a navigable stream or river; those parts of such drainage ditches
adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching or had
no previous stream history; and such lands are maintained in nonstructural
agricultural use.
§ 335-94 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-94
326:664
SIDE YARD — A yard extending from the street yard to the rear yard of the
lot, the width of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between
the side lot line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the
principal structure. (See Illustration No. 1.55)
SIGN — Any canopy, marquee, design, monogram, billboard, balloon, board,
poster, building, streamer, banner, fence, wall or structure of any kind,
temporary or permanent, fixed or portable, used or to be used for
advertising, announcement, display, designation or promotion purposes or
upon which any advertisement, announcement, display, designation or
promotion is shown, painted or set forth in any manner that is intended to
be viewed from any public roadway or area.
SIGN, AREA — The exposed face area, including any background or
backing, constructed or installed as an integral part of such sign, but not
any structural elements lying outside the display area of the sign. The sign
area of a double-faced sign shall be the area of the larger single face. For
a sign composed of individually mounted letters, the sign area shall be
computed as the sum of the areas of the individual letters with the area
for the individual letters computed as the area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the words and/or symbols.
SIGN, EXTERIOR — Any sign placed so as to be viewed from a public area
outside of the business establishment displaying said sign.
SIGN, GROUND — Any sign supported by uprights, braces, poles or similar
appurtenances placed upon the ground and wholly or partially independent
of any building for support.
SIGN, HANGING — Any sign attached to a building canopy or overhang
which is attached to and does not extend beyond said canopy or overhang.
SIGN HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the ground level
adjacent to the sign to the highest part of the sign, including all illuminators
and embellishments.
SIGN, INTERIOR — Any sign placed so as to be viewed primarily from
within the business displaying said sign.
SIGN, PERMANENT — Any sign intended to be in place more than 30 days.
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign that is not affixed to a building, including a
structure, or to the ground, mounted on wheels to make it transportable.
Signs mounted on trucks, taxicabs or other motor vehicle as a secondary
or incidental use of said vehicle shall not be considered as a portable
sign for the purpose of this chapter. Any motor vehicle or trailer having a
nonpermanent or detachable sign and parked continuously for a period in
excess of 72 hours in the same site will be presumed to have a primary use
as a portable sign.
SIGN, PROJECTING — Any sign mounted perpendicular to the exterior of a
building and projecting out from said building.
55.Editor's Note: Illustration 1 is located at the end of the definition of the term "rear yard."
§ 335-94 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-94
326:665
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign intended to be in place for a reasonably
limited period of time but not to exceed 30 days and not to exceed a total of
32 square feet.
SIGN, UTILITY — Any sign not over four square feet in area, including, but
not limited to, signs denoting entrances, exits, parking, rest rooms, public
telephones, street names and traffic control.
SIGN, WALL — Any sign whose face is mounted in a parallel plane to the
building wall or structure, or which is fastened to or painted on the wall of a
building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting
structure for or forms the background surface of the sign and which does
not project more than 10 inches from such building or structure and does
not extend beyond the ends of said wall or structure.
SIGN, WINDOW — Any sign attached to or in close proximity to the interior
or exterior of a window facing an outside public area.
SKILLED NURSING SERVICES — Shall have the meaning as indicated
and as defined in Wisconsin Statutes § 50.01 as existing on or before
September 28, 2011, except as amended herein. Those services, to which
all of the following apply, that are provided to a resident under a physician's
orders:[Added 11-22-2011]
SNOWMOBILE — Any engine-driven vehicle of a type which utilizes sledtype
runners or skis or an endless belt tread or any combination of these or
similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated.
SOLID FENCE — Shall have the meaning found under
§ 335-88D(8)(g).[Added 2-23-2015]
The services require the skills of and are provided directly by or under
the supervision of a person whose licensed, registered, certified or
permitted scope of practice is at least equivalent to that of a licensed
practical nurse.
A.
Any of the following circumstances exist:
The inherent complexity of a service prescribed for a resident is
such that it can be safely and effectively performed only by or
under the supervision of registered nurses or licensed practical
nurses.
(1)
The full recovery or medical improvement of the resident is not
possible, but the services are needed to prevent, to the extent
possible, deterioration of the resident's condition or to sustain
current capacities of the resident.
(2)
Because of special medical complications, performing or
supervising a service that is generally unskilled or observing the
resident necessitates the use of a person whose licensed,
registered, certified or permitted scope of practice is at least
equivalent to that of a licensed practical nurse.
(3)
B.
§ 335-94 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-94
326:666
STORY — That portion of a principal structure included between the surface
of any floor and the surface of the next floor above or, if there is no floor
above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement
shall not be counted as a story.
STORY, HALF — A story which is situated in a sloping roof, the floor area of
which does not exceed 2/3 of the floor area of the story immediately below
it, and which does not contain an independent dwelling unit.
STREET — A public right-of-way not less than 50 feet wide, providing
primary access to abutting properties.
STREET YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth
of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the existing
or proposed street or highway right-of-way line and a line parallel thereto
through the nearest point of the principal structure. Corner lots and double
frontage lots have two such yards. Where the street right-of-way is a culde-
sac, the street yard is determined by measuring the required setback
distance along each side lot line and connecting those two points with a
straight line.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members of
a structure, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the
ground which is six inches or higher above grade. This definition includes
principal and accessory buildings, swimming pools, raised decks, gazebos,
yard maintenance buildings, tennis courts and fences. This definition
excludes flagpoles, swing sets, basketball hoops, ground barbecues, light
posts and lawn ornaments such as artwork, statuaries and related
decorative lawn ornaments.[Amended 1-22-2008; 6-24-2008]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the current assessed value of the
structure, either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the
structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. The term does not, however, include either: [Amended
7-22-2003]
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe code living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving
preservation by the Wisconsin State Historical Society or listed on
the National Register of Historic Places.
(2)
A.
Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs,
modifications or additions. Such ordinary maintenance repairs include
internal and external painting, decorating, paneling and the
replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components.
B.
§ 335-94 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § 335-94
326:667
SWIMMING POOL — See "private swimming pool."
TRAILER — A vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property
or passengers entirely on its own structure and being drawn by a motor
vehicle.
USE — The purpose or activity for which the land or structure thereon is
designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — A subordinate use on the same lot which is incidental
and customary in connection with the principal use.
USE, NONCONFORMING — Any use of a building structure, fixture or
premises which, on the effective date of this chapter, does not, even though
lawfully established, comply with all of the applicable use regulations of
the zoning district in which such building, structure, fixture or premises is
located.[Amended 8-22-2006]
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main use of land or building as distinguished from
a subordinate or accessory use.
UTILITY SUBSTATION — A structure used for the connection and service of
public utilities.
VERTICAL HEIGHTS — The distance between the grade line or ground
elevation adjacent to a structure at the lowest point to the highest point of
the structure at a location other than on the side of the structure where the
principal entrance is located.[Added 9-10-2001]
WETLANDS — An area where water is at, near or above the land surface
long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which has
soils indicative of wet conditions.
WHOLESALE-MANUFACTURER-CENTER — An establishment that is
primarily engaged in manufacturing and/or distributing merchandise to
retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business
users; or to other wholesalers.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a structure, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except by the vegetation. The street
and rear yards extend the full width of the lot. (See Illustration No. 1.56)
YARD MAINTENANCE BUILDING — See "building, yard maintenance."
YARD SALE — See "rummage sale."
56.Editor's Note: Illustration 1 is located at the end of the definition of the term "rear yard."
§ 335-94 ELM GROVE CODE § 335-94
326:668
Appendix
Chapter A340
FIRE DEPARTMENT BYLAWS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners — See Ch. 7, Art. II.
Fire Department — See Ch. 33.
§ A340-1. Authority of Police and Fire Commission.
The Elm Grove Volunteer Fire Department is subject to the authority of the
Police and Fire Commission as provided in Chapter 7, Article II of the Code
of the Village of Elm Grove and §§ 61.65 and 62.13, Wis. Stats.
§ A340-2. Organization.
A. Organization of membership. The Fire Department shall consist of the
following persons appointed by the Police and Fire Commission from
time to time: one Chief, Fire Department officers and fire fighters. A
Chairperson, a Secretary and a Treasurer may be appointed to carry
out the business functions of the Department provided for in these
bylaws. The maximum and minimum number of fire fighters shall be as
determined from time to time by the Village Board of Trustees.
B. Gender. In the following sections of these bylaws, words in either the
masculine form or feminine form shall be deemed to include or relate to
both males and females.
C. Member classification. Members shall consist of the following
classifications:
(1) Active fire fighters. Active fire fighters shall be competent and
experienced members who are actively engaged in the fire-fighting,
administration or rescue functions of the Department. All active
fire fighters shall be chosen by, and be subject to, such
requirements as are from time to time established under Wisconsin
Administrative Code §§ SPS 330 and SPS 332.
(2) Probationary fire fighters. Probationary fire fighters shall be
members training to become active fire fighters. They shall be
subject to extended training and supervision established under
Wisconsin Administrative Code §§ SPS 330 and SPS 332 and such
supervision as the Chief shall require. All new fire fighters shall be
permitted the opportunity to obtain the training specified in
Wisconsin Administrative Code § SPS 330.08 (b) within 12 months
of the date of their appointment to the Department. Probationary
fire fighters shall become active fire fighters on recommendation of
§ 335-94 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § A340-2
326:669
§ A340-3. Application and qualification for membership.
§ A340-4. Membership titles and general job descriptions.
the Chief and approval by the Police and Fire Commission. A
member with less than one year experience as a member of the
Department or equivalent shall be a probationary fire fighter.
A. Any person at least 18 years of age who lives or normally works within
or near the Village and meets the position requirements established
from time to time for fire fighters may apply for membership in the
Department.
B. The application of the candidate shall be turned over to the Chief for
evaluation. Following evaluation by the Chief, the Chief may
recommend the applicant to the Police and Fire Commission for
consideration as a probationary fire fighter. All applicants approved by
the Police and Fire Commission shall be required to undergo a medical
examination to determine their fitness for duty and acceptance of all
candidates shall be conditioned upon the results of said examination.
C. All applicants, after appointment, shall serve a probationary training
period. If after satisfactory completion of the probationary training
period the Chief decides that the applicant shows satisfactory
proficiency in drills and fire-fighting knowledge, the applicant shall
become a full member upon confirmation by the Police and Fire
Commission.
A. The following membership titles and general job descriptions shall be
applicable to the Department:
(1) Administrative. An administrative member shall be a member
appointed by the Chief. This member may or may not have firefighting
duties.
(2) Daytime member. Daytime members are those members who work
for, within or nearby the Village and respond and train on a daytime
basis.
(3) Explorer scout advisor. The explorer scout advisor is a line fire
fighter or above in rank who is responsible for the efficient and safe
operations of the explorer scout post.
(4) Instructor. An instructor shall be a member with instructor status
responsible for the probationary and Department training
programs.
(5) Probationary fire fighters. Probationary fire fighters shall be
members in training to become active fire fighters. They shall be
subject to training as required under Wisconsin Administrative
Code § SPS 330 and supervision as the Chief shall determine.
§ A340-2 ELM GROVE CODE § A340-4
326:670
§ A340-5. Meetings.
§ A340-6. Duties and election of business officers.
Probationary fire fighters shall become active fire fighters after one
year on recommendation by the Chief.
(6) Active fire fighters. Active fire fighters shall be competent and
experienced members who have met the educational and training
standards set forth in Wisconsin Administrative Code § SPS 330
and are actively engaged in the fire-fighting, administrative or
rescue functions of the Department.
(7) Motor pump operators. The motor pump operators are appointed
by the Chief subject to approval of the Police and Fire Commission
after successful completion of all required state certification under
Wisconsin Administrative Code § SPS 330. They are responsible for
operation of the Department apparatus.
(8) Lieutenant. The Lieutenant of each company, appointed by the
Chief subject to approval of the Police and Fire Commission, shall
assist his/her Captain in the discharge of his/her duties. In the
absence of the Captain, the Lieutenant shall officiate in his/her
capacity.
(9) Captain. The Captain of each company, appointed by the Chief
subject to approval of the Police and Fire Commission, shall
command his/her company and be responsible for the condition of
his/her assigned apparatus and equipment and such special
projects or tasks as the Chief may assign from time to time.
(10) Battalion Chief. The Battalion Chief, appointed by the Chief subject
to approval of the Police and Fire Commission, shall assist the Chief
in his/her duties and, in the absence of the Chief, Assistant Chief
and Deputy Chief, shall act in the capacity of Chief.
(11) Deputy Chief. The Deputy Chief, appointed by the Chief subject to
approval of the Police and Fire Commission, shall assist the Chief in
his/her duties and, in the absence of the Chief and Assistant Chief,
shall act in the capacity of Chief.
(12) Assistant Chief. The Assistant Chief, appointed by the Chief subject
to approval of the Police and Fire Commission, shall assist the Chief
in his/her duties and, in the absence of the Chief, shall act in the
capacity of Chief.
B. The number of positions available in each stated category shall be
determined by the Board of Trustees on an annual basis as part of the
annual budget.
A. The regular monthly meeting shall be held the first Tuesday of each
month at 7:00 p.m. or other hour specified.
§ A340-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § A340-6
326:671
§ A340-7. Duties of active and probationary fire fighters.
A. Duties of business officers.
(1) The business officers of the Department shall consist of the
Chairperson of the meeting, the Secretary and the Treasurer.
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of members.
(3) The Secretary shall keep the minutes of all meetings, a signed copy
of which shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
(4) The Treasurer shall receive all moneys of the Department drill
fund, pay out all moneys upon proper order and render an
accounting at each regular membership meeting.
B. Election of business officers.
(1) All business officers shall be elected by a majority vote of the active
members and shall hold office for a term of one year or until their
respective successors have been elected. All nominations will be
made from the floor. Any vacancies existing during the year may be
filled for the balance of the year by a majority vote of the active
members present at any regular monthly meeting.
(2) Any business officer may be removed at any meeting upon the
affirmative vote of a majority of the active members present at such
meeting.
A. The regular monthly functions are:
(1) First Tuesday of month: monthly and officers' meetings.
(2) Second Tuesday: probationary member training/informal drill
night.
(3) Third Tuesday: required monthly drill night.
(4) Fourth Tuesday: special drill night.
(5) Fifth Tuesday: MPO training/special drill night.
(6) Daytime monthly drill and meeting.
B. It is required that fire fighters attend the first Tuesday monthly meeting
and a regular monthly drill. It is expected that probationary fire fighters
will attend as many special drills as possible. It is mandatory that all fire
fighters attend no fewer than two drills per quarter and 10 drills per
year. With few exceptions, all Tuesday night Department activities
begin at 7:00 p.m. Promptness in attendance is a requisite. If for any
reason a fire fighter is unable to attend a required drill or meeting, that
person is expected to notify his/her company officer. Attendance at
meetings and drills shall continue until released by a company officer.
§ A340-6 ELM GROVE CODE § A340-7
326:672
§ A340-8. Excused absences.
The Chief or any company officer shall have the power to excuse any
member for absence from fires, meetings or other occasions if notified of
good and valid reasons.
§ A340-9. Appointment of officers.
The Chief may appoint officers from active fire fighters, as specified in
§ A340-4, as the Chief may deem necessary, subject to the approval of the
Police and Fire Commission and subject to removal in the manner provided
for in § 62.13, Wis. Stats.
§ A340-10. Duties of Chief and other operating officers.
C. Active fire fighters shall proceed to the fire station or location of a fire
as they may be commanded, immediately upon the alarm thereof, shall
attend all fires and shall obey all commands of their officers in
accordance with Department regulations. The tour of duty shall
continue until released by a company officer.
D. Membership records shall be reviewed regularly by the Chief.
E. Leaves of absence may be granted by the Chief for reasons acceptable
to the Chief. No more than two successive six-month leaves will be
granted any member.
F. Any member who voluntarily leaves the Department or is dismissed by
the Chief for cause shall return to the commanding officer of his/her
company all Department property in his/her care, including pager,
radio, badges and insignia, or identification. He/she shall not use any
Department insignia or identification upon any personal equipment
purchased by him/her. Return of personal attire may be required at the
option of the Chief or his/her designee.
A. The Chief shall be responsible for the general condition and efficient
operation of the Department, the training of members and the
performance of all other duties imposed upon him/her. The Chief may
incur obligations on behalf of the Department, in conformity with other
applicable ordinances of the Village, for operating supplies and services
and emergency replacement of existing equipment when the purchase
price therefor is $1,000 or less without prior approval of the Village
Manager. When the purchase price of such supplies, services or
equipment is more than $1000, the Chief shall, prior to the incurring of
such obligations, obtain approval of the Village Manager pursuant to
Chapter 54, § 54-3H of this Code.
B. Subject to the provisions of Subsection A of this section, the Chief shall
purchase and the Department shall use only such supplies and
replacement equipment as shall be of the uniform size and type
§ A340-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § A340-10
326:673
§ A340-11. Amendments.
Bylaw amendments may be amended from time to time by the Village Board
of Trustees.
required by § 213.15, Wis. Stats., and Wisconsin Administrative Code
Chapter SPS 330.
C. The Chief shall prescribe a fire alerting system for use by the
Department and shall have the fire alerting system tested at regular
intervals.
D. The Chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct the
officers and members in the performance of their duties.
E. The Chief shall have each fire investigated, with the general assistance
of Village Police Department, to determine its cause and in case of
suspicion of incendiarism shall notify the State Fire Marshal. Whenever
suspicion of incendiarism exists, the Chief shall take all reasonable
steps to preserve the situs of the fire intact, including cordoning off,
excluding unauthorized persons from or otherwise safeguarding the
area. In no event shall the Chief seize any physical evidence of
incendiarism pending arrival of the State Fire Marshal unless it is
necessary for the preservation of such evidence.
F. The Chief shall see that all apparatus and equipment are properly
cleaned and in place and ready for use at all times.
G. The Chief shall inspect or cause to be inspected and maintained the
public water hydrants and other designated sources of water supply
within the Village and shall see that water hydrants are free of ice and
snow.
H. In the absence of the Chief, an Assistant Chief shall officiate in the
capacity of the Chief. The Assistant Chief shall execute his/her duties in
accordance with the operational procedures and directives as set down
by the Chief.
I. Captains shall command their companies and have control thereof.
J. The Captain shall be responsible for the condition of his/her assigned
apparatus and equipment.
K. The Lieutenant of each company shall assist his/her Captain in the
discharge of his/her duties. In the absence of the Captain, the
Lieutenant shall officiate in his/her capacity.
L. In the event of a vacancy in the position of Chief, names of candidates
may be submitted at any regular meeting of the Department and an
advisory vote shall be taken by all members present concerning said
candidates. The results of said vote shall be given to the Police and Fire
Commission, which may use such advisory voting information in the
course of its selection process.
§ A340-10 ELM GROVE CODE § A340-12
326:674
§ A340-12. General rules.
A. No persons shall be allowed to enter the fire station for the purpose of
handling any apparatus or equipment belonging to the Department,
except active or probationary members of the Department, or unless
such person is in the company of an active member of the Department.
B. Any member of the Department shall be subject to discipline by the
Chief of the Department or the Police and Fire Commission pursuant to
§ 62.13, Wis. Stats., when any of the following circumstances adversely
affect the Department:
(1) Commission of a felony, misdemeanor or violation of any Village
municipal ordinance.
(2) Insubordination or disobedience toward a superior officer.
(3) Intoxication or impairment.
(4) Unlawful use of controlled substances.
(5) Neglect of duty or disobedience of any Department order.
(6) Chronic absence from duty without leave.
(7) Incapacity for duty, either mental or physical.
(8) Breach of any discipline previously imposed.
(9) Communicating confidential information relating to Department
business without permission.
(10) Untruthfulness in connection with any activity or proceeding
reflecting upon the Department.
(11) Violation of the provisions of these bylaws.
C. No members of the Department shall drive, carry or cause to be driven,
carried or transported any Department vehicle or equipment without
obtaining the prior permission of an officer.
D. Each member of the Department shall be held personally responsible
for all Department gear and equipment in his/her possession.
E. Unauthorized use of another member's personal equipment is
prohibited.
F. All members driving equipment must have a Wisconsin Motor Vehicle
Department driver's license in good standing.
G. All injuries must be reported to the officer in charge immediately and
must be reported on the fire or drill report of that instance. A report
must be made to the Chief and forwarded to the Village Clerk as soon as
possible.
§ A340-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § A340-12
326:675
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-11-2000 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
12-11-2000 Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages amendment
Ch. 171
2-12-2001 Dogs amendment Ch. 95, Art. I
2-12-2001 Parks and recreation amendment Ch. 204
4-9-2001 Land division Ch. 305
4-9-2001 Floodplain zoning Ch. 330
4-9-2001 Zoning Ch. 335
7-11-2001 Elections amendment Ch. 19
8-13-2001 Ethics amendment Ch. 25
8-13-2001 Humane Officers Ch. 95, Art. III
8-13-2001 Demolition permits amendment Ch. 106, Art. II
9-10-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
9-10-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
9-10-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
9-10-2001 Street numbers Ch. 243, Art. III
2-26-2002 Village Board amendment Ch. 80
2-26-2002 Dogs amendment Ch. 95, Art. I
2-26-2002 Bicycles amendment Ch. 101
2-26-2002 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 150
2-26-2002 Parks and recreation amendment;
transient merchants amendment
Chs. 204 and 262
4-23-2002 Posting of building numbers at private
drive entrances
Ch. 243, Art. II
H. Members shall not discuss or disseminate the business of the
Department in any manner which may be detrimental to the reputation
of the Department at any time or place, except as authorized by the
Chief, Village Manager, or the Fire and Police Commission.
I. All discipline shall be administered in accordance with §§ 61.65 and
62.13, Wis. Stats., and all subsequent amendments thereto.
§ A340-12 ELM GROVE CODE § DL-1
326:676
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-23-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 275
4-23-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 275
4-23-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
6-24-2002 Posting of building numbers at private
drive entrances amendment
Ch. 243, Art. II
6-24-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
12-17-2002 Noise amendment Ch. 208
12-17-2002 Stormwater management amendment Ch. 325
12-17-2002 Professional contract fees amendment Ch. 30
12-17-2002 Sewers amendment Ch. 232
12-17-2002 Plumbing amendment Ch. 212
4-22-2003 Transient merchants amendment Ch. 262
4-22-2003 Transient merchants amendment Ch. 262
4-22-2003 Village Board amendment Ch. 80
4-22-2003 Code of conduct signs amendment Chs. 106, 335
5-27-2003 Plan Commission amendment Ch. 7, Art. III
5-27-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 275
6-24-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
7-22-2003 Floodplain zoning; zoning amendment Chs. 330 and 335
8-26-2003 Sewers amendment Ch. 232, Art. I
10-28-2003 Demolition permits amendment Ch. 106, Art. II
10-28-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
11-25-2003 Community Development Authority Ch. 8
11-25-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
3-23-2004 Public Works/Utility Committee
amendments
Chs. 80, 212, 232,
266 and 275
4-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 275
5-25-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
5-25-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
6-22-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 275
6-22-2004 Animals amendment Ch. 95
8-24-2004 Stormwater Management Utility Ch. 326
12-21-2004 Building Board amendment Ch. 7, Art. I
12-21-2004 Building Board amendment Ch. 7, Art. I
12-21-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
§ DL-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § DL-1
326:677
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-21-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
3-22-2005 Building construction amendment Ch. 106
3-22-2005 Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages amendment
Ch. 171
3-22-2005 Snow and ice removal amendment Ch. 243
4-26-2005 General penalty and citations
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II
4-26-2005 Trees and vegetation amendment Ch. 266
4-26-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
4-26-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
4-26-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
5-24-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
7-26-2005 Building code amendment Ch. 106, Art. I
7-26-2005 General penalty amendment Ch. 1, Art. II
7-26-2005 Schedule of deposits amendment Ch. 1, Art. II
7-26-2005 Violations and penalties amendments Chs. 22; 25; 33; 87;
91; 95, Arts. I and
II; 101; 106, Art. I;
123; 134; 143; 147;
150; 161; 171; 185;
190; 193; 204; 208,
Arts. I and II; 212;
220, 232, Art. I;
238; 243, Art. IV;
255, Arts I and II;
259; 262; 266; 305;
325, Art. I; 330;
335
7-26-2005 Noise amendment Ch. 208, Art. I
9-27-2005 Building code amendment Ch. 106, Art. I
9-27-2005 Electrical standards Ch. 134
9-27-2005 Plumbing amendment Ch. 212
11-22-2005 Dogs amendment Ch. 95, Art. I
11-22-2005 Parks and recreation amendment Ch. 204
11-22-2005 Floodplain zoning Ch. 330
4-25-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
4-25-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
5-23-2006 Financial procedures amendment Ch. 30
§ DL-1 ELM GROVE CODE § DL-1
326:678
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-23-2006 Officers and employees: Village
Manager amendment
Ch. 54, Art. II
5-23-2006 Cigarette license amendment Ch. 255, Art. I
5-23-2006 Transient merchants amendment Ch. 262
5-23-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 275
6-27-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
7-25-2006 Drug paraphernalia amendment Ch. 128
7-25-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 275
8-22-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 275
8-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
8-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
8-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
8-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
10-24-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
10-24-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
3-27-2007 Special events Ch. 241
3-27-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
5-22-2007 Parks and recreation amendment Ch. 204
5-28-2007 Trees and vegetation amendment Ch. 266
8-28-2007 Sex offender residency restrictions Ch. 234
8-28-2007 Firearms and weapons amendment Ch. 147
8-28-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 275
9-25-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
11-27-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
12-18-2007 Public access to records amendment;
records retention and destruction
amendment
Ch. 65, Arts. I and
II
12-18-2007 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 91
12-18-2007 Building Code amendment Ch. 106, Art. I
1-22-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
1-22-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
2-26-2008 General penalty and citations
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II
3-25-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
§ DL-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § DL-1
326:679
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-22-2008 Publishing and posting of notices
amendments
Chs. 65, Art. II;
106, Art. I; 116;
171; 232, Art. II;
243, Art. IV; 266;
275; 330; 335
4-22-2008 Peace and good order: chronic
nuisance property
Ch. 208, Art. III
4-22-2008 Transient merchants amendment Ch. 262
6-24-2008 Possession of cigarettes or tobacco
products by minors
Ch. 255, Art. III
6-24-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 275
6-24-2008 Floodplain zoning amendment Ch. 330
6-24-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
10-28-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
10-28-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
10-28-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
10-28-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
10-28-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
10-28-2008 Plumbing amendment Ch. 212
11-19-2008 Floodplain zoning amendment Ch. 330
12-16-2008 Floodplain zoning amendment Ch. 330
2-24-2009 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 91
2-24-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 275
2-24-2009 Construction site erosion control
amendment
Ch. 325, Art. I
4-28-2009 Chronic nuisance property amendment Ch. 208, Art. III
5-26-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
6-23-2009 Ethics amendment Ch. 25
6-23-2009 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 150
7-18-2009 Stormwater and sewer illicit discharge
connections
Ch. 325, Art. IV
10-27-2009 Village Board amendment Ch. 80
10-27-2009 Sex offender residency restrictions
amendment
Ch. 234
10-27-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 275
10-27-2009 Property maintenance amendment Ch. 220
10-27-2009 Chronic nuisance property amendment Ch. 208, Art. III
§ DL-1 ELM GROVE CODE § DL-1
326:680
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-23-2010 Parks and recreation amendment Ch. 204
4-27-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
6-22-2010 Smoking ban Ch. 255, Art. IV
6-22-2010 Building Code amendment Ch. 106, Art. I
10-26-2010 Municipal Court amendment Ch. 12
10-26-2010 Trees and vegetation amendment Ch. 266
10-26-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
4-26-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
8-23-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
8-23-2011 Firearms and weapons amendment Ch. 147
10-25-2011 Peace and good order: certain offenses
defined as misdemeanors by state law
amendment
Ch. 208, Art. II
11-22-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
11-22-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
11-22-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
11-22-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
11-22-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
11-22-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
3-27-2012 Peace and good order: certain offenses
defined as misdemeanors by state law
amendment
Ch. 208, Art. II
3-27-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
3-27-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
3-27-2012 Community Development Authority
amendment
Ch. 8
5-22-2012 Parks and recreation amendment Ch. 204
6-26-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
6-26-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
2-26-2013 Sewer rates amendment Ch. 232, Art. II
2-26-2013 Trees and vegetation amendment Ch. 266
3-26-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
7-23-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
9-24-2013 Building Code amendment Ch. 106, Art. I
9-24-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
10-22-2013 Water connection fees Ch. 280
§ DL-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § DL-1
326:681
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-26-2013 Parks and recreation amendment Ch. 204
11-26-2013 Peace and good order: certain offenses
defined as misdemeanors by state law
amendment
Ch. 208, Art. II
1-28-2014 Village Board amendment Ch. 80
2-24-2014 Cruelty to animals or birds
amendment
Ch. 95, Art. II
2-24-2014 Open burning amendment Ch. 112
2-24-2014 Firearms and weapons amendment Ch. 147
2-24-2014 Trees and vegetation amendment Ch. 266
2-24-2014 Floodplain zoning amendment Ch. 330
3-24-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
6-28-2014 Water connection fees amendment Ch. 280
8-25-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
8-25-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
10-27-2014 Well abandonment Ch. 283
10-27-2014 Floodplain zoning amendment Ch. 330
12-15-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
1-26-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
2-23-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
2-23-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
4-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
8-24-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
9-28-2015 Solid waste: garbage, refuse and yard
waste collection and disposal
Ch. 225, Art. I
9-28-2015 Trees and vegetation amendment Ch. 266
2-22-2016 Records: retention and destruction
amendment
Ch. 65, Art. II
2-22-2016 Animals: dogs amendment Ch. 95, Art. I
3-28-2016 Building construction: Building Code
amendment
Ch. 106, Art. I
3-28-2016 Electrical standards amendment Ch. 134
3-28-2016 Plumbing amendment Ch. 212
4-25-2016 Parks and recreation amendment Ch. 204
4-25-2016 Peace and good order: certain offenses
defined as misdemeanors by state law
amendment
Ch. 208, Art. II
§ DL-1 ELM GROVE CODE § DL-1
326:682
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-27-2016 Sewers: sewer district amendment Ch. 232, Art. I
6-27-2016 Electrical standards amendment Ch. 134
6-27-2016 Building construction: building code
amendment
Ch. 106, Art. I
6-27-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
11-28-2016 Fire Department bylaws amendment Ch. A340
12-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 335
6-26-2017 Parks and recreation amendment Ch. 204
8-28-2017 Building construction: Building Code
amendment
Ch. 106, Art. I
8-28-2017 Coal tar sealant Ch. 120
8-28-2017 Peace and good order: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 208, Art. I
6-25-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 275
11-14-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 335
12-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 275
2-25-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 335
4-22-2019 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 275
5-30-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 335
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
10-28-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 335 37
§ DL-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY § DL-1
326:683