Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Construction and Penalties
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as §§ 1-1-2, 1-1-3, 1-1-5, 1-1-6
and 1-1-7 of the 2000 Code]
§ 1-1. Principles of construction.
The following rules or meanings shall be applied in the construction and
interpretation of ordinances codified in this Code of Ordinances, unless
such application would be clearly inconsistent with the plain meaning or
intent of the ordinances:
A. Acts by agents. When an ordinance requires that an act be done by a
person which may be legally performed by an authorized agent of that
principal person, the requirement shall be construed to include all acts
performed by such agents.
B. Code and Code of Ordinances. The words "Code," "Code of Ordinances"
and "Municipal Code," when used in any section of this Code, shall refer
to this Code of Ordinances of the Village of East Troy unless the context
of the section clearly indicates otherwise.
C. Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or
allowed by these ordinances, the day of the act or event from which the
period of time begins to run shall not be included, but the last day of the
period shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal
holiday. If the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven
days, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the
computation. As used in this subsection, "legal holiday" means any
statewide legal holiday specified by state law.
D. Fine. The term "fine" shall be the equivalent of the word "forfeiture"
and vice versa.
E. Gender. Use has been made of masculine pronouns in these ordinances
solely for the sake of brevity. Unless specifically stated to the contrary,
this Code of Ordinances is gender neutral and words in these
ordinances referring to the masculine gender shall also be construed to
apply to females and vice versa.
F. General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed according to
their plain meaning in common usage. However, words or phrases with
a technical or special meaning shall be understood and construed
according to that technical or special meaning, if such is the intent of
the ordinance.
G. Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or
more Village officers or employees shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or other persons.
H. Officers. The term "officers" shall refer solely to local offices created by
state statute.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
§ 1-2. Conflicting provisions.
§ 1-3. Effective date of ordinances.
I. Officials. The term "officials" shall mean all Village officers and
employees.
J. Person. The word "person" shall mean any of the following entities:
natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, political
bodies or any other entity of any kind which is capable of being sued.
K. Repeal. When any ordinance having the effect of repealing a prior
ordinance is itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive
the prior ordinance or any part thereof, unless expressly so provided.
L. Singular and plural. Every word in these ordinances referring to the
singular number only shall also be construed to apply to several
persons or things, and every word in these ordinances referring to a
plural number shall also be construed to apply to one person or thing.
M. Tense. The use of any verb in the present tense shall not preclude the
interpretation of the verb in the future tense, where appropriate.
N. Village. The term "Village" shall mean the Village of East Troy,
Walworth County, Wisconsin.
O. Wisconsin Administrative Code. The term "Wisconsin Administrative
Code" and its abbreviation as "Wis. Adm. Code" shall mean the
Wisconsin Administrative Code as of the adoption of this Code, as
amended or renumbered from time to time.
P. Wisconsin Statutes. The term "Wisconsin Statutes" and its abbreviation
as "Wis. Stats." shall mean, in these ordinances, the Wisconsin Statutes
as of the adoption of this Code, as amended or renumbered from time to
time. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
A. If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the
provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out
of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter.
B. If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with
each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the
events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more
general provisions.
A. Code. The Code of Ordinances, Village of East Troy, Wisconsin, shall
take effect as provided by state law.
B. Subsequent ordinances. All ordinances passed by the Village Board
subsequent to the adoption of the Code of Ordinances, except when
otherwise specifically provided, shall take effect from and after their
publication.
§ 1-1 EAST TROY CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 1-5. Documents incorporated by reference. [Amended 12-16-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-18]
Whenever any standard code, rule, regulation, statute or other written or
printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in
this Code as if fully set forth herein, and the Village Clerk shall maintain
in his/her office a copy of any such material if it is not readily available
online as adopted and as amended from time to time. Materials on file at the
Village Clerk's office shall be considered public records open to reasonable
examination by any person during the office hours of the Village Clerk,
subject to such restrictions on examination as the Village Clerk imposes for
the preservation of the materials.
A. General penalty. Except where a penalty is provided elsewhere in this
Code, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code
shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty which
shall be as follows:
(1) First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $25 nor
more than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall
be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are
paid, but not to exceed 90 days.
(2) Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance
or part of an ordinance of this Code who shall previously have been
convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall,
upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50 nor more than
$1,000 for each such offense, together with costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be
imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs of
prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six months.
B. Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues
or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall
preclude the Village from maintaining any appropriate action to
prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code.
C. Other remedies. The Village shall have any and all other remedies
afforded by the Wisconsin Statutes in addition to the forfeitures and
costs of prosecution above.1
1. Editor's Note: Original § 1-1-6(d), Juvenile disposition alternatives for alcohol/drug
offenses, (e), Dispositional alternatives for other ordinance violations, and (f), Violation of
juvenile dispositional orders, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02. See now § 30-9, Court authority to impose alternative
juvenile dispositions and sanctions.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:5

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
§ 1-6. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., the ordinances of the Village of East
Troy of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Village Board of the
Village of East Troy, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 510, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Village
of East Troy," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-7. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-8. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-9. Copy of Code on file. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall
remain there for use and examination by the public for at least two weeks,
in accordance with § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., and until final action is taken on
this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be
certified to by the Village Clerk, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring
to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Village Board
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the "Code of the Village of East Troy" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be inserted
in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:7
§ 1-11. Publication; filing. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
The Clerk of the Village of East Troy, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required by law, a notice of the adoption of this
ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office
of the Village Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular
office hours. The publication of notice of the enactment of this ordinance,
coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-12. Code to be kept up-to-date. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Village Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the Code
required to be filed in the Village Clerk's office for use by the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are included as supplements to said Code
book.
§ 1-13. Sale of Code. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased
from the Village Clerk or an authorized agent of the Village Clerk upon the
payment of a fee to be set by the Village Board. The Village Clerk may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village of
East Troy to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a penalty as
provided in § 1-4 of the Code.
§ 1-15. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 1-11 EAST TROY CODE § 1-16
1:8
§ 1-16. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-17. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Village of East Troy which is
not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain
in full force and effect. The follow portions of the 2000 Code of Ordinances
are specifically repealed: § 2-1-8, Municipal Board of Absentee Canvassers;
Title 7, Chapter 15, Mandating of Employee Benefits for Private Business;
Title 9, Chapter 4, Cable Television; and §§ 11-4-2 to 11-4-9 (offenses
involving alcohol beverages).
§ 1-18. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-17 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 15, 2014.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9
§ 1-19. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Village's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances adopting or amending the Zoning Map or otherwise
rezoning property.
O. Any charter ordinances.
P. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
specific fee amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the
Village.
Q. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
deposit or bond schedule.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending
rates or charges for water or sewer service.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Village of East Troy, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsections B
and C hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Village Board that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. The adoption of the Code includes the adoption of the following new
ordinance: Chapter 483, Erosion Control and Stormwater Management.
C. The amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number
references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and
appear in the Code.)2
§ 1-18 EAST TROY CODE § 1-20
1:10
§ 1-20. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-19C, the chapters, parts and sections that were
added, amended or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a
footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: [Amended (added, deleted) 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]. Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Village offices.
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:11
Chapter 6
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
§ 6-1. Review of administrative determinations.
Any person aggrieved by an administrative determination of the Village
Board, or a board, commission, committee, agency, officer or employee
of the Village of East Troy, or agent acting on its behalf, may have such
determination reviewed as provided in this chapter. The remedies under
this chapter shall not be exclusive, but an election to proceed hereunder
shall be an election of remedies.
§ 6-2. Determinations reviewable.
The following determinations are reviewable under this chapter:
§ 6-3. Determinations not subject to review.
The following determinations are not reviewable under this chapter:
A. The grant or denial in whole or in part after application of an initial
permit, license, right, privilege or authority, except a fermented malt
beverage or intoxicating liquor license.
B. The suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an existing permit,
license, right, privilege or authority, except as provided in § 6-3D.
C. The denial of a grant of money or other thing of value under a statute or
ordinance prescribing conditions of eligibility for such grant.
D. The imposition of a penalty or sanction upon any person except a
municipal employee or officer, other than by a court.
E. The suspension or removal of a Village officer or employee, except as
provided in § 6-3B and G.
A. A legislative enactment. (A legislative enactment is an ordinance,
resolution or adopted motion of the Village Board.)
B. Any action subject to administrative or judicial review procedures
under state statutes or other provisions of this Code.
C. The denial of a tort or contract claim for money, required to be filed
with the Village pursuant to statutory procedures for the filing of such
claims.3
D. The grant, denial, suspension or revocation of a fermented malt
beverage license or intoxicating liquor license under Ch. 125, Wis.
Stats.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 1-20 EAST TROY CODE § 6-3
1:12
§ 6-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — Includes the Village Board and any board,
commission, committee, agency, officer, employee or agent of the Village
making a determination under § 6-1, and every person, committee or agency
of the Village to make an independent review under § 6-8B.4
PERSON AGGRIEVED — Includes any individual, partnership, corporation,
association, public or private organization, or officer, department, board,
commission or agency of the Village whose rights, duties or privileges are
adversely affected by a determination of a municipal authority.
§ 6-5. Village officials and agencies.
A department, board, commission, agency, officer or employee of the Village
who or which is aggrieved may not initiate review under this chapter
of a determination of any other department, board, commission, agency,
officer or employee of the Village but may respond or intervene in a review
proceeding under this chapter initiated by another.
§ 6-6. Reducing determination to writing.
If a determination subject to this chapter is made orally or, if in writing,
does not state the reasons therefor, the municipal authority making such
determination shall, upon written request of any person aggrieved by such
determination made within 10 days of notice of such determination, reduce
the determination and the reasons therefor to writing and mail or deliver
such determination and reasons to the person making the request. The
determination shall be dated and shall advise such person of his/her right to
have such determination reviewed, that such review may be obtained within
30 days, and the officer or person to whom a request for review shall be
addressed.
§ 6-7. Request for review of determination.
Any person allegedly aggrieved may have a written or oral determination
reviewed by written request mailed or delivered to the municipal authority
which made such determination within 30 days of notice to such person
of such determination. The request for review shall state the grounds
E. Judgments and orders of a court.
F. Determinations made during municipal labor negotiations.
G. Determinations subject to grievance, arbitration or other procedures
provided in collective bargaining agreements.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 6-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:13
upon which the person allegedly aggrieved contends that the determination
should be modified or reversed. A request for review shall be made to the
officer, employee, agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body
who or which made the determination, but failure to make such request to
the proper party shall not preclude the person aggrieved from review unless
such failure has caused prejudice to the municipal authority.
§ 6-8. Review of determination.
§ 6-9. Administrative appeal.
A. Initial determination. If a request for review is made under § 6-7, the
determination to be reviewed shall be termed an "initial
determination."
B. Who shall make review. A review under this section may be made by the
officer, employee, agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body
who or which made the initial determination. However, an independent
review of such determination by another person, committee or agency
of the Village, appointed by the Village President without confirmation,
shall be provided if practicable.
C. When to make review. The municipal authority shall review the initial
determination within 15 days of receipt of a request for review. The
time for review may be extended by agreement with the person
allegedly aggrieved.
D. Right to present evidence and argument. The person aggrieved may file
with his/her request for review, or within the time agreed with the
municipal authority, written evidence and argument in support of his/
her position with respect to the initial determination.
E. Decision on review. The municipal authority may affirm, reverse or
modify the initial determination and shall mail or deliver to the person
aggrieved a copy of the municipal authority's decision on review which
shall state the reason for such decision. The decision shall advise the
person aggrieved of his/her right to appeal the decision, that appeal
may be taken within 30 days, and the office or person with whom notice
of appeal shall be filed.
A. From initial determination or decision on review.
(1) If the person aggrieved had a hearing substantially in compliance
with § 6-10 when the initial determination was made, he/she may
elect to follow §§ 6-6 through 6-8 but is not entitled to a further
hearing under § 6-10 unless granted by the municipal authority. He/
she may, however, seek judicial review under § 6-12.
(2) If the person aggrieved did not have a hearing substantially in
compliance with § 6-10 when the initial determination was made,
he/she shall follow §§ 6-6 through 6-8 and may appeal under this
section from the decision made under § 6-8.
§ 6-7 EAST TROY CODE § 6-9
1:14
§ 6-10. Hearing of administrative appeal.
§ 6-11. Final determination.
B. Time within which appeal may be taken. Appeal from a decision on
review under § 6-8 may be taken within 30 days of notice of such
decision.
C. How appeal may be taken. An appeal under this section may be taken
by filing with or mailing to the office or person designated in the
municipal authority's decision on review written notice of appeal.
A. Time of hearing. The Village shall provide the appellant a hearing on an
appeal under § 6-9 within 15 days of receipt of the notice of appeal and
shall serve the appellant with notice of such hearing by mail or personal
service at least 10 days before such hearing. The office or person with
whom a notice of appeal is filed shall immediately notify the Village
Attorney, who shall forthwith advise the Village President of such
appeal.
B. Conduct of hearing. At the hearing, the appellant and the municipal
authority may be represented by counsel and may present evidence and
call and examine witnesses and cross-examine witnesses of the other
party. Such witnesses shall be sworn by the person conducting the
hearing. The Village President shall appoint, without confirmation, an
impartial decision maker, who may be an officer, committee, board or
commission of the Village or the Village Board, who did not participate
in making or reviewing the initial determination, who shall make the
decision on administrative appeal. The decision maker may issue
subpoenas. The hearing may, however, be conducted by an impartial
person, committee, board or commission designated by the Village
President to conduct the hearing and report to the decision maker.
C. Record of hearing. The person conducting the hearing or a person
employed for that purpose shall take notes of the testimony and shall
mark and preserve all exhibits. The person conducting the hearing may,
and upon request of the appellant shall, cause the proceedings to be
taken by a stenographer or by a recording device, the expense thereof
to be paid by the Village.
D. Hearing on initial determination. Where substantial existing rights are
affected by an initial determination, the municipal authority making
such determination shall, when practicable, give any person directly
affected an opportunity to be heard in accordance with this section
before making such determination.
A. Within 20 days of completion of the hearing conducted under § 6-10 and
the filing of briefs, if any, the decision maker shall mail or deliver to the
appellant its written determination, stating the reason therefor. Such
determination shall be a final determination.
§ 6-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-11
1:15
§ 6-12. Judicial review.
§ 6-13. Legislative review.
Chapter 15
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency Government Committee — See Ch.
44.
§ 15-1. Board of Review.
B. A determination following a hearing substantially meeting the
requirements of § 6-10, or a decision on review under § 6-8 following
such hearing, shall be a final determination, judicial review of which
may be obtained under § 6-12.
A. Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final determination may seek
review thereof by writ of certiorari within 30 days of receipt of the final
determination.
B. The record of the proceedings shall be transcribed at the expense of the
person seeking review. A transcript shall be supplied to anyone
requesting the same at his expense. If the person seeking review
establishes indigence to the satisfaction of the reviewing court, the
court may order the proceedings transcribed at the expense of the
Village, and the person seeking review shall be furnished a free copy of
the transcript. By stipulation, the court may order a synopsis of the
proceedings in lieu of a transcript. The court may otherwise limit the
requirement for a transcript.
A. Seeking review pursuant to this chapter does not preclude a person
aggrieved from seeking relief from the Village Board or any of its
boards, commissions, committees or agencies which may have
jurisdiction.
B. If, in the course of legislative review under this section, a determination
is modified, such modification and any evidence adduced before the
Village Board, board, commission, committee or agency shall be made
part of the record on review under § 6-12.
C. The Village Board, board, commission, committee or agency conducting
a legislative review under this section need not conduct the type of
hearing required under § 6-10.
A. Organization. The Board of Review shall consist of the Village
President, the Village Clerk and two members and one or more
§ 6-11 EAST TROY CODE § 15-1
1:16
alternate members who are citizens of the Village and may be, but are
not required to be, elected or appointed officials or public employees,
with the exception of the Village Assessor, and are appointed by the
Village President in odd-numbered years, for terms of two years,
commencing on May 1. If more than one alternate is appointed, the
President shall designate one of the existing or newly appointed
alternates as first alternate, one as second alternate, and so forth
to establish the priority of all alternate members. The Assessor shall
attend all meetings of the Board of Review but shall not vote.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Compensation. Members of the Board of Review shall not receive
compensation for serving on the Board of Review. Village officials shall
not receive compensation beyond that which they receive for serving as
Village officials.5
C. Duties. The duties and functions of the Board of Review shall be as
prescribed in §§ 70.46 and 70.47, Wis. Stats.
D. Meetings. In accordance with § 70.47(3)(b), Wis. Stats., the Village
Board does hereby exercise its right to designate hours for the annual
Board of Review proceedings other than those set forth in § 70.47(3)(a),
Wis. Stats., and shall designate the hours of the annual Board of Review.
The Board may adjourn from day to day, or from time to time, until such
time as its business is completed, provided that adequate notice of each
adjournment is so given.
E. Clerk. The Village Clerk shall act as Clerk of the Board of Review and
shall keep an accurate record of all its proceedings. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
F. Objections to valuations to be written. No person shall be permitted to
appear and make objection before the Board of Review of the Village of
East Troy to the amount of valuation of any property unless objection
thereto shall first have been made in writing and filed with the Clerk of
the Board of Review.
G. Confidentiality of income and expenses. This subsection adopts by
reference § 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats. Income and expense information
provided by a property owner to the Assessor for the purposes of
establishing the valuation for assessment purposes by the income
method of valuation shall be confidential and not a public record open
to inspection or copying under § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats. An officer may
make disclosure of such information under the following
circumstances:
(1) The Assessor has access to such information in the performance of
his/her duties.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-1
1:17
§ 15-2. Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2) The Board of Review may review such information when needed, in
its opinion, to decide upon a contested assessment.
(3) Another person or body has the right to review such information
due to the intimate relationship to the duties of an office or as set
by law.
(4) The officer is complying with a court order.
(5) The person providing the income and expense information has
contested the assessment level at either the Board of Review or by
filing a claim for excessive assessment under § 74.37, Wis. Stats., in
which case the base records are open and public.
A. Establishment. A Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed and
governed by the state zoning enabling law as contained in § 62.23, Wis.
Stats., Chapter 510, Zoning, of the Village Code, and this section. The
laws of the state and Village ordinances shall prevail in that order. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five citizen members and at
least two alternate members, appointed by the Village President,
subject to confirmation by the Village Board, for a three-year term of
office. The members shall be removable by the Village Board for cause
upon written charges and upon public hearing. The Village President
shall designate one of the members Chairperson.6
B. Powers. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the powers prescribed
in Chapter 510, Zoning, § 510-148.7
C. Meetings and rules.
(1) All meetings and hearings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
open to the public, except that the Board may go into executive
session to deliberate after a hearing or an appeal. The final vote on
an appeal shall be taken in open session by roll call vote, recorded
and open for public inspection at the Municipal Building. Public
notice of all regular and special meetings shall be given to the
public and news media as required by the Wisconsin Open Meeting
Law.8
(2) Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or by the
Secretary at the request of two members. Notice of a special
meeting shall be mailed to each member at least 48 hours prior to
the time set for the meeting, or announcement of the meeting shall
be made at any meeting at which all members are present.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
8. Editor's Note: See §§ 19.81 to 19.98, Wis. Stats.
§ 15-1 EAST TROY CODE § 15-2
1:18
§ 15-3. Plan Commission.
(3) Hearings may be held at any regular or special meeting at the time
set by the Chairperson.
(4) A quorum for any meeting or hearing shall consist of three
members, but a lesser number may meet and adjourn to a specified
time. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(5) The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the
office of the Village Clerk and shall be public record. The Board
shall adopt its own rules of procedure, not in conflict with this Code
of Ordinances or with the applicable Wisconsin Statutes.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(6) No Board member shall participate in the decision on or vote upon
any case in which the member is financially interested, directly or
indirectly, but the Chairperson shall direct an alternate member to
act instead. Disqualification of a member for interest shall not
decrease the number of votes required for acting upon any matter,
but such member may be counted in determining whether a
quorum is present for the transaction of business.
D. Offices. The Village Board shall provide suitable offices for holding
hearings and the preservation of records, documents and accounts.9
A. Composition. The Village Plan Commission shall consist of seven
members who shall be the following: the Village President, who shall be
its presiding officer, a Village Trustee, and five citizen members who
shall serve for three-year terms, one of whom may be, but is not
required to be, a member of the Park and Recreation Board.
B. Appointment.
(1) Trustee member. The Trustee member shall be annually appointed
by a majority vote at the first regularly scheduled Board of Trustees
meeting after the April election.
(2) Citizen members.
(a) The five citizen members shall be appointed by the Village
President for a term of three years during the month of April
and have terms expiring April 30, subject to Village Board
approval.10
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 15-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-3
1:19
(b) All citizen members shall be persons of recognized experience
and qualifications and shall hold office until their respective
successors are selected and qualified. Whenever a vacancy
shall occur in any citizen member, a successor shall be
appointed for the unexpired term in the manner as set forth
above.
C. Record. The Plan Commission shall keep a written record of its
proceedings, to include all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed
with the Village Clerk. Four members shall constitute a quorum, but all
actions shall require the affirmative approval of a majority of all of the
members of the Commission. [Amended 12-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
D. Duties.
(1) The Comprehensive Plan.11
(a) The Plan Commission shall make, adopt and, as necessary,
amend, extend or add to the Comprehensive Plan, subject to
Village Board confirmation, for the physical development of the
Village, including areas outside of its boundaries which, in the
Plan Commission's judgment, bear relation to the development
of the Village. The Comprehensive Plan, with the
accompanying maps, plats and descriptive and explanatory
matter, shall show the Commission's recommendations for
such physical development and may include, among other
things, without limitation because of enumeration, the general
location, character and extent of streets, highways, freeways,
street grades, roadways, walks, parking areas, public places
and areas, parks, parkways, playgrounds, sites for public
buildings and structures, and the general location and extent
of sewers, water conduits and other public utilities, whether
privately or publicly owned, the acceptance, widening,
narrowing, extension, relocation, removal, vacation,
abandonment or change of use of any of the foregoing public
ways, grounds, places, spaces, buildings, properties, utilities,
routes or terminals, the general location, character and extent
of community centers and neighborhood units, and a
comprehensive zoning plan.
(b) The Commission may adopt the Comprehensive Plan as a
whole by a single resolution or, as the work of making the
whole Comprehensive Plan progresses, may, from time to time,
by resolution, adopt a part or parts thereof, any such part to
correspond generally with one or more of the functional
subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan. The adoption of
the plan or any part, amendment or addition shall be by
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 15-3 EAST TROY CODE § 15-3
1:20
resolution carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a
majority of all the members of the Plan Commission, subject
to confirmation by the Village Board. The resolution shall refer
expressly to the maps, descriptive matter and other matters
intended by the Commission to form the whole or any part
of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the
adopted plan or part thereof by the identifying signature of the
Secretary of the Commission, and a copy of the plan or part
thereof shall be certified to the Village Board. The purpose and
effect of the adoption and certifying of the Comprehensive Plan
or part thereof shall be solely to aid the Plan Commission and
the Village Board in the performance of their duties.
(2) Matters referred to Plan Commission. The Village Board or officer
of the Village having final authority thereon shall refer to the Plan
Commission for its consideration and report before final action is
taken by the Board, public body or officer the following matters:
the location of any statue or other memorial; the location,
acceptance, extension, alteration, vacation, abandonment, change
of use, sale, acquisition of land for or lease of land for any street,
alley or other public way, park, playground, airport, area for
parking vehicles, or other memorial or public grounds; the location,
extension, abandonment or authorization for any public utility,
whether publicly or privately owned; all plats of lands in the Village
or within the territory over which the Village is given platting
jurisdiction by Ch. 236, Wis. Stats.; the location, character and
extent or acquisition, leasing or sale of lands for public or
semipublic housing, slum clearance, relief of congestion, or
vacation camps for children; and the amendment or repeal of any
land use ordinance.
(3) Miscellaneous powers. The Commission may make reports and
recommendations relating to the plan and development of the
Village to public officials and agencies; civic, education,
professional and other organizations; and citizens. It may
recommend to the Village Board programs for public improvements
and the financing thereof. All public officials shall, upon request,
furnish to the Commission, within a reasonable time, such available
information as it may require for its work. The Commission, its
members and employees, in the performance of its function, may
enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys, and place
and maintain necessary monuments and markers thereon. In
general, the Commission shall have such powers as may be
necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote
municipal planning in cooperation with the Village Board. The
Commission shall oversee community development block grants.
The Village Board may refer to the Commission for its
consideration and recommendation any matter pertaining to
planning and development of land within the Village and within 1 1/
2 miles of the limits of the Village. All plats or replats of any lands
§ 15-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-3
1:21
§ 15-4. Library Board.
within the limits of the Village or any lands outside the Village and
within 1 1/2 miles of the limits of the Village shall be submitted to
the Commission for its recommendation to the Village Board before
the same are approved by the Village Board.
E. Compensation; oath. Compensation may be established by the Village
Board for service on the Commission. Citizen members shall take the
official oath required by § 19.01, Wis. Stats., which shall be filed with
the Village Clerk. [Amended 12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
F. Organization. As soon as all members of the first Commission shall have
been appointed, the Village Clerk shall give each member a written
notice of the appointment and thereon shall fix the time and place of the
first meeting, which shall be not less than five nor more than 10 days
thereafter. Such Commission shall elect a Secretary who shall keep a
written record of its proceedings, to include all actions taken, a copy of
which shall be filed with the Village Clerk. [Amended 12-19-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
G. Employees; budget. The Plan Commission shall have the power to
employ experts and such staff as may be necessary and to pay for their
services and such other expenses as may be necessary and proper,
within the limits of the budget established by the Village Board or
placed at its disposal through gift, and subject to any ordinance or
resolution enacted by the Village Board. As far as possible, the
Commission shall utilize the services of existing Village officials and
employees.
H. Rules of procedure; report. The Plan Commission is hereby authorized
to adopt rules governing its own proceedings. The Commission shall
make a monthly report, with such general recommendations as to
matters covered by its prescribed duties and authority as seem proper.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
A. Organization; terms.
(1) There is hereby created, pursuant to Ch. 43, Wis. Stats., a
municipal Library Board for the Village, consisting of seven
members. Membership shall consist of three citizens and one
Trustee member appointed by the Village President, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board, one representative appointed by
the School District and two representatives appointed by Walworth
County. Pursuant to § 43.54(1), Wis. Stats., up to two members of
the Library Board may be residents of towns adjacent to the
Village.12
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 15-3 EAST TROY CODE § 15-4
1:22
§ 15-5. Park and Recreation Board.
(2) Terms of such members shall be from May 1 in the year of their
appointment, and thereafter each regular appointment shall be for
a term of three years. Not more than one member of the Village
Board shall, at any time, be a member of the Library Board. Citizen
members shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board. The Trustee member shall be
appointed annually by the Village President, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board.
(3) A majority of the membership of the Board shall constitute a
quorum.
(4) As soon as practical after the first appointments, at a date and
place fixed by the appointing officer, and annually thereafter, within
30 days after the time designated in this section for the beginning
of terms, the members of the Library Board shall organize by
election from among their number of a President and such other
officers that they deem necessary and prescribe and adopt rules
and regulations for the operation of the library.13
B. Duties and powers. The Library Board shall have the duties and powers
as prescribed by Ch. 43, Wis. Stats., and more particularly set forth in
§ 43.58, Wis. Stats.
A. Established. Pursuant to the provisions of §§ 27.08(1) and 27.13, Wis.
Stats., there is hereby created a Park and Recreation Board for the
Village.
B. Membership; compensation. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
(1) The Park and Recreation Board shall consist of seven members who
shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation
by a majority vote of the Village Board.
(2) One member shall be a Village Trustee.
(3) The members shall serve without compensation.
C. Presiding officer. The presiding officer shall be a Chairperson elected
annually by a majority of the full Board.
D. Secretary appointment. The Secretary shall be appointed by the
Chairperson.
E. Oaths. Official oaths shall be taken by all members in accordance with
§ 19.01, Wis. Stats., within five days of receiving notice of their
appointments. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 15-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-5
1:23
F. Terms. Those members appointed by the Village President shall serve
for two years, commencing on May 1, except that when the Board is
first constituted, three members shall be appointed for a term of one
year. The Trustee member shall be appointed annually by the Village
President, subject to confirmation by the Village Board. [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
G. Vacancy filling. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same
manner as appointments for the full term. [Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02]
H. Adoption of rules. The Park and Recreation Board shall organize and
adopt rules for its own governance in accordance with the provisions of
this section. These rules shall be submitted to the Village Board for
approval, rejection or modification and shall not become effective until
approved by the Village Board.
I. Meetings. Regular meetings shall be held monthly and special meetings
at the call of the President or a majority of the full Board. No more than
one meeting per quarter may be canceled. All meetings shall be open to
the public. [Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-13; 9-19-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-11]
J. Standing and special committees. Standing and special committees
may be created by the Board and members of the committees appointed
by the Chairperson.
K. Quorum. A quorum shall be four members, but all actions shall require
approval of a majority of the full Board, except on a motion to adjourn.
L. Records; copies on file. A written record shall be kept showing all
actions taken, resolutions, findings, determinations, transactions and
recommendations made. A copy shall be filed with the Village Clerk as a
public record. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
M. Powers and duties. The Park and Recreation Board, subject to the
approval of the Village Board, except in instances expressly otherwise
provided in this section or in any other ordinance of the Village, shall
have such powers and duties and be subject to such limitations as
provided in § 27.08(2), (5) and (6), Wis. Stats. The following powers are
authorized:
(1) To appoint such agents and employees as may be necessary to
carry out its functions, subject to approval of and appropriations
and regulations made by the Village Board.
(2) To make reports and recommendations relating to park and
recreation development in the Village to the Village Board.
(3) To recommend park, recreation and open space land acquisition
and development programs and the financing thereof to the Village
Board.
§ 15-5 EAST TROY CODE § 15-5
1:24
(4) To recommend improvements to Village parks and open spaces and
the financing thereof to the Village Board.
(5) To recommend to the Village Board recreation programs and, upon
approval of the Village Board, to coordinate such programs.
(6) To request information that is available to the public from any
Village official to be furnished within a reasonable time. Other
information requested shall be provided in the sole discretion of the
official unless release of such information is prohibited by law.
(7) To prepare and recommend to the Village Plan Commission that
component of the Village Comprehensive Plan pertaining to park,
recreation and related open space development in the Village.14
(8) To consider and report or recommend on all matters referred to it
by the Village Board.
(9) To submit to the Village Board:
(a) Prior to September 1 in each year, an estimate of the
expenditures to be made by the Park and Recreation Board
during the ensuing calendar year, including an estimate of the
amount necessary for the purchase and improvement of land
for parks, parkways, boulevards, pleasure drives and related
park and recreation areas as provided in § 27.10(1)(a), Wis.
Stats. The inclusion of any such estimate or sum in the Village
budget or in any appropriation or levy ordinance of the Village
shall not constitute Village Board approval of the transaction to
which the estimate or sum relates.
(b) Prior to March 1 in each year, a detailed report of all its
transactions for the preceding year, together with an itemized
account of all receipts and expenditures, a list of employees
and an inventory of property in charge of the Board, as
provided in § 27.10(1)(a), Wis. Stats.
N. Jurisdiction of Police Department. All Village parks, parkways,
boulevards and pleasure drives maintained and controlled in or by the
Village shall be subject to the supervision by and the jurisdiction of the
Police Department and shall be subject to the ordinances of the Village.
O. Enactment of ordinances. The Park and Recreation Board shall prepare
and recommend to the Village Board the enactment of such ordinances
as it deems necessary to protect and preserve the parks, parkways,
boulevards and pleasure drives in the Village, or under its charge, or to
secure the free and reasonable use thereof by the public. The Village
Board may adopt such proposed ordinances as it deems will be suitable
for the purposes stated or such other ordinances so deemed.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 15-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-6
1:25
§ 15-6. Booth Lake Memorial Park Board.
The joint Booth Lake Memorial Park Board of the Village of East Troy, the
Town of East Troy and the Town of Troy shall consist of six representatives,
two of whom shall be appointed by the Village Board. The appointments
shall be made annually. The Village of East Troy appointments shall be
made at the organizational meeting by the Village President, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board. One member shall be a Trustee and one
member a citizen.15
§ 15-7. Meetings and public notice.
A. Regular meetings; public notice. Every board, committee and
commission created by or existing under the ordinances of the Village
shall:
(1) Schedule a date, time and place for its meetings;
(2) Post, or when necessary publish, notice in or notify the official
Village newspaper thereof, in compliance with state law thereon;
and/or
(3) Post an agenda of the matters to be taken up at such meeting.
B. Form of notice. Such notice shall set forth the time, date, place and
subject matter of the meeting, including that intended for consideration
at any contemplated closed session which may be authorized by law.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
C. Notice to members. Every member of any board, commission or
committee of the Village of East Troy shall be notified by the secretary
thereof that a meeting is to be held and the time and place of such
meeting and the subject to be considered thereat. No member shall be
intentionally excluded from any meeting by a failure to give proper
notice or a reasonable attempt to give proper notice to such member.
D. Minutes to be kept. Every board, commission and committee shall keep
a record of the minutes of its proceedings and shall cause a signed copy
thereof to be filed by its secretary with the Village Clerk within one
week of the meeting date. The Village Clerk shall furnish a copy of all
minutes filed with him/her to each member of the Village Board. All
such minutes shall be public record. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
E. Special meetings. Nothing in Subsection A shall preclude the calling of
a special meeting or dispensing with the publication of notice or such
posting of the agenda, for good cause, but such special meetings shall
nonetheless comply in all respects with the provisions of §§ 19.81 to
19.89, Wis. Stats.
15.Editor's Note: Original § 2-4-7, Forestry Board, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 15-6 EAST TROY CODE § 15-8
1:26
§ 15-8. Residency requirement; attendance standards.
§ 15-9. Rules of procedure.
Chapter 24
CITATIONS
§ 24-1. Authorization for use of citation.
The Village of East Troy hereby elects to use the citation method of
enforcement of ordinances. All Village officers and other Village personnel
charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this Code
of Ordinances are hereby authorized, pursuant to § 66.0113(1)(a), Wis.
Stats., to issue citations for violations of this Code of Ordinances, including
ordinances for which a statutory counterpart exists.
§ 24-2. Officials authorized to issue citation.
Citations authorized in § 24-1 above may be issued by law enforcement
officers of the Village and by the following designated Village officials with
respect to sections of the Code which are directly related to the official's
area of responsibility. The officials granted authority to issue citations under
A. Residency. Except for the Library Board or Booth Lake Memorial Park
Board, no person not a resident of and not residing in the Village of East
Troy shall be appointed in a voting capacity to any Village board,
committee or commission. Any board, committee or commission
member who moves from the Village shall be removed from such board,
committee or commission but may be appointed to serve in an ex officio
capacity.16
B. Attendance standard. Members of boards, committees and commissions
are required to attend a minimum of 2/3 of the meetings in each sixmonth
period of their respective bodies, unless excused by the
membership of their body. Failure to comply with this subsection may
result in the removal and replacement of the official found to be in
noncompliance.
A. Except as provided herein, the provisions of §§ 148-18 through 148-22
of this Code, relating to rules of procedure for the Village Board,
together with Robert's Rules of Order, shall, as far as applicable, also
apply to committee, board and commission meetings.
B. A simple majority of the members of a board, committee or commission
shall constitute a quorum.17
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). Original § 2-4-11, Economic Development Committee, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 15-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-2
1:27
this section may delegate the authority to other Village employees within
the designated official's department, with the approval of the Village Board:
§ 24-3. Form of citation.
The form of the citation to be issued by Village police officers or other
designated Village officials is incorporated herein by reference and shall
provide for the following information;
A. Building Inspector. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
B. Fire Inspector.
C. Weed Commissioner.
D. Code Compliance Specialist. [Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
A. The name and address of the alleged violator. [Amended 6-15-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-02]
B. The factual allegations describing the alleged violation.
C. The time and place of offense. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
D. The section of the ordinance violated.
E. A designation of the offense in such manner as can be readily
understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so.
F. The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court.
G. A statement which, in essence, informs the alleged violator that:
(1) The alleged violator may make a cash deposit of a specified amount
to be mailed to a specified official within a specified time.
(2) If the alleged violator makes such a deposit, he/she need not
appear in court unless subsequently summoned.
(3) If the alleged violator makes a cash deposit and does not appear in
court, he or she either will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no
contest and submitted to a forfeiture, plus costs, fees, and
surcharges imposed under Ch. 814, Wis. Stats., not to exceed the
amount of the deposit or will be summoned into court to answer the
complaint if the court does not accept the plea of no contest.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(4) If the alleged violator does not make a cash deposit and does not
appear in court at the time specified, the court may issue a
summons or a warrant for the defendant's arrest or consider the
nonappearance to be a plea of no contest and enter judgment under
§ 66.0113(3)(d), Wis. Stats., or the municipality may commence an
§ 24-2 EAST TROY CODE § 24-3
1:28
§ 24-4. Deposit schedule. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
The cash deposits for the various ordinances for which a citation may be
issued are as established on the deposit schedule adopted by the Village
Board, a copy of which is on file with the Village Clerk. In addition to
the deposit amount listed, the deposit shall include the costs, fees and
surcharges imposed under Ch. 814, Wis. Stats. The Chief of Police shall be
provided a copy of all deposit schedules and amendments thereto.
§ 24-5. Receipt of cash deposits.
Deposits shall be made in cash, money order, personal checks or certified
check to the Clerk of Municipal Court. Receipts shall be given for all
deposits received.
§ 24-6. Violator's options; procedure on default.
Section 66.0113(3), Wis. Stats., relating to a violator's options and
procedure on default, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference.
§ 24-7. Nonexclusivity of chapter.
action against the alleged violator to collect the forfeiture, plus
costs, fees, and surcharges imposed under Ch. 814, Wis. Stats.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(5) If the court finds that the violation involves an ordinance that
prohibits conduct that is the same as or similar to conduct
prohibited by state statute punishable by fine or imprisonment or
both, and that the violation resulted in damage to the property of or
physical injury to a person other than the alleged violator, the court
may summon the alleged violator into court to determine if
restitution shall be ordered under § 800.093, Wis. Stats. [Added
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
H. A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit, the
alleged violator shall sign an appropriate statement which accompanies
the citation to indicate that he/she read the statement required under
Subsection G and shall send the signed statement with the cash deposit.
I. Such other information as may be deemed necessary.
A. Adoption of this chapter does not preclude the Village Board from
adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any
other law or ordinance relating to the same or other matters.
B. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the Village or
any authorized officer from proceeding under any other ordinance or
law or by any other enforcement method to enforce any ordinance,
regulation or order.
§ 24-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-7
1:29
Chapter 30
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 30-1. Court established.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Ch. 755, Wis. Stats., there is hereby
established a Municipal Court for the Village of East Troy.
§ 30-2. Municipal Judge.
§ 30-3. Procedure.
A. Office of Municipal Judge created. Pursuant to the authority granted by
Ch. 755, Wis. Stats., there is hereby created the office of Municipal
Judge for the Municipal Court for the Village of East Troy.
B. Election; term. The Municipal Judge shall be elected at large at the
spring election 2012 for a term of four years, commencing on May 1
succeeding the election. The Municipal Judge shall be subject to the
Wisconsin Code of Judicial Ethics and shall file an annual financial
statement.
C. Salary. The salary of the Municipal Judge may be increased for a new
term prior to the beginning of the term for the Judge, or for the second
or a subsequent year of a term before the start of that year during the
term, but the salary shall not be decreased during the term of the
Judge. Salaries may be paid annually or in equal installments as
determined by the Village Board, but no Judge may be paid a salary for
that portion of any term during which portion the Judge has not
executed the official bond or official oath as required by § 755.03, Wis.
Stats., and filed under § 19.01(4)(c), Wis. Stats., as amended.18
D. Bond; oath. The Municipal Judge shall execute and file with the Clerk of
the Circuit Court for Walworth County the oath prescribed by § 755.03,
Wis. Stats., and an official bond in such an amount as shall be fixed by
the Village Board.
A. The procedure in Municipal Court for the Village of East Troy shall be
as provided in this chapter and state law, including, but not by way of
limitation, Chs. 62, 66, 755 and 800, Wis. Stats.
B. The Municipal Court shall be open as determined by the Municipal
Judge.
C. The Municipal Judge shall keep his/her office and hold court in the
Municipal Building.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 24-7 EAST TROY CODE § 30-3
1:30
§ 30-4. Bonds, forfeitures and fees.
§ 30-5. Abolition of Court.
The Village Board may, by ordinance or by law, abolish the Municipal Court
at the end of any term for which the Judge has been elected.
D. If the Municipal Judge is temporarily absent, sick or disabled, the
provisions of § 800.06(1), Wis. Stats., shall apply, and if the Municipal
Judge becomes incompetent, unable or fails to act, or in the event of a
vacancy, the provisions of § 800.06(2), Wis. Stats., shall apply. Any
substitute Municipal Judge designated or assigned hereunder shall be
compensated as authorized by the Village Board. The Municipal Judge
shall satisfy all continuing education requirements for municipal
judges.
E. Upon the proper and timely written request for substitution of the
Municipal Judge, the provisions of § 800.05, Wis. Stats., shall apply.
F. The procedures of the Municipal Court shall be in accord with the
applicable Wisconsin Statutes and Village ordinances. The Court shall
abide by the Wisconsin Rules of Evidence and shall abide by the
Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule. In nontraffic matters, the
Municipal Judge shall draft a bond schedule, which shall become
effective upon approval by the Village Board. No bond shall exceed the
maximum penalty which could be imposed for the ordinance violation.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
A. Bonds for appearance, partial payments and other funds collected by
the Court shall be treated as escrow funds and deposited with the
Village Treasurer. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall collect all forfeitures and costs in
any action or proceeding before him/her and shall pay over such
moneys to the Village Treasurer within 30 days after receipt by the
Municipal Court. At the time of payment, the Municipal Court Clerk
shall report to the Village Treasurer the title of the action and the total
amount of the forfeiture, fees, penalty assessments and costs, if any.
The Village Treasurer shall disburse the fees as provided in § 814.65,
Wis. Stats., and disburse any penalty assessments pursuant to
§ 66.0114(1)(b), Wis. Stats.19 [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
C. Pursuant to § 814.65, Wis. Stats., the fee for court costs in a Municipal
Court action shall be set by the Village Board. [Amended 12-16-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-11; 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-6
1:31
§ 30-6. Adoption of statutory provisions.
Chapters 755 and 800, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted by reference.
§ 30-7. Contempt of court.20
The Municipal Judge may punish for contempt of court in accordance with
§ 800.12, Wis. Stats.
§ 30-8. Stipulations and deposits.
§ 30-9. Court authority to impose alternative juvenile dispositions
and sanctions.
A. Deposit schedule to be established. The Municipal Judge shall establish
and submit to the Village Board for approval a schedule of deposits for
violations of this Code of Ordinances, Village resolutions and bylaws,
except traffic regulations, which are governed by § 345.27, Wis. Stats.,
and boating violations governed by § 23.67, Wis. Stats. When approved
by the Board, such deposit schedule shall be posted in the office of the
Municipal Court Clerk and the Village Police Department.21
B. Stipulation and deposit in lieu of court appearance. Persons cited for
violations of this Code of Ordinances, Village resolutions or bylaws for
which a deposit has been established under this section shall be
permitted to make a stipulation of no contest and a deposit in lieu of
court appearance, as provided in §§ 800.035 and 800.09, Wis. Stats.22
C. Traffic and boating deposits. The deposit schedule established by the
Wisconsin Judicial Conference and the procedures set forth in Chs. 23
and 345, Wis. Stats., shall apply to stipulations and deposits for
violations of traffic regulations enacted in accordance with § 345.27,
Wis. Stats., and boating regulations enacted in accordance with
§ 30.77, Wis. Stats.
D. When not permitted. Stipulations and deposits shall not be permitted
after initial appearance or in cases of contempt under § 30-7 above.
A. For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance, the Municipal
Court is authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in
§§ 938.343 and 938.344, Wis. Stats., in accordance with the provisions
of those statutes.23
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 30-6 EAST TROY CODE § 30-9
1:32
§ 30-10. Clerk of Municipal Court.
B. For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates a
condition of a dispositional order of the Court under § 938.343 or
938.344, Wis. Stats., the Municipal Court is authorized to impose any of
the sanctions listed in § 938.355(6)(d), Wis. Stats., in accordance with
the provisions of those statutes.
C. This section is enacted under the authority of § 938.17(2)(cm), Wis.
Stats.
A. Appointment. The Municipal Judge shall, in writing, appoint a Clerk of
the Municipal Court. The Clerk's salary shall be fixed by the Village
Board. The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall hold office for an
indefinite term of office. The Clerk shall, before entering upon the
duties of his/her office, take the oath provided by § 19.01, Wis. Stats.,
and give such bond as the Board may require. The oath and bond of the
Clerk of the Municipal Court shall be filed with the Village Clerk. The
cost of such bond shall be paid by the Village. [Amended 12-16-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Duties. The Court Clerk shall:
(1) File and review citations and complaints, assuring their
correctness.
(2) Reply to departmental mail concerning routine matters, as
prescribed by the Municipal Judge.
(3) Assign docket numbers to citations and complaints, type the docket
sheets and gather all material pertinent to cases.
(4) Determine and schedule Court dates and facilities.
(5) Communicate with law officers, attorneys and defendants
regarding Court proceedings.
(6) Balance dockets at the conclusion of Court proceedings.
(7) Prepare and mail warrants and summons.
(8) Prepare monthly report of financial activities.
(9) Assist in the collection of traffic bonds.
(10) Prepare necessary communications for jury trials and transfers to
Circuit Court.
(11) Perform such other duties as may be required by the Municipal
Judge and Village Board.
(12) Retain records related to the disposition made of the case, the
amount of fine and costs paid and to whom paid and bond posted.
[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
§ 30-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-10
1:33
Chapter 41
ELECTIONS
§ 41-1. Election poll hours.
The voting polls in the Village of East Troy, Walworth County, Wisconsin,
shall be opened from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. for all elections.
§ 41-2. Election officials. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
Election officials for each polling place shall be appointed pursuant to
§§ 7.30, 7.31 and 7.32, Wis. Stats. Such election officials shall have all
of the powers and perform all of the duties prescribed for such officers
by the statutes. The Village Clerk is hereby authorized to select alternate
officials or two sets of officials to work at different times on election day
and shall have the power to limit the number of election officials and
establish different working hours for different officials. The Village Clerk
shall determine, in advance of each election, whether the number of
election officials for such election should be reduced from the number
prescribed by the Wisconsin Statutes, and if such a reduction is so
determined, the Village Clerk shall further redistribute duties among the
remaining officials.
§ 41-3. Nomination of elective officers.
Candidates for elective office in the Village shall be nominated by
nomination papers signed by not fewer than 20 nor more than 100 electors
of the Village of East Troy. The nomination of candidates shall, in all
respects, conform to the requirements of Ch. 8, Wis. Stats.
§ 41-4. Nonpartisan primary.
Candidates for elected Village offices shall be nominated by a nonpartisan
primary conducted pursuant to § 8.05(5), Wis. Stats. Such candidate shall
file with his/her nomination papers a declaration that he/she will qualify for
the office to which he/she may be elected.
§ 41-5. Voter registration.
A. Voter registration required. Voter registration is required pursuant to
§ 6.27, Wis. Stats.24
B. State statutes adopted. The provisions of §§ 6.26 through 6.57 inclusive
of the Wisconsin Statutes are adopted and, by reference, made a part of
this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 30-10 EAST TROY CODE § 41-5
1:34
Chapter 44
EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT
§ 44-1. Emergency government defined.
"Emergency government" means the preparation for and the carrying out
of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military
forces are primarily responsible, to minimize injury and repair damage
resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile
acts, natural disasters, chemical disasters and nuclear disasters.
§ 44-2. Policy and purpose.
§ 44-3. Emergency Government Committee.
A. By reason of the increasing possibility of disasters of unprecedented
size and destructive potential, and to ensure that preparation will be
adequate to cope with such disasters, and to provide for the common
defense, to protect the public peace, health, safety and general welfare,
and to preserve the lives and property of the people, it is declared
necessary to:
(1) Establish a local emergency government organization.
(2) Provide for the exercise of necessary powers during life and
property threatening emergencies.
(3) Provide for the rendering of cooperation and mutual aid between
the Village of East Troy and other political subdivisions.
B. It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the policy of
the Village of East Troy that all emergency government functions be
coordinated to the maximum extent possible with existing services and
facilities of the Village and with comparable functions of the federal,
state and county government and other political subdivisions, and of
various private agencies, to the end that the most effective preparations
and use may be made of the manpower, resources and facilities for
dealing with any disaster that may occur.
A. Organization.
(1) The Emergency Government Committee shall be composed of the
following personnel and shall serve without compensation, except
as stated in § 44-4A and B:
(a) Village of East Troy Board President.
(b) Emergency Government Manager.
(c) Village of East Troy Chief of Police.
(d) Joint Fire District Chief (or authorized representative).
§ 41-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-3
1:35
§ 44-4. Emergency Government Manager.
(e) Rescue Squad Captain (or authorized representative).
(f) Director of Public Works.25
(g) Airport Manager.
(h) Authorized representative of the East Troy School District.
(i) Authorized representative of Tri Troy Ambulance.
(2) The Village Board President shall serve as Chairperson of the
Committee, and the Emergency Government Manager shall serve
as Secretary.
B. Committee duties.
(1) The Emergency Government Committee shall be an advisory and
planning body and shall advise the Village President, Emergency
Government Manager and the Village Board on all matters
pertaining to emergency government.
(2) The Emergency Government Committee shall meet at least four
times annually, on a quarterly basis, and may meet more frequently
if it is deemed necessary by the Committee. A copy of the minutes
of all meetings shall be forwarded to the Village Clerk and to all
members of the Village Board. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(3) The Emergency Government Committee shall present an annual
report to the Village Board in May of each year, advising the Village
Board of the status of readiness of local facilities and personnel and
of the activities of the Emergency Government Committee during
the preceding year.
A. Appointment; compensation; oath. The Emergency Government
Manager shall be appointed by the Village Board, shall receive such
daily compensation as may be determined by the Village Board and
shall take and file an official oath of office. A Manager appointee may be
selected from the membership of the Committee or may be selected
from the general public. A Manager serves at the pleasure of the Village
Board and may be removed by a majority vote of the Village Board.26
B. Assistant managers; appointment; compensation. An assistant may be
appointed by the Village Board as may be deemed necessary, and the
appointee shall receive such daily compensation as may be determined
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 44-3 EAST TROY CODE § 44-4
1:36
§ 44-5. Emergency regulations.
Whenever necessary to meet an emergency of any nature for which
adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Village Board or the
Village President, the Manager, in the absence of the Village President, may
by proclamation promulgate and enforce such orders, rules and regulations
relating to the conduct of persons and use of property as shall be necessary
to protect the public peace, health and safety and preserve the lives and
by the Village Board. An assistant serves at the pleasure of the Village
Board and may be removed by a majority vote of the Village Board.
C. Power and duties.
(1) The Manager shall be the executive head of the Emergency
Government Organization and shall have direct responsibility for
the organization, administration and operation of the Emergency
Government Organization, subject to the direction and approval of
the Village Board.
(2) The Manager shall coordinate all activities of emergency
government within the Village, maintain liaison and cooperate with
emergency government agencies and organizations of other
political subdivisions and the state and federal governments, and
participate in county and state emergency government activities
upon request and shall have such additional authority, duties and
responsibilities as are authorized by this chapter and as may, from
time to time, be required by the Emergency Government
Committee and/or the Village Board.
D. General plan. The Manager, with the assistance and cooperation of the
Emergency Government Committee, shall prepare a comprehensive
general plan for the emergency government of the Village and shall
present such plan to the Village Board for its approval. When the Village
Board has approved the plan by resolution, it shall be the duty of all
municipal agencies and all emergency government forces of the Village
to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved.
The plan may be modified in like manner.
E. Utilization of existing services and facilities. In preparing and executing
the Emergency Government Plan, the Manager shall utilize the
services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the existing departments
and agencies of the Village to the maximum extent practicable. The
officers and personnel of all such departments and agencies shall
cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the Manager.
F. Mutual aid agreements. The Emergency Government Manager may,
subject to the approval of the Emergency Government Committee and
the Village Board, enter into mutual aid agreements with other political
subdivisions. Copies of such agreements shall be filed with all
government bodies and/or agencies that require them.
§ 44-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-5
1:37
property and to ensure the cooperation necessary in emergency
government activities. Such proclamations shall be posted in three public
places within the Village of East Troy and may be rescinded by the Village
Board at any time by resolution.
§ 44-6. Emergency declaration.
§ 44-7. County jurisdiction.27
Chapter 18, Civil Emergencies, of the Walworth County Code shall have
precedence over this chapter.
§ 44-8. Violations and penalties.28
No person shall willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the
Emergency Government Organization in the enforcement of any order, rule,
regulation or plan issued pursuant to this chapter or do any act forbidden
by any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to the authority
contained in this chapter. Any person found to be in violation of this chapter
shall be subject to a forfeiture of of not more than $200.
Chapter 52
FINANCE AND TAXATION
A. Upon the declaration by the Governor, Village President or the
Emergency Government Manager in the absence of the Village
President, or by the Village Board, of a state of emergency, the
Emergency Government Manager shall issue all necessary
proclamations as to the existence of such state of emergency and shall
issue such disaster warnings or alerts as shall be required in the
Emergency Government Plan.
B. The Emergency Government Organization shall take action in
accordance with the Emergency Government Plan only after the
declaration of an emergency and the issuance of the official disaster
warnings. Such state of emergency shall continue until terminated by
the issuing authority, provided that any such declaration not issued by
the Governor may be terminated by a declaration of the Village Board.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 44-5 EAST TROY CODE § 44-8
1:38
ARTICLE I
Finance
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 3, Ch. 1, of the 2000
Code]
§ 52-1. Preparation of tax roll; tax collection.
§ 52-2. Duplicate Treasurer's bond eliminated. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
§ 52-3. Village budget.
A. Content of tax roll. Pursuant to § 70.65, Wis. Stats., the
Village Clerk shall prepare a tax roll and include the required contents
as described in § 70.65, Wis. Stats. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
B. Property tax collection. All provisions of Ch. 74, Wis. Stats., in regards
to property tax collection are adopted and by reference made a part of
this article with the same force and effect as though set out in full.
A. Bond eliminated. The Village of East Troy elects not to give the bond on
the Village Treasurer, in his/her capacity as Treasurer, as provided for
by § 70.67(1), Wis. Stats.
B. Village liable for default of Treasurer. Pursuant to § 70.67(2), Wis.
Stats., the Village shall be obligated to pay, in case the
Village Treasurer acting as Treasurer shall fail to do so, all state and
county taxes required by law to be paid by such Treasurer to the County
Treasurer.
A. Departmental estimates. On or before September 15 of each year, each
officer and department head shall annually file with the
Village Treasurer and Village Administrator an itemized statement of
disbursements made to carry out the powers and duties of such officer
or department during the preceding fiscal year, and a detailed
statement of the receipts and disbursements on account of any special
fund under the supervision of such officer or department during such
year, and of the conditions and management of such fund; also detailed
estimates of the same matters for the current fiscal year and for the
ensuing fiscal year. Such statements shall be presented in the form
prescribed by the Village Treasurer and shall be designated as
"Departmental Estimates" and shall be as nearly uniform as possible for
the main division of all departments. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
B. Consideration of estimates. The Village Treasurer and Village
Administrator shall consider such departmental estimates in
consultation with the department head and develop a budget amount
for such department or activity. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-3
1:39
C. Form of proposed budget. On or before October 20 of each year, the
Village Administrator with the assistance of the Village Treasurer shall
prepare and submit to the Village Board a proposed budget of the
Village for the ensuing fiscal year. The proposed budget shall include:
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(1) The actual expenditures of each department and activity for the
expired portion of the current year, and last preceding fiscal year,
and the estimated expense of conducting each department and
activity of the Village for the remainder of the current year and
ensuing fiscal year, with reasons for any proposed increase or
decrease as compared with actual and estimated expenditures for
the current year.
(2) An itemization of all anticipated income of the Village from sources
other than general property taxes and bonds issued, with a
comparative statement of the amounts received by the Village from
each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and
current fiscal year.
(3) An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general
property taxes which, with income from other sources, will be
necessary to meet the proposed expenditures.
(4) All existing indebtedness of the Village, including the amount of
interest payable and principal to be redeemed on any outstanding
general obligation bonds of the Village and any estimated
deficiency in the sinking fund of any such bonds during the ensuing
fiscal year.
(5) Such other information as may be required by the Board and by
state law.
D. Copies of budget. The Village Treasurer shall provide a reasonable
number of copies of the budget summary thus prepared for distribution
to citizens. The entire fiscal budget shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the Village Treasurer during regular office
hours. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
E. Report and hearing.
(1) The Village Administrator and Treasurer, with the assistance of the
Village Clerk, shall submit to the Village Board, at the time the
annual budget is submitted, the draft of an appropriation ordinance
providing for the expenditures proposed for the ensuing fiscal year.
On submission of the proposed appropriation ordinance to the
Village Board, it shall be deemed to have been regularly introduced
to the body. The ordinance and supplementary reports shall include
the estimated cost of improvements as well as the estimated cost of
operating the various departments and all other costs, including
interest charges, for which money will have to be raised by taxation
§ 52-3 EAST TROY CODE § 52-3
1:40
§ 52-4. Changes in budget.
The amount of the tax to be levied or certified, the amounts of the various
appropriations, and the purposes thereof shall not be changed after
approval of the budget, except upon the recommendation of the Village
President and upon a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the Village
Board. Notice of such transfer shall be given by publication within 10 days
thereafter in the official Village newspaper.
§ 52-5. Village funds to be spent in accordance with appropriation.
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the Village, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance
of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as
authorized by § 52-4 of this article. At the close of each fiscal year, any
unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund
and shall be subject to reappropriation, but appropriations may be made by
the Board, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of
improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed within
such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until the
purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned.
§ 52-6. Fiscal year.
The calendar year shall be the fiscal year.
during the following year. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
(2) A summary of such budget and notice of the time and place where
such budget in detail is available for public inspection and notice of
the time and place for holding the public hearing thereon shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village or
legally posted at least 15 days prior to the time of such public
hearing.
(3) Not less than 15 days after the publication of the proposed budget
and the notice of hearing thereon, the public hearing shall be held
at the time and place stipulated, at which time any resident or
taxpayer of the Village shall have an opportunity to be heard on the
proposed budget. The budget hearing may be adjourned from time
to time. Following the public hearing, the proposed appropriation
ordinance may be changed or amended and shall take the same
course in the Village Board as other ordinances.
§ 52-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-7
1:41
§ 52-7. Public depositories.29
The Village Board shall designate the public depository or depositories
within the state within which Village funds shall be deposited, and when the
money is deposited in such depository in the name of the Village, Village
officials and bondsmen shall not be liable for such losses as are defined
by state law. The interest arising therefrom shall be paid into the Village
treasury.
§ 52-8. Claims against Village.
§ 52-9. Temporary investment of funds not immediately needed.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
The Village Treasurer may invest any Village funds not immediately needed,
pursuant to §§ 66.0603(1m) and 219.05, Wis. Stats.
§ 52-10. Receiving money; receipts. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
A. Village Board to audit accounts. Except as provided in Subsection C, no
account or demand against the Village shall be paid, except budgeted
items which are equal to or under the budget amount, until it has been
audited by the Village Board and an order drawn on the
Village Treasurer therefor. Every such account shall be itemized. Every
such account or demand allowed in whole or in part shall be filed by
the Village Treasurer, and those of each year shall be consecutively
numbered and have endorsed thereon the number of the order issued in
payment. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Claims to be verified. All accounts, demands or claims against the
Village shall be verified by the claimant or proper official.
C. Payment of regular wages or salaries. Regular wages or salaries of
Village officers and employees shall be paid by payroll, verified by the
proper Village official, department head, board or commission and filed
with the Village Treasurer in time for payment on the regular pay day.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
A. The Village Treasurer and his/her deputies shall not receive any money
into the treasury from any source, except on account of taxes levied and
collected during the fiscal year for which they may then be serving,
without recording the transaction therefor in the manner specified by
the Village Board.
B. Upon the payment of any money (except for taxes as herein provided),
the Village Treasurer shall ensure there is a record for the money so
received. The Village Treasurer shall charge the amount thereof to the
treasury and credit the proper account. The payment of the money to
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 52-7 EAST TROY CODE § 52-10
1:42
§ 52-11. Statement of real property status. [Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
The Village Clerk and his/her designees are authorized to prepare a
statement of real property status form to be used to provide information
often requested for transfers of real property, such as the amount of
outstanding special assessments, deferred assessments, changes in
assessments, amount of taxes, outstanding water and sewer bills, current
water and sewer bills, contemplated improvements, outstanding citations
on building code violations and similar information. Any such information
sought shall be provided to the person requesting it on said form. Requests
for statements of real property status shall be made to the Village Clerk a
minimum of one business day in advance. A fee set by the Village Board
shall be charged for compiling this information.
§ 52-12. Bidding procedures.
§ 52-13. Procurement policy.
In order to ensure that the expenditure of public funds occurs in a manner
that balances the desire for the lowest cost with the expectation of a
quality product, the Village Board shall establish a procurement policy to
be followed by all Village departments in the procurement of goods and
services.
§ 52-14. Accounts receivable billing procedures.
any receiving agent of the Village or to the Village Treasurer shall be
safeguarded in such manner as the Village Board shall direct.
A. Adoption of city bidding procedures. All contracts for public
construction shall be let by the Village Board in accordance with
§ 62.15, Wis. Stats. The Village Board, or a person or body designated
by the Village Board, shall exercise the powers and duties of the Board
of Public Works under § 62.15, Wis. Stats. [Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02]
B. Construction by the Village. Any class of public construction may be
done directly by the Village without submitting the same for bids,
provided that the same is authorized by a vote of 3/4 of all members of
the Village Board.
A. Billings by the Village may be paid within 30 days after billing without
interest. Thereafter, interest may be charged at the rate of 1 1/2% per
month, or any fraction thereof, until the following first day of November.
Bills not paid on or before the first day of November shall have added to
the total amount due 1 1/2% of said charges and a penalty of 10% and
shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge and become a lien
upon real estate.
§ 52-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-14
1:43
§ 52-15. Annual audits. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
A firm of certified public accountants shall be employed each year by or
at the direction of the Village,to conduct a detailed audit of the Village's
financial transactions and its books and to assist the Village Treasurer and
Village Administrator in the management of the Village's financial affairs,
including the Village's public utilities. These auditors shall be employed on
a calendar-year basis. The books audited may, in addition to the Village
financial records of the office of the Village Treasurer, include the Village's
public utilities, Police Department records and any other books of any
boards, commissions, officers or employees of the Village handling Village
moneys.
§ 52-16. Liability of Village for acts of agents. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
No agent of the Village of East Troy, having authority to employ labor or to
purchase materials, supplies or any other commodities, may bind the Village
or incur any indebtedness for which the Village may become liable without
approval of the Board or in accordance with an approved procurement
policy. Each such employment or purchase order shall be drawn against a
specific appropriation, the money for which shall be available in the Village
Treasury and not subject to any prior labor claims or material purchase
orders at the time when such employment is negotiated or purchase order
drawn. The Village Clerk shall keep a record of such employment and
purchase orders and shall charge them against the proper appropriation.
§ 52-17. Tax incremental financing.
B. In addition to the procedure specified in Subsection A above, the Village
shall refuse to issue any permit or license to any person, individual,
corporation or partnership owing moneys to the Village for any reason
until such account receivable is paid in full.
A. State statute adopted by reference. Pursuant to the authority set forth
in § 66.1339, Wis. Stats., the provisions of § 66.1105, Wis. Stats., are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if set
forth at length herein. For purposes of Village operation, as used in the
subject statute, the term "city" shall mean the Village of East Troy, and
the term "local legislative body" shall mean the Village Board.
B. Conflicts.
(1) In the formulation of the project plan for a tax incremental district,
it is conceivable that a conflict might arise between that method (or
methods) of financing the project costs deemed best by the Village
Board and that specified by various other provisions of the East
Troy Code of Ordinances dealing with the financing of public
improvements, such as Article II, Special Assessments and
Charges, of this chapter, or Chapter 495, Subdivision of Land.
§ 52-14 EAST TROY CODE § 52-17
1:44
§ 52-18. Annexation; taxes paid to town.
Pursuant to § 66.0217(14)(a)1, Wis. Stats., a village annexing territory from
a town must pay annually to the town, for five years, an amount equal to the
amount of property taxes that the town levied on the annexed territory in
the year the annexation is final. It shall be the responsibility of the person
or persons requesting annexation or developing the property to pay to the
Village upon its enacting the annexation ordinance annexing the property a
sum equal to the total amount of taxes required to be paid to the town by
the Village.
(2) In order to give the Village the maximum authority to implement
the spirit of the Wisconsin Tax Increment Law with respect to the
financing of project costs, the Board is hereby authorized to
provide for payment of project costs through any of the methods set
forth in § 66.1105(9), Wis. Stats., in combination with, or in lieu of,
any or all of the alternate methods of financing public
improvements set forth in the East Troy Code of Ordinances or
otherwise provided for by law.
§ 52-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-18
1:45

ARTICLE II
Special Assessments and Charges
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 3, Ch. 2, of the 2000
Code]
§ 52-19. Special assessment procedure.
A. General. In addition to other methods provided by law, special
assessments for any public work or improvement may be levied in
accordance with the provisions of this article.30
B. Resolution. Whenever the Village Board shall determine that any public
work or improvement shall be financed in whole or in part by special
assessments levied under this article, it shall adopt a resolution setting
forth such intention and the time, either before or after completion of
the work or improvement, when the amount of such assessments shall
be determined and levied, the number of annual installments, if any, in
which such assessments may be paid, the rate of interest to be charged
on the unpaid balance and the terms on which any of such assessments
may be deferred while no use of the improvement is made in connection
with the property.31
C. State law. The provisions of § 66.0703, Wis. Stats., shall apply to special
assessments levied under this article, except that when the Village
Board determines by resolution, as provided hereinabove, that the
hearing on such assessments shall be held subsequent to the
completion of the work or improvement, the report required by
§ 66.0703(5), Wis. Stats., may contain a statement of the final cost of
the work or improvement in lieu of an estimate of such cost.32
D. Notice of hearing. Upon filing a copy of said report, the Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall prepare a notice of hearing, which notice shall comply
with § 66.0703(7), Wis. Stats. Such notice shall be signed by the Village
Clerk-Treasurer, who shall cause the same to be published at least once
in the official newspaper and shall mail a copy of such notice at least 10
days before the hearing or proceeding to every interested person whose
post office address is known or can be ascertained with reasonable
diligence.
E. Lien. Any special assessment levied under this article shall be a lien
against the property assessed from the date of the final resolution of the
Village Board deeming the amount of such levy.
F. Deferred assessments.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 52-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-19
1:47
(1) In the interest of the public health, welfare and safety, it is often
necessary to construct certain public improvements in areas which
are undeveloped. In such cases, it results that payment for such
improvements should be delayed until such time as the area
benefitted is ultimately developed.
(2) Where such condition is found, the Village Board may defer the due
date of any special assessment levied on such terms and in such
manner as prescribed by the Board while no use of the
improvement is made in connection with the property. Such special
assessment must be paid, however, within 10 years of the date of
the final resolution making the levy, unless the Board permits
additional time by allowing payment of the assessment in
installments, in which case the assessment shall be paid within the
time prescribed by the resolution permitting the installment
payments.
(3) If the Board defers the due date of special assessments under this
section, it may make an annual interest charge not to exceed 10%
of the total deferred assessment, which charge shall be added to
the total assessment for each full year (or prorated portion thereof)
of deferment.
(4) Any special assessment deferred under this section shall be a lien
against the property assessed from the date of the resolution
making the levy. Whenever the due date of a special assessment
shall be deferred under this section, a notice shall be sent to each
interested person whose post office address is known, or can with
reasonable diligence be ascertained, substantially as follows:
DEFERRED ASSESSMENT NOTICE
Notice is hereby given that the special assessments for the
improvements of (describe the improvement) have been
determined as to your parcel of real estate which is affected
thereby, and a statement of the same is on file with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer. It is proposed to defer payment of the same
on the following terms: (here insert interest per annum, period
of deferment, whether installments are permissible following
termination of deferment, etc.).
G. Special assessments; payment in installments.
(1) Whenever any special assessments shall be levied to defray the cost
of any public improvement, such special assessments may be paid
in annual installments of not more than 10 in number, as
determined by the Village Board.
(2) The first installment shall include a proportionate part of the
principal of the special assessment determined by the number of
installments, together with interest, at a specified rate not to
exceed 12% per annum. Said interest rate shall be computed for a
§ 52-19 EAST TROY CODE § 52-19
1:48
§ 52-20. Sewer main construction.
period of one year from the date of the notice herein provided for,
and each subsequent installment shall include a like proportion of
the principal and one year's interest upon the unpaid portion of
such assessment.
(3) The first installment shall be entered in the first tax roll prepared
after said installments shall have been determined as a special tax
on the property upon which the special assessment was levied, and
thereafter this tax shall be treated in all respects as any other
municipal tax. One of the subsequent installments shall be entered
in a like manner and with like effect in each of the annual tax rolls
thereafter, until all are levied.
(4) If any installment so entered in the tax roll shall not be paid to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer with the other taxes, it shall be returned to
the county as delinquent and accepted and collected by the county
in the same manner as delinquent general taxes on real estate.33
H. Statutory provisions. The provisions of §§ 66.0703(12) and 66.0701(2),
Wis. Stats., relating to appeal shall apply to any special assessment
under this article.
A. Request in writing.
(1) Any person desiring the extension of the sanitary sewer system to
service property owned by him shall file a written request therefor
with the Village Clerk-Treasurer stating the location and length of
the requested extension and the names of the owners of real estate
along which such extensions shall extend.
(2) A sanitary sewer main extension may also be initiated by action of
the Village Board.
B. Procedures. When an extension of a sewer main is approved, the Board
may levy special assessments against the benefitted property following
the procedures outlined in § 52-19 of this article and the cost schedules
set forth below.
C. Sewers and manholes. [Amended 2-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-0234]
(1) The total cost of sewers and manholes shall be funded by the
Village Sewer Utility.
(2) The Village Sewer Utility shall pay for the crossing of road
intersections. This subsection shall not apply to extension of sewer
mains in new subdivisions.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 52-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-20
1:49
§ 52-21. Water main construction. [Amended 2-3-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-02; 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(3) The property owner shall pay for the laterals serving his property.
The expense of laying service pipe from the main to the property
line and of connecting such service pipe to the main shall be
charged also to the property owner.
(4) The Village Sewer Utility shall pay for lift stations and force mains.
This subsection shall not apply to lift stations and/or force mains in
new subdivisions or new service areas.
(5) Any property owner petitioning for a sewer extension may be
required to pay all special assessments in full for intervening
properties. This payment is to be made before construction starts.
The amount paid will be refunded to the petitioner as the special
assessments are paid by the intervening (benefitted) property
owners. Any interest paid on said assessments shall also be
refunded to the petitioner.
(6) There shall be sanitary sewer connection charges pursuant to
§ 400-93 of the Village Code.
(7) Any property owner who has filed a written request, as of the date
of passage of this article, for the extension of the sanitary sewer
system shall pay the sewer connection charges in existence as of
the date of his request for such extension.
(8) Property owners developing a property shall extend sanitary sewer
facilities to the property lines if, at the time of application for a
building permit, sewer facilities will become available to an
adjacent property within a period of 10 years as determined by the
Director of Public Works. [Added 8-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-10]
(9) Property owners shall extend water supply facilities to the limits of
the property lines if, at the time of application for a building permit,
water supply facilities will become available to an adjacent
property within a period of 10 years as determined by the Director
of Public Works. [Added 8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10]
A. Request in writing.
(1) Any person desiring the extension of the water system to service
property owned by him shall file a written request therefor with the
Village Clerk-Treasurer stating the location and length of the
requested extension and names of the owners of real estate along
which such extensions shall extend.
(2) A water main extension may also be initiated by action of the
Village Board.
§ 52-20 EAST TROY CODE § 52-21
1:50
(3) When an extension of a water main is approved, the Board may levy
special assessments against the benefitted property following the
procedures outlined in § 52-19 of this article and the cost schedules
set forth below.
(4) Where the cost of the extension is to immediately be collected
through special assessment by the Village against the abutting
property, § 66.0703, Wis. Stats., will apply, and no additional
customer contribution to the Utility will be required.
(5) Where the Village is unwilling or unable to make a special
assessment, the extension will be made on a customer-financed
basis as follows:
(a) The applicant(s) will advance as a contribution in aid of
construction the total amount equivalent to that which would
have been assessed to the property under Subsection A(4).
(b) Part of the contribution required in Subsection A(5)(a) will be
refundable. When additional customers are connected to the
extended main within 10 years of the date of completion,
contributions in aid of construction will be collected equal to
the amount which would have been assessed under Subsection
A(4) for the abutting property being served. This amount will
be refunded to the original contributor(s). In no case will the
contribution received from additional customers exceed the
amount which would have been required under Subsection
A(4), nor will it exceed the total assessable cost of the original
extension.
(6) When a customer connects to a transmission main or connecting
loop installed at the Utility's expense within 10 years of the date of
completion, there will be a contribution required of an amount
equivalent to that which would have been assessed under
Subsection A(4).
(7) Subdivision developers shall be responsible, where the main
extension has been approved by the Utility, for the water service
lateral installation costs from the main through the curb stop box.
When the cost of a utility main extension is to be collected through
special assessment by the municipality, the actual average water
lateral installation costs from the main through the curb stop box
shall be included in the special assessment of the development or
an assessable utility extension will be installed from the main
through the curb stop box by the Utility, for which the actual cost
will be charged.
(8) Application for installation of water mains in regularly platted real
estate development subdivisions shall be filed with the Utility. If the
developer, or a contractor employed by the developer, is to install
the water main (with the approval of the Utility), the developer
shall be required to advance to the Utility, prior to beginning of the
§ 52-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-21
1:51
§ 52-22. Storm sewer.
All storm sewer costs shall be paid by the Village except as otherwise
provided in this Code of Ordinances. All storm sewer costs in new
developments shall be paid by the developer pursuant to Chapter 495,
Subdivision of Land.
§ 52-23. Existing streets.
The Village shall pay for all the costs associated with the repair and/or
replacement of hard surface pavement on existing streets.
§ 52-24. New streets.
construction, the total estimated cost of the extension. If final costs
exceed estimated costs, an additional billing will be made for the
balance of cost due. This balance is to be paid within 30 days. If
final costs are less than estimated, a refund of the overpayment will
be made by the Water Utility.
B. Water improvements.
(1) The total cost of replacement water mains, lines, valves, services
and laterals, including the curb stop, shall be funded through the
Village Water Utility. The cost of replacement laterals or services
from the curb stop to the building shall be paid for by the property
owner. This subsection shall not apply to water mains in new
subdivisions or new service areas.
(2) Hydrants and leads shall be paid by the Village Water Utility. This
subsection shall not apply to hydrants and leads in new
subdivisions.
(3) New water main valves shall be included in the assessment.
(4) The Village Water Utility shall pay for all water mains and valves in
street intersections. This subsection shall not apply to mains or
valves in new subdivisions.
(5) Any property owner petitioning for a water extension may be
required to pay all special assessments in full for intervening
properties. This payment is to be made before construction starts.
The amount paid will be refunded to the petitioner as the special
assessments are paid by the intervening (benefitted) property
owners. Any interest paid on said assessments shall also be
refunded to the petitioner.
A. New streets shall be graded to full width and the roadway graded to
subgrade width of 36 feet and surfaced with gravel at least 10 inches
thick and 32 feet wide and spread in accordance with state highway
specifications. All new streets shall have, as a minimum, oil seal coating
or a three-inch asphalt mat.
§ 52-21 EAST TROY CODE § 52-24
1:52
§ 52-25. Curb and gutter.
§ 52-26. Sidewalks.
§ 52-27. Driveway approaches.
Driveway approaches, including necessary grading work and bedding
gravel, shall be assessed to the property owner at full cost.
§ 52-28. Special charges for current services.35
In accordance with § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., and in addition to any other
method provided by law, special charges for current services may be
imposed by the Village Board by allocating all or part of the cost of the
service to the property served. Services within the scope of this section
shall include but not be limited to those enumerated in § 66.0627(1)(c), Wis.
B. Ditch slopes, cut and fill slopes, and curb and gutter, where necessary
and required by the Village Board, shall be done in an approved manner
as required by the Village Board. The cost of such improvement shall be
assessable to the property frontage on each side of the street. The
Village, however, shall pay for intersections.
C. This section shall not apply to new streets in new subdivisions, which
shall be governed by Chapter 495, Subdivision of Land, of this Code.
A. The property shall be assessed for the total cost to property frontage for
new curb and gutter which is not being replaced.
B. The Village shall pay for curb and gutter that is located in the
intersection.
C. Curb and gutter that is replaced, including necessary grading work and
bedding gravel, shall be assessed 50% to the property owner over the
entire property frontage and the Village shall pay the other 50%.
Corner properties shall only be assessed for the frontage on the shorter
side.
A. Sidewalks which are new and not being replaced shall be paid for by the
Village with the exception of sidewalks in new subdivisions. Sidewalks
in new subdivisions shall be installed by the developer pursuant to
Chapter 495, Subdivision of Land, of this Code.
B. The Village shall pay for sidewalks located in street intersections. This
subsection shall not apply to new sidewalks in new subdivisions.
C. Sidewalk repair and/or replacement shall be paid 50% by the abutting
property owner and the Village shall pay the other 50% unless the
owner causes need for repairs.
35.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 52-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-28
1:53
Stats. The Village Board shall determine the manner of providing notice of
a special charge, subject to the requirements of § 66.0627(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
§ 52-28 EAST TROY CODE § 52-28
1:54
ARTICLE III
Room Tax
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 3, Ch. 5, of the 2000
Code]
§ 52-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — Any place of lodging that
provides eight or fewer rooms for rent to no more than a total of 20 tourists
or other transients for more than 10 nights in a twelve-month period, is the
owner's personal residence, is occupied by the owner at the time of rental,
and in which the only meal served to guests is breakfast.36
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or group of buildings in which the public
may obtain accommodations for a consideration, including, without
limitation, such establishments as inns, motels, hotels, bed-and-breakfast
establishments, tourist homes, tourist houses or courts, lodging houses,
rooming houses, summer camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges, cabins
and any other building or group of buildings in which accommodations
are available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required
for use of the accommodations, except accommodations furnished by any
hospital, sanatarium or nursing home, or by corporations or associations
organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational
purposes, provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and
associates inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
TRANSIENT — Any person residing for a continuous period of less than one
month in a hotel, motel or other furnished accommodations available to the
public.
§ 52-30. Imposition of tax.
A. Scope of tax. Pursuant to § 66.0615, Wis. Stats., and effective upon the
effective date of this article, a tax is hereby imposed on the privilege
and service of furnishing, at retail, of rooms or lodging to transients by
hotel keepers, motel operators, bed-and-breakfast operators, and other
persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public,
irrespective of whether membership is required for the use of the
accommodations. Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax
imposed by § 77.52(2)(a)1, Wis. Stats.
B. Use of tax proceeds. Such tax is and shall be at a rate of 5% of the gross
receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging. The proceeds
of such tax collected shall be apportioned as follows: 2% thereof shall
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). The definition of "gross receipts" which immediately followed this definition was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 52-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-30
1:55
§ 52-31. Collection of tax.
be allowed for administration to the party taxed and filing the return
required hereunder and 98% to the Village of East Troy.
C. Effective date. Effective date of the room tax will be July 1, 1998, for
hotels and motels within the taxing jurisdiction and January 1, 2000, for
all bed-and-breakfast establishments in the taxing jurisdiction.
A. Administration by Village Clerk-Treasurer. This tax shall be
administered by the Village Clerk-Treasurer who shall, at Village
expense, provide the necessary application and reporting forms at no
cost to the taxpayer.
B. Collection of tax. The tax imposed for the months of January, February
and March, and for each calendar quarter thereafter, is due and
payable on the last day of the month next succeeding the calendar
quarter for which the room tax was imposed. A return shall be filed with
the Clerk-Treasurer by those furnishing, at retail, such rooms and
lodging on or before the same date on which such tax is due and
payable. Such returns shall show the gross receipts of the preceding
calendar quarter from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging, the
amount of taxes imposed for such period, and such other information as
the Clerk-Treasurer deems necessary. Every person required to file
such quarterly return shall, with his/her first return, elect to file an
annual calendar year or fiscal year return. Such annual return shall be
filed within 90 days of the close of each such calendar or fiscal year. The
annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns, reconcile and
adjust for errors in the quarterly returns, and shall contain certain such
additional information as the Village Clerk-Treasurer requires. Such
annual returns shall be made on forms as prescribed by the Village
Clerk-Treasurer. All such returns shall be signed by the person required
to file a return or duly authorized agents but need not be verified by
oath. The Village Clerk-Treasurer may, for good cause, extend the time
for filing any return, but in no event longer than one month from the
filing date.
C. Issuance of permit.
(1) Every person furnishing rooms or lodging shall file with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer an application for a permit for each place of
business. Every application for a permit shall be made upon a form
prescribed by the Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall set forth the
name under which the applicant transacts or intends to transact
business, the location of his/her place of business, and such other
information as the Village Clerk-Treasurer requires. The
application shall be signed by the provider of rooms/lodging, if a
sole proprietor, or if not a sole proprietor by the person authorized
to act on behalf of such applicant. At the time of making an
application, the applicant shall pay to the Village Clerk-Treasurer a
fee set by the Village Board for each permit.37
§ 52-30 EAST TROY CODE § 52-31
1:56
§ 52-32. Determination of tax by audit.
(2) After compliance with Subsection C(1) above and § 52-36A by the
applicant, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall grant and issue to each
applicant a separate permit for each place of business within the
Village. Such permit is not assignable and is valid only for the
transaction of business at the place designated therein. It shall, at
all times, be conspicuously displayed at the place for which issued.
(3) Whenever any person fails to comply with this section, the Village
Clerk-Treasurer may, upon 10 days' notification, and after affording
such person the opportunity to show cause why his/her permit
should not be revoked, revoke or suspend any or all of the permits
held by such person. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall give such
person written notice of the suspension or revocation of any of his/
her permits. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall not issue a new
permit after the revocation of a permit unless satisfied that the
former holder of the permit will comply with the provisions of this
section. A fee set by the Village Board shall be imposed for the
renewal or issuance of a permit which has been previously
suspended or revoked.38
D. Sale or conveyance of business. If any person liable for any amount of
tax under this article sells out his/her business or stock of goods or
quits the business, his/her successors or assigns shall withhold
sufficient portion of the purchase price to cover such amount until the
former owner produces a receipt from the Village Clerk-Treasurer that
it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a
person subject to the tax imposed by this article fails to withhold such
amount of tax from the purchase price as required, he/she shall become
personally liable for payment of the amount required to be withheld by
him/her to the extent of the price of the accommodations value in
money.
A. The Village Clerk-Treasurer may, by field audit, determine the tax
required to be paid the Village or the refund due to any person under
this article. This determination may be made upon the basis of the facts
contained in the return being audited or upon any other information
within the Clerk-Treasurer's possession. The Village Clerk-Treasurer is
authorized to examine and inspect the books, records, memoranda and
property of any person in order to verify the tax liability of that person
or of any other person. Nothing herein shall prevent the Village Clerk-
Treasurer from making a determination of tax at any time.
B. The Village Clerk-Treasurer may, by office audit, determine the tax
required to be paid to the Village or the refund due to any person under
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 52-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-32
1:57
§ 52-33. Failure to file return.
If any person fails to file a return as required by this article, the Village
Clerk-Treasurer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts
under § 52-31. Such estimate shall be made for the period for which such
person failed to make a return and shall be based upon any information
which is in the Village Clerk-Treasurer's possession or may come into the
Clerk-Treasurer's possession. On the basis of this estimate, the Village
Clerk-Treasurer shall compute and determine the amount required to be
paid to the Village, adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to 10%
thereof. One or more such determinations may be made for one or more
than one period.
§ 52-34. Interest on unpaid taxes.
All unpaid taxes under this article shall bear interest at the rate of 18%
per year, from the due date of the return until the first day of the month
following the month in which the tax is paid or deposited with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer. An extension of time within which to file shall not operate
to extend the due date of the return for purposes of interest computations.
§ 52-35. Delinquent returns; late fee; penalty.
this article. This determination may be made upon the basis of the
facts contained in the return being audited or on the basis of any
other information within the Village Clerk-Treasurer's possession. One
or more such office audit determinations may be made of the amount
due for any one or for more than one period.39
A. Delinquent tax returns shall be subject to a late filing fee set by the
Village Board. In addition, should it be determined by the Village Clerk-
Treasurer that any of the following are the case due to negligence, then
and in such circumstances the entire tax finally determined shall be
subject to penalty of 25% of the tax exclusive of interest or other
penalties:40
(1) No return is filed;
(2) A return is filed late; or
(3) An incorrect return if filed.
B. If a person fails to file a return when due or files a false or fraudulent
return, with the intent in either case to defeat or evade a tax imposed by
this article, a forfeiture of 50% of the entire tax finally determined shall
39.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
Original § 3-5-5, Failure to file return, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 52-32 EAST TROY CODE § 52-35
1:58
§ 52-36. Security.
§ 52-37. Confidentiality maintained.
be added to the tax required to be paid, exclusive of interest and other
penalties.
A. In order to protect the revenue of the Village, the Village Board, upon
inquiry or request of it by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, may require any
person liable for the tax imposed by this article to place with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer, before or after a permit is issued, security in the form
of cash or corporate bond, in an amount not to exceed the highest
quarterly payment of the previous year's return (if such performance
record exists) or, lacking such previous performance record, in such
other amount as the Village Board may set, but not to exceed $5,000. If
any taxpayer fails or refuses to place such security, the Village Clerk-
Treasurer may refuse or revoke such permit. If any taxpayer is
delinquent in the payment of any taxes imposed by this article, the
Village Clerk-Treasurer may, upon 10 days' notice, recover the taxes,
interest and penalties from the security placed with the Village Clerk-
Treasurer by such taxpayer. No interest shall be paid or allowed by the
Village to any person for the deposit of such security.
B. Every person liable for the tax imposed by this article shall keep or
cause to be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent
papers in such form as the Village Clerk-Treasurer requires.
A. All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writing, or audit reports relating to
such returns on file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer are deemed to be
confidential, except the Village Clerk-Treasurer may divulge their
contents to the following and no others:
(1) The person who filed the return.
(2) Officers, agents or employees of the Federal Internal Revenue
Service or the State Department of Revenue.
(3) Officers, employees or agents of the Village auditors.
(4) Such other public officials of the Village of East Troy when deemed
necessary.
(5) When directed by court order.
B. No person having an administrative duty under this section shall make
known, in any manner, the business affairs, operations or information
obtained by an investigation of records of any person on whom a tax is
imposed by this article, or the amount or source of income, profits,
losses, expenditures or any particulars thereof set forth or disclosed in
any return, or permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or examined
by any person, except as provided above.
§ 52-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-37
1:59
§ 52-38. Violations and penalties.42
Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this article who fails or
refuses to permit the inspection of his/her records by the Village Clerk-
Treasurer, after such inspection has been duly required by such Clerk-
Treasurer, or who fails to file a return as provided in this article, or who
violates any other provisions of this article, where no other penalty is
provided, shall be subject to forfeiture as prescribed by § 1-4 of this Code.
Each day, or portion thereof, that such violation continues is hereby deemed
to constitute a separate offense.
C. Any person violating this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not
less than $100 nor more than $500.41
41.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 52-37 EAST TROY CODE § 52-38
1:60
ARTICLE IV
Licenses and Permits
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 7, Ch. 13, of the 2000
Code]
§ 52-39. Nonpayment of taxes or forfeitures.
The Village shall not issue or renew any license to transact any business
within the Village of East Troy:
§ 52-40. Applicability.
This article shall apply to licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of the
following chapters of this Code:
§ 52-41. Denial of renewal.
An application for renewal of a license subject to this article shall be denied
pursuant to the provisions of § 52-39 only following notice and opportunity
for hearing as provided by § 52-42 below.
A. For any purposes for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the
Village are delinquent and unpaid.
B. For any person who is delinquent in payment of:
(1) Any taxes, assessments or other claims owed the Village; or
(2) Any forfeiture resulting from a violation of any Village ordinance.
A. Chapter 170, Adult-Oriented Establishments.
B. Chapter 185, Amusement Devices and Arcades.
C. Chapter 230, Cigarettes.
D. Chapter 273, Fireworks.
E. Chapter 305, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages,
Article I, Licenses and Permits.
F. Chapter 416, Special Community Events.
G. Chapter 423, Streets and Sidewalks, Article III, Street Use Permits,
Article IV, Parades and Races, and Article V, Horse-Drawn Carriages.
H. Chapter 432, Taxicabs.
I. Chapter 440, Transient Merchants.
§ 52-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-42
1:61
§ 52-42. Notice and hearing.
Prior to any denial of an application for renewal of a license, including
denials pursuant to § 52-39, the applicant shall be given notice and
opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided:
§ 52-43. Other grounds for hearing.
Where an individual, business or corporation wishes to appeal the Village
Clerk-Treasurer's decision not to issue a license or permit under the
chapters in § 52-40 on grounds other than those specified in §§ 52-39
through 52-42 above, the applicant may file a request, in writing, with the
Village Clerk-Treasurer that the matter be referred to the Village Board. A
public hearing shall be scheduled within 14 calendar days by the Village
Board. All parties may be represented by counsel. The Board shall consider
all relevant information and shall render a decision which shall be binding.
A. With respect to licenses renewable under Chapter 305, Intoxicating
Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages, Article I, Licenses and Permits,
of this Code, notice and opportunity for hearing shall be as provided by
§ 125.12, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time.
B. With respect to licenses other than those described in Subsection A
herein, the Village Board or its assignee shall notify the applicant in
writing of the Village's intention not to renew the license and shall
provide the applicant with an opportunity for hearing. The notice shall
state the reasons for the intended action and shall establish a date, not
less than three days nor more than 10 days after the date of the notice,
on which the applicant shall appear before the Village Board. If the
applicant shall fail to appear before the Board on the date indicated on
the notice, the Board shall deny the application for renewal. If the
applicant appears before the Board on the date indicated in the notice
and denies that the reasons for nonrenewal exist, the Village Board
shall conduct a hearing with respect to the matter. The applicant shall,
upon request, be provided a written transcript of the hearing at the
applicant's expense. If the Village Board determines the applicant shall
not be entitled to renewal pursuant to § 52-39, the application for
renewal shall be denied.
§ 52-42 EAST TROY CODE § 52-43
1:62
Chapter 90
NEWSPAPER, OFFICIAL
§ 90-1. Designation of official newspaper.
The official Village newspaper shall be the East Troy Times, to be used
for the publication of legal and/or official notices and documents when
publication is used instead of posting, as allowed by Wisconsin law.
Chapter 97
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 15.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 30.
Emergency government — See Ch. 44.
Police Department — See Ch. 105.
Village Board — See Ch. 148.
§ 97-1. General provisions.
A. General powers. Officers shall have generally the powers and duties
prescribed for like officers of towns and villages, except as otherwise
provided, and such powers and duties as are prescribed by law and,
except as to the Village President, shall perform such duties as shall be
required of them by the Village Board. Officers whose powers and
duties are not enumerated in Ch. 61, Wis. Stats., shall have such powers
and duties as are prescribed by law for like officers or as are directed by
the Village Board.
B. Rules. All officers and departments may make the necessary rules for
the conduct of their duties and incidental proceedings.
C. Applicability of ethics statutes. The general laws for the punishment of
bribery, misdemeanors and corruption in office shall apply to Village
officers.
D. Legal representation. Whenever a Village official in his/her official
capacity is proceeded against or obliged to proceed before any civil
court, board or commission to defend or maintain his/her official
position or because of some act arising out of the performance of his/
her official duties, and he/she has prevailed in such proceedings, or the
Village Board has ordered the proceedings discontinued, the Board may
provide for payment to such official such sum as it sees fit to reimburse
him/her for the expenses reasonably incurred for costs and attorney
fees.43
§ 52-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-2
1:63
§ 97-2. Clerk. [Amended 12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-09; 11-4-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-16]
§ 97-2.1. Treasurer. [Added 11-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-16]
§ 97-3. Deputy Clerk and Deputy Treasurer. [Amended 12-16-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-12]
A. Duties. The Village Clerk shall have the duties as specified in § 61.25 of
the Wisconsin Statutes for a village clerk and any other duties as
specified by the Village Board of Trustees.
B. Term. The Village Clerk shall be appointed by a majority of the Village
Board of Trustees and hold office for an indefinite term.
C. Compensation. The compensation of the Village Clerk shall be fixed by
the Village Board.
A. Duties. The Village Treasurer shall have the duties as specified in
§ 61.26 of the Wisconsin Statutes for a village treasurer and any other
duties as specified by the Village Board of Trustees.
B. Term. The Village Treasurer shall be appointed by a majority of the
Village Board of Trustees and hold office for an indefinite term.
C. Compensation. The compensation of the Village Treasurer shall be fixed
by the Village Board.
A. Deputy Clerk.
(1) In the temporary absence or disability of the Village Clerk, the
Deputy Village Clerk shall have the duties as specified in § 61.25,
Wis. Stats., for a village clerk and any other duties as specified by
the Village Board of Trustees and shall act under the Village Clerk's
direction. The acts of the Village Deputy Clerk shall be covered by
official bond as the Village Board shall direct. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(2) The Village Deputy Clerk shall be appointed by a majority of the
Village Board of Trustees and hold office for an indefinite term,
subject to removal at any time by a majority vote of the Village
Board.
(3) The compensation of the Village Deputy Clerk shall be fixed by the
Village Board.
B. Deputy Treasurer. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(1) In the temporary absence or disability of the Village Treasurer, the
Deputy Village Treasurer shall have the duties as specified in
43.Editor's Note: Original § 2-3-2, Appointed officials, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02.
§ 97-2 EAST TROY CODE § 97-3
1:64
§ 97-4. Attorney.
§ 97-5. Chief of Police.44
§ 61.26, Wis. Stats., for a village treasurer and any other duties
as specified by the Village Board of Trustees and shall act under
the Village Treasurer direction. The acts of the Village Deputy
Treasurer shall be covered by official bond as the Village Board
shall direct.
(2) The Village Deputy Treasurer shall be appointed by a majority of
the Village Board of Trustees and hold office for an indefinite term,
subject to removal at any time by a majority vote of the Village
Board.
(3) The compensation of the Village Deputy Treasurer shall be fixed by
the Village Board.
A. Appointment. The Village Attorney is an appointed position. The Village
Attorney shall be appointed by the Village President, except the Village
Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the Board.
B. Duties. The Village Attorney shall have the following duties:
(1) The Village Attorney shall conduct all of the legal business in which
the Village has an interest.
(2) The Village Attorney shall, when requested by Village officers, give
written legal opinions, which shall be filed with the Village.
(3) The Village Attorney shall draft ordinances, bonds and other
instruments as may be required by the Village officers.
(4) The Village Attorney may appoint an assistant who shall have
power to perform his/her duties and for whose acts he/she shall be
responsible to the Village. Such assistant shall receive no
compensation from the Village unless provided by ordinance.
(5) The Village Attorney shall perform such other duties as provided by
state law and as designated by the Village Board.
C. Special counsel. The Village Board may employ and compensate special
counsel to assist in or take charge of any matter in which the Village is
interested.
A. Appointment.
(1) The Chief of Police shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
members of the Village Board for an indefinite term, subject to
removal pursuant to the procedures established in § 61.65(1)(am),
Wis. Stats. The Chief shall exercise the powers and duties of village
44.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 105, Police Department.
§ 97-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-5
1:65
§ 97-6. Fire Chief.
The Fire Chief shall assume office pursuant to the bylaws of the Joint Fire
Commission of which the Village of East Troy is a part.
marshals and village constables and any other powers and duties
prescribed by the Village Board, Village ordinances or the
Wisconsin Statutes. Upon a permanent vacancy, an officer
designated by the Board shall temporarily replace the Chief until
the vacancy is filled by the Village Board.
(2) The compensation to be paid the Chief of Police for his/her services,
the hours of active duty, rest days, vacation periods and other
involvement of his/her employment shall be such as may be
determined by the Village Board from time to time. In the event of
vacation or temporary disability, the Chief of Police shall appoint an
officer in charge to act in the Chief's absence.
B. General duties.
(1) The Chief of Police shall have command of the Police Department.
The Chief of Police shall have general administration and control of
the Department and shall be responsible for the Department's
government, efficiency and general good conduct. The Chief of
Police shall perform all duties prescribed to him/her by the laws of
the state and the ordinances of the Village and shall obey all
written orders of the Village Board or appropriate committee
thereof.
(2) The Chief of Police shall cause the public peace to be preserved and
may arrest and, with reasonable diligence, take before the proper
court every person found in the Village engaged in any disturbance
of the peace or violating any law of the state or ordinance of the
Village. The Chief shall cooperate with other law enforcement
officers in the arrest or apprehension of persons charged with
crime. The Chief of Police shall see that all laws and ordinances of
the Village and state are enforced. Whenever any violation thereof
shall come to his/her knowledge, he/she shall cause the requisite
complaint to be made and see that the evidence is procured for the
successful prosecution of the offender or offenders. The Chief of
Police shall exercise supervisory control over all the personnel of
his/her Department and may adopt, subject to the approval of the
Village Board, rules and regulations for the government, discipline,
equipment and uniforms of the police officers. The Chief of Police
shall be solely responsible for the care and condition of the
equipment used by his/her Department. The Chief of Police shall
keep an accurate and complete record of all complaints, arrests,
traffic violations, convictions and dispositions of the Department.
§ 97-5 EAST TROY CODE § 97-7
1:66
§ 97-7. Weed Commissioner.
The Weed Commissioner shall be appointed by the Village President, subject
to Village Board confirmation. The term of office of the Weed Commissioner
shall commence on the first day of May following his/her appointment. The
Weed Commissioner shall take the official oath, which oath shall be filed in
the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer, and shall hold office for one year.
The Weed Commissioner shall hold office pursuant to and fulfill the duties
set out in state law.
§ 97-8. Director of Public Works.
§ 97-9. Assessor.
A. Appointment. The Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the
Village President, subject to Village Board confirmation.
B. Duties and powers. The Director of Public Works shall have the
following duties and powers:
(1) The Director of Public Works shall have general charge and
supervision of all public works in the Village.
(2) The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for the
maintenance, repair and construction of streets, alleys, curbs and
gutters, sidewalks, bridges, street signs, storm sewers, Village
buildings and structures, and all machinery, equipment and
property used in any activity under his/her control.
(3) The Director of Public Works shall have charge of all public
services, including the wastewater sewer plant, municipal water
system, snow and ice removal, and street cleaning and flushing.
(4) The Director of Public Works shall perform such other activities
and duties as are imposed upon him/her, from time to time, by the
Village Board, his/her job description or employment contract.
A. Pursuant to §§ 61.195, 61.197 and 66.0101, Wis. Stats., the Village
hereby elects not to be governed by those portions of §§ 61.19 and
61.23, Wis. Stats., which relate to the selection and tenure of the
Village Assessor and which are in conflict with this section.45
B. Hereafter, instead of being elected, the Assessor or assessing firm shall
be appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation by a
majority vote of the Village Board.
C. Said person so appointed to perform the duties of such office shall have
an indefinite term and shall serve as determined by contract. A
corporation or an independent contractor may be appointed as the
Village Assessor. The corporation or independent contractor so
45.Editor's Note: This section was originally enacted by charter ordinance.
§ 97-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-9
1:67
§ 97-10. Building Inspector.
appointed shall designate the person responsible for the assessment.
The designee shall file the official oath under § 19.01, Wis. Stats., and
sign the affidavit of the Assessor attached to the assessment roll under
§ 70.49, Wis. Stats. No person may be designated by any corporation or
independent contractor unless he/she has been granted the appropriate
certification under § 73.09, Wis. Stats. For purposes of this subsection,
"independent contractor" means a person who either is under contract
to furnish appraisal and assessment services or is customarily engaged
in an independently established trade, business or profession in which
the services are offered to the general public.
A. Appointment.46
(1) Inspectors, or inspection firms, shall be appointed by the Village
President, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the Village
Board.
(2) Each inspector shall serve according to contract and:
(a) Have proper state certification in areas of his/her
responsibility.
(b) Possess such executive ability as is requisite for the
performance of his/her duties and shall have a thorough
knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in the
installation of equipment in his/her area of responsibility.
(c) Be well versed in approved methods of construction for safety
to persons and property, the statutes of the State of Wisconsin
relating to work in his/her area of responsibility, and any
orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof.
(d) Have sufficient experience in the installation of equipment to
enable him/her to understand and apply the appropriate codes
adopted by the Village of East Troy.
B. Authority to enter premises; appeals.
(1) In the discharge of his/her respective duties, each Inspector under
this section, or his/her authorized agent, may enter any building
upon presentation of the proper credentials, during reasonable
hours, for the purpose of inspection and may require the
production of any permit or license required hereunder. No person
shall interfere with the Inspector or his/her authorized agent while
in the performance of his/her duties, and any person so interfering
shall be in violation of this section and subject to a penalty as
provided by § 1-4 of this Code.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 97-9 EAST TROY CODE § 97-10
1:68
§ 97-10.1. Administrator. [Added 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-17]
(2) If consent to enter, to personal or real properties which are not
public buildings or to portions of public buildings which are not
open to the public for inspection purposes, has been denied, the
Inspector shall obtain a special inspection warrant under
§ 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
(3) Any person feeling himself/herself aggrieved by any order or ruling
of an Inspector may, within 30 days thereafter, appeal from such
order or ruling to the Zoning Board of Appeals, as established in
Chapter 510, Zoning, of this Code. Such an appeal is to be in
writing.47
C. Duties and authority. The Building Inspector shall have such duties as
are prescribed in this section and Chapter 210, Building Construction,
of this Code.
D. Stop-work orders and revocations. The Building Inspector may order
construction, installation, alteration or repair work stopped when such
work is being done in violation of this Code of Ordinances. Work so
stopped shall not be resumed, except with written permission of the
Inspector. If the stop-work order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a
written order within a reasonable period of time.48
A. A Village Administrator may be appointed by the Village Board. The
Village Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the
Village, responsible for proper administration of the business affairs of
the Village. The Village Administrator shall be appointed based on merit
with due regard to training, experience, administrative ability and
general fitness for office, by a majority vote of the Village Board. The
Village Administrator shall hold office for an indefinite term subject to
removal at any time by a 2/3 vote of the Village Board. The Village
Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of, and be accountable to, the
Village President and Village Board.
B. Duties and powers of the Village Administrator:
(1) General charge and supervision over all administrative functions of
the Village.
(2) Carries out actions and directives of the Village Board which
require administrative implementation or where the President and/
or Village Board have so directed.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
48.Editor's Note: Original § 2-3-14, Village Engineer, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02.
§ 97-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-10.1
1:69
§ 97-11. Eligibility for office.
§ 97-12. Oaths of office.
§ 97-13. Vacancies.
(3) Prepares reports and recommendations for the Village Board and
other boards, committees or commissions as needed, regarding
operational or policy matters before them.
(4) Serves as the personnel director for all Village departments.
(5) Serves as Executive Director of Community Development Authority
and promotes general economic well-being and growth of the
Village.
(6) Oversees Village's overall financial management, accounting
system, and processes ensuring methods are employed in
accordance with current professional standards.
(7) Responsible for preparation and presentation of annual budget in
coordination with other Village officials and reporting the financial
position to the Board on a regular basis.
C. The Village Board shall adopt a full job description for the the Village
Administrator that may be reviewed and updated as necessary by the
Village Board.
A. No person shall be elected by the people to a Village office who is not, at
the time of his/her election, a citizen of the United States and of this
state and an elector of the Village and, in case of a ward office, of the
ward and actually residing therein.
B. An appointee by the Village President who is required to be confirmed
by the Village Board and is rejected by the Board shall be ineligible for
appointment to the same office for one year thereafter.
A. Oath of office. Every officer of the Village, including members of Village
boards and commissions, shall, before entering upon his/her duties and
within five days after notice of election or appointment, take the oath of
office prescribed by law and file such oath in the office of the Village
Clerk-Treasurer, provided that the Municipal Judge shall file it with the
Walworth County Clerk of Circuit Court office prior to acting as Judge.
Any person reelected or reappointed to the same office shall take and
file an official oath for each term of service.49
B. Form; procedure. The form, filing and general procedure for the taking
of oaths shall be governed by Ch. 19, Subchapter I, Wis. Stats.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 97-10.1 EAST TROY CODE § 97-13
1:70
§ 97-14. Removal from office.
§ 97-15. Custody of official property.
Village officers must observe the standards of care imposed by § 19.21, Wis.
Stats., with respect to the care and custody of official property.
Chapter 105
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 105-1. Organization.
§ 105-2. Records and reports.
A. How occurring. Except as provided in Subsection C below, vacancies in
elective and appointive positions occur as provided in §§ 17.03 and
17.035, Wis. Stats.
B. How filled. Vacancies in elective and appointive offices shall be filled as
provided in § 17.24, Wis. Stats.
C. Temporary incapacitation. If any officer is absent or temporarily
incapacitated for any cause, the Board may appoint some person to
discharge his/her duties until he/she returns, or until such disability is
removed.
A. Elected officials. Elected officials may be removed by the Village Board
as provided in §§ 17.13(2) and 17.16, Wis. Stats.
B. Appointed officials. Appointed officials may be removed as provided in
§§ 17.13(1) and 17.16, Wis. Stats.
A. Organization. The Village of East Troy Police Department shall consist
of a Chief of Police and such other officers, assistants and patrolmen as
from time to time may be appointed by the Village Board, pursuant to
the provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall be appointed pursuant to
Chapter 97, Officers and Employees.
C. Deputy Chief. Upon recommendation by the Chief of Police, a Deputy
Chief may be appointed by the Village Board.
A. (Reserved)50
B. Police records. There shall be kept by the Department a suitable record
in which shall be entered the name of every person arrested in the
Village, the name of the person making the arrest, the date and cause of
50.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Monthly reports, was repealed 2-6-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-01.
§ 97-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-2
1:71
§ 105-3. General powers of police officers.
Every member of the Police Department shall:
§ 105-4. Responsibilities of Chief of Police.
the arrest, and the court from which the warrant was issued.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
A. Familiarize himself/herself with the ordinances of the Village and the
statutes and attend to the enforcement of such ordinances by all lawful
means.
B. Help prevent crimes, misdemeanors and violations of Village
ordinances and protect the health, safety, public peace and order of the
Village and its inhabitants.
C. Report all street and sidewalk obstructions, unlighted streetlamps,
unlawful street signs or signals, and defective or dangerous streets and
sidewalks to the appropriate person or organization responsible for
their repair or service.
D. Maintain order at the scene of a fire or any other fire response within
the Village.
E. See that the necessary permits and licenses issued by the state or
Village are in the possession of or properly displayed by any person
engaged in an activity or business within the Village for which such
permit or license is required and that the terms of such permits or
licenses are complied with.
F. Perform such other lawful duties as ordered by the Chief of Police or
his/her authorized representative.
A. Duties. In addition to the duties imposed upon him/her elsewhere in this
Code of Ordinances, the Chief of Police shall:
(1) Have command of the Police Department on administrative
matters, subject to the direction of the Village Board.
(2) Cause to be maintained accurate records of complaints, crimes,
traffic accidents, ordinance violations, arrests, summons, incidents,
and calls for police service and shall provide a system of periodic
summary and analysis to ensure the most efficient and effective
deployment and use of the Department's resources. He/she shall
submit or cause to be submitted to the various agencies such
reports and summaries as are required by state statutes or
ordinances and shall participate in voluntary programs designed to
improve law enforcement and public safety.
(3) Submit such reports and comply with such administrative
procedures as may be prescribed by the Village Board relative to
fiscal and administrative matters.
§ 105-2 EAST TROY CODE § 105-4
1:72
§ 105-5. Rules and policies.
The Chief of Police shall establish and promulgate rules of conduct,
directives and policies and procedures and prescribe such duties for
individual members as he/she may deem necessary for the effective and
efficient command and operation of the Department, provided that no such
rules of conduct, directive, policy, procedure, duties or assignment shall
be in conflict with the statutes, ordinances and approved Village personnel
rules and regulations.
(4) Submit such reports and/or information and comply with such
policies as may be prescribed by the Village Board.
(5) Have control of the assignment, hours of duty, and transfer of all
members of the Department.
(6) Plan, organize, staff, direct and control all of the human and
material resources of the Department for the most effective and
efficient discharge of its duty, to protect persons and property,
preserve the peace, protect the rights of citizens and enforce the
Wisconsin Statutes and the ordinances of the Village, as are within
its jurisdiction. He/she shall supervise the preparation and
presentation of annual reports and budgets for the Police
Department. He/she shall be required to certify to the correctness
of all bills incurred by the Department.
(7) Strive to maintain suitable, productive relationships with other
Village departments and with other governmental agencies and
private organizations concerned with law enforcement, crime
prevention, administration of justice and public safety. He/she shall
cooperate and exchange information with other Village
departments in matters relating to their various functions.
(8) Plan and execute programs designed to prevent and repress crime,
apprehend and prosecute offenders, recover property, and regulate
noncriminal conduct, giving highest priority in the allocation of
resources to crime and other offenses most hazardous to life and
property.
B. Custody of Department equipment. The Chief of Police shall be the
custodian of all Village property, equipment and supplies under the
control of, or used by, the Police Department and shall be responsible
for the care, maintenance, safeguarding and accurate records of such
property, equipment and supplies.
C. Custody of property. The Chief of Police shall be the custodian of all
property and shall be responsible for the safekeeping, lawful
disposition and accurate records of the same. He/she shall see that all
property is returned to its lawful owner or otherwise disposed of
according to the applicable statutes.
§ 105-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-6
1:73
§ 105-6. Personnel records and performance evaluations.51
The Chief of Police shall cause to be maintained adequate personnel records
of employment, assignment, promotions, attendance, performance and
training for all members of the Department. The personnel files containing
these records will be kept in the Clerk-Treasurer's Department. The Chief
of Police shall also comply with all provisions of the Law Enforcement
Standards Board in regard to background investigations. The Chief of Police
shall keep himself/herself adequately informed of the activities of the
Department and be assured that the duties of his/her subordinates are
properly discharged. The Chief of Police shall formulate procedures for
recognizing outstanding performance by Department members, for
investigating complaints of misconduct by any Department member and
for taking appropriate disciplinary action subject to the provisions of the
applicable statutes, rules of the Department and the jurisdiction of the
Village Board.
§ 105-7. Police Chief's responsibility for training.
The Chief of Police is responsible for the training of all members of the
Department. The Chief of Police shall cause adequate and progressive
programs of training to be organized and conducted to prepare Department
members in the knowledge, procedures and techniques of their duties
and responsibilities. The Chief of Police will ensure that, within budgetary
limitations, members of the Department attend training courses, seminars
and conferences necessary to maintain and improve their job skills and
professional knowledge. The Chief of Police shall encourage Department
members to further their education in law enforcement through study,
special courses, college attendance, extension programs and independent
readings.
§ 105-8. Civilians to assist.
All persons in the Village, when called upon by any police officer or peace
officer, shall promptly aid and assist him/her in the execution of his/her
duties, and whoever shall neglect or refuse to give such aid or assistance
shall be subject to the general penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code.
§ 105-9. Hearing authorities for suspension or removal of law
enforcement officers.
A. Pursuant to § 62.13(6m), Wis. Stats., the Village may not suspend,
reduce, suspend and reduce or remove any Police Chief or other law
enforcement officer who is not probationary, unless the Village follows
the procedure under § 62.13(5), Wis. Stats. To act under this
subsection, the Village may do either of the following:52
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 105-6 EAST TROY CODE § 105-9
1:74
Chapter 109
PROPERTY, LOST, ABANDONED AND SURPLUS
§ 109-1. Disposal of surplus Village property.
(1) Establish a committee of not less than three members, none of
whom may be an elected or appointed official of the Village, or be
employed by the Village. The Village shall pay each member for the
member's cost of serving on the committee.
(2) Send a written request for a hearing examiner to the Division of
Hearings and Appeals under § 15.103(1), Wis. Stats. The Village
shall reimburse the state for the state's costs under this subsection.
B. The provisions of this section, required by § 61.65(1)(am), Wis. Stats.,
first apply to law enforcement officers, when such officers are subject to
a collective bargaining agreement which is in conflict with the statutory
requirements, but only after the expiration date of such agreement.
A. Definition.
(1) Surplus Village property is that property which is owned by the
Village of East Troy and which has no further usefulness to the
Village. An item of property shall be considered to have no further
usefulness when:
(a) The item or its function has been totally replaced by other
Village property and no probable future function exists for it;
(b) The Village no longer performs the service for which the item
was purchased and no other service can reasonably be
provided by the item; or
(c) The item is no longer able to reliably or economically perform
the work required of it.
(2) Surplus Village property as defined in this section shall not include:
(a) Land or buildings, but shall include fixtures and such salvage
as may be taken from a building without structural damage
when such fixtures and salvage are not part of a demolition
contract.
(b) Property which is obtained by the Village as a result of
abandonment or loss by the property's original owner.
(c) Items of property which are traded in for newer items.
B. Determination of surplus Village property.
(1) Whenever an item of Village property is determined to be surplus
Village property on the basis that the Village no longer performs
§ 105-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-1
1:75
the service for which the item was purchased, the Village Board
shall determine whether or not the item is surplus Village property.
(2) Whenever the fair market value of the item is more than $5,000,
the Village Board shall determine whether or not the item is
surplus Village property.
C. Disposition of surplus Village property.
(1) Whenever the Village Board determines that an item of property is
surplus Village property, it shall dispose of such property as it
determines.
(2) Whenever the fair market value of an item is more than $500 and
the Village Board had determined, pursuant to Subsection B, that
the item is surplus Village property, the department head
responsible for the item shall dispose of the property by:
(a) Donation to a nonprofit organization within the Village or to a
governmental agency;
(b) Public auction;
(c) Sale by sealed bid; or
(d) Negotiated sale.
(3) In the event of a public auction or sale by sealed bid, the item will
be sold in "as is" condition to the person submitting the highest bid;
provided, however, that a lower bid submitted by a nonprofit
organization or governmental agency may be accepted by the
Village Board. The department head responsible for the item shall
determine the time in which the successful bidder must remove the
item. In the event the item is not removed within that time, the item
shall revert to the Village and the amount of the bid shall be
forfeited to the Village. In the event no bids are received, the item
shall be disposed of as directed by the Village Board.
(4) No public auction or awarding of bids shall occur under this section
unless a description of the item to be sold and an advance notice of
the time and place for such auction or bid submission are first
published as a Class 2 notice in the official Village newspaper.
(5) Whenever the fair market value of an item is $500 or less and the
Village Board has determined, pursuant to Subsection B, that it is
surplus Village property, the item shall be either disposed of as set
forth in Subsection C(2) above or destroyed.
D. Determination of fair market value. Whenever this section requires a
determination of the fair market value of an item of property, that
determination shall be made by the department head responsible for
the property, whose decision shall be final.
§ 109-1 EAST TROY CODE § 109-1
1:76
§ 109-2. Lost and abandoned property.
E. Authority to dispose of property.
(1) Except for library materials used by the public library for lending
purposes, only the Village Board may dispose of Village property
which is not surplus Village property.
(2) Whenever this section provides for an auction or other disposition
of any property, the Village Board shall be authorized to hire an
auctioneer or take such other action as is necessary to properly
dispose of the property; provided, however, that the fees of such
auctioneer and all such costs, other than those for Village labor and
the use of Village property, do not exceed the payment received by
the Village from the auction or sale of the property.
A. Village custody of lost or abandoned property.
(1) Property which appears to be lost or abandoned, discovered by
officers or turned in to the Chief of Police by citizens, shall be
disposed of according to this section.
(2) Lost and abandoned property will be examined by the Chief of
Police for identifying marks in an attempt to determine the owner.
If identifying marks are present, they shall be used by the Chief of
Police to attempt to contact the owner to return the property. If no
identifying marks are present, the property shall be taken into
custody by the Chief of Police.
(3) No Village employee shall keep, for his or her own use, property
found in the course of duty, nor take possession of property during
off-duty hours when the discovery was made while on duty.
(4) The Chief of Police shall permit citizens to claim lost property if
they can provide sufficient proof that they are the rightful owners.
(5) No Village employee shall receive any lost, stolen, abandoned or
otherwise unclaimed property from the Chief of Police, unless that
person receives a written receipt signed by the Chief of Police, a
copy of which shall remain with the Village Clerk. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Disposal procedures.
(1) Classes of property. All property which has been abandoned, lost or
remained unclaimed for a period of 30 days after the taking of
possession of the same by the Village shall be disposed of as
follows, except that if the property is usable for Village operations,
the property need not be sold at auction but may become the
property of the Village:
§ 109-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-2
1:77
(a) Vehicles. Vehicles shall be disposed of as set forth in the
applicable provisions of Chapter 461, Vehicles, Junked, Stored
or Abandoned, of this Code.
(b) Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages. Intoxicating
liquor and fermented malt beverages shall be destroyed.
(c) Firearms, ammunition and explosives. Firearms or ammunition
shall be returned to their rightful owner, destroyed, or
transferred to the State Crime Laboratory, the Division of Law
Enforcement Services of the Department of Justice, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation or the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms and Explosives of the United States Department of
Justice. Any explosive, flammable, or other material proving a
danger to life or property may be disposed of immediately upon
taking possession thereof. The Chief of Police and the Fire
Chief, after consulting with the County Sheriff's Department,
are hereby authorized to determine the disposal procedure;
provided, however, that any such procedure will attempt to
return to its rightful owner any such material which appears to
have been stolen. In the alternative, the Police Department
may retain such weapons for use by the Department.53
(d) Other property with a fair market value of $100 or less. An
item or property with a fair market value of $100 or less shall
be destroyed or sold at public auction. Perishable property
which deteriorates to a fair market value of less than $100 may
be sold at public auction or by sealed bid.
(e) Illegal property. Property which cannot be legally possessed
shall be destroyed.
(2) Disposal by auction or sealed bid.
(a) Whenever any property under this section is sold by public
auction or sale, or by sealed bid, such auction or the awarding
of bids shall be preceded by a Class 2 notice describing the
property and arranging the time and place for the auction or
bid submission. Such notice shall be published in the official
Village newspaper. The property auctioned or sold by sealed
bid shall be sold in "as is" condition to the highest bidder. No
sale or auction shall occur until the Chief of Police has
determined that the property has no value to any probable
investigation or legal proceeding. The department head
responsible for the property shall determine the time in which
the successful bidder shall remove the property. In the event
the property is not removed within that time, the property shall
revert to the Village, and the amount of the bid shall be
forfeited to the Village.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 109-2 EAST TROY CODE § 109-2
1:78
Chapter 113
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES, ACCESS TO
§ 113-1. Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act.
The Village of East Troy, in complying with the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA), 42 U.S.C. § 12101, will not discriminate against qualified
individuals with disabilities on the basis of disability in all Village programs,
activities, and services and does not discriminate on the basis of disability
in its hiring or employment practices. An ADA Coordinator has been
appointed. Concerns and/or complaints can be addressed to the ADA
Coordinator.
§ 113-2. Grievance procedure.
A grievance procedure has been adopted and is on file with the Village
Clerk.
§ 113-3. Appeals.
If unresolved, the complainant or ADA Coordinator may ask that the
complaint be heard by the Village Board. The Village Board will issue its
written decision within 30 days. Review will be conducted in public with a
minimum twenty-four-hour notice. All proceedings will be transcribed and
maintained. The decision of the Board shall be final. The Village Board will
also review requests or suggestions from disabled persons regarding access
to and participation in public facilities, services, activities and functions in
the community.
(b) Any Village official selling property under this section shall
maintain, for two years, an inventory of any property not
disposed of by auction or sale by sealed bid and shall include a
record of the date and method of disposal, any payment
received for the property, and the name and address of the
person acquiring the property.
(3) Lost property. Property which is found by persons and delivered to
the Chief of Police for the purpose of locating the former owner
shall not be considered abandoned or unclaimed under this section
until 30 days after mailing to the person finding the property a
notice that he may claim ownership of said property. The Chief of
Police shall determine what portion, if any, of the property or its
value shall be given the finder. This provision shall not apply to any
Village employee finding property in the regular course of his
employment.
(4) Payment to Village treasury. All sums received from the sale of
property under this section shall be paid to the Village treasury.
§ 109-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-4
1:79
§ 113-4. Other remedies.
The right of a person to a prompt and equitable resolution of the complaint
filed hereunder shall not be impaired by the person's pursuit of other
state or federal remedies. Utilization of this grievance procedure is not a
prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies. However, the Village believes
that resolution of the complaint will be more promptly achieved if the
Village is able to provide a remedy before the complaint is brought to an
external organization.
§ 113-5. Due process.
This chapter shall be construed to protect the substantive rights of
interested persons and to meet appropriate due process standards.
Chapter 122
RECORDS
§ 122-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTUAL COST — The total cost of personnel, including wages, fringe
benefits and all other benefits and overhead, related to the time spent in
search of records.
AUTHORITY — Any of the following Village of East Troy entities having
custody of a Village record: an office, elected official, agency, board,
commission, committee, council, department or public body corporate and
politic created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order, or a formally
constituted subunit of the foregoing.
CUSTODIAN — That officer, department head, division head, or employee
of the Village designated under § 122-3 or otherwise responsible by law to
keep and preserve any Village records or file, deposit or keep such records
in his or her office and who is required by this chapter to respond to
requests for access to such records.
DIRECT COST — The actual cost of personnel plus all expenses for paper,
copier time, depreciation and supplies.
RECORD — Any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual,
or electromagnetic information or electronically generated or stored data
is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics,
which has been created or is being kept by an authority. "Record" includes,
but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts,
photographs, films, recordings, tapes, optical disks, and any other medium
on which electronically generated or stored data is recorded or preserved.
"Record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like
materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the
§ 113-4 EAST TROY CODE § 122-1
1:80
originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working;
materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have
no relation to his or her office; materials to which access is limited by
copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of
an authority other than a public library which are available for sale, or
which are available for inspection at a public library.[Amended 6-15-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-02]
§ 122-2. Duty to maintain records.
§ 122-3. Legal custodians.
A. Except as provided under § 122-7, each officer and employee of the
Village shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his or
her predecessor or other persons and required, by law, to be filed,
deposited or kept in his or her office or which are in the lawful
possession or control of the officer or employee or his or her deputies,
or to the possession or control of which he or she or they may be
lawfully entitled as such officers or employees.
B. Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term
of employment, or whenever the office or position of employment
becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his or
her successor all records then in his or her custody and the successor
shall receipt therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file said
receipt in the office of the Village Clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a
successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be delivered to and
receipted for by such secretary or Village Clerk, on behalf of the
successor, to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
A. Each elected official is the legal custodian of his or her records and the
records of his or her office, but the official may designate the
Village Clerk to act as the legal custodian. [Amended 12-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Unless provided in Subsection C, the Village Clerk or the
Village Clerk's designee shall act as legal custodian for the Village and
for any committees, commissions, boards, or other authorities created
by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board. The following offices or
authorities shall have as a legal custodian of records the individual so
named: [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
Authority
Designated Legal
Custodian
General Village records (including
Board records)
Village Clerk
Department of Public Works Director of Public Works
Police Department Chief of Police
§ 122-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-3
1:81
§ 122-4. Public access to records.
C. For every authority not specified in Subsections A and B, the authority's
chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but
the officer may designate an employee of his or her staff to act as the
legal custodian.
D. Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his
or her absence, or in the absence of his or her designee, and each legal
custodian shall send notice of the designated deputy to the
Village Clerk. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
E. The Village Clerk shall establish criteria for establishing the records
system and shall cause the department/office records system to be
reviewed on an annual basis. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
A. Except as provided in § 122-6, any person has a right to inspect a record
and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in § 19.35(1),
Wis. Stats.
B. Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular
office hours.
C. If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records
are kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon
at least 48 hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy.
D. A requestor shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those
available to Village employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record.
E. The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may
impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an
original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged.
F. A requestor shall be charged a fee set by the Village Board to defray the
cost of copying records.54
(1) If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual
and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing
shall be charged.
(2) The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in
printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and audio
and video tapes, shall be charged.
(3) If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also
be charged.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 122-3 EAST TROY CODE § 122-4
1:82
§ 122-5. Access procedures.
(4) There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost
thereof exceeds $50, in which case the actual cost shall be
determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requestor.
(5) The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and
shall require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if such
estimate exceeds $5.
(6) Elected and appointed officials of the Village shall not be required
to pay for public records they may reasonably require for the
proper performance of their official duties.
(7) The legal custodian may provide copies of record without charge,
or at a reduced charge, where he or she determines that waiver or
reduction of the fee is in the public interest.
G. Pursuant to Section 19.34, Wis. Stats., and the guidelines therein listed,
each authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for
inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a
notice containing a description of its organization and the established
times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the
methods whereby the public may obtain information and access to
records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of
records, and the costs thereof. This subsection does not apply to
members of the Village Board.
A. A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal
custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably
describes the requested record or the information requested. However,
a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject
matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a
sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a request must be
in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under
§ 19.37, Wis. Stats. Except as provided below, no request may be
refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be
identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may be
refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a
fee is required under § 122-4F(5). A requestor may be required to show
acceptable identification whenever the requested record is kept at a
private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or
regulations so require.
B. Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as
practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the
requester of the authority's determination to deny the request, in whole
or in part, and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after
conferring with the Village Attorney, determines that a written request
is so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making the
§ 122-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-5
1:83
§ 122-6. Limitations on right to access.
request may first be required to itemize his or her request in a manner
which would permit reasonable compliance.55
C. A request for a record may be denied as provided in § 122-6. If a request
is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a
written statement of the reasons for denying the request is made by the
requestor within five business days of the oral denial. If a written
request is denied in whole or in part, the requestor shall receive a
written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written
denial of a request shall inform the requestor that, if the request for the
record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review
upon petition for a writ of mandamus under § 19.37(1), Wis. Stats., or
upon application to the Attorney General or a district attorney.
A. As provided in § 19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records are exempt
from inspection under this chapter:
(1) Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal
law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law;
(2) Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law
enforcement purposes, if federal law or regulations require
exemption from disclosure, or if exemption from disclosure is a
condition to receipt of aids by the state;
(3) Computer programs and files, although the material used as input
for a computer program/file or the material produced as a product
of the computer program is subject to inspection; and
(4) A record or portion of a record containing information qualifying as
a trade secret as defined in § 134.90(1)(c), Wis. Stats.56
B. As provided by § 43.30, Wis. Stats., public library circulation records
are exempt from inspection under this section.
C. In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is
not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after
conferring with the Village Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or
part, only if he or she determines that the harm to the public interest
resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full
access to the requested record. Examples of matters for which
disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which
were necessary and given in order to obtain the information
contained in them.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 122-5 EAST TROY CODE § 122-6
1:84
§ 122-7. Retention and destruction of records.
(2) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(a), Wis. Stats., records of current
deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing.
(3) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(b) and (c), Wis. Stats., records of current
deliberations concerning employment, dismissal, promotion,
demotion, compensation, performance, or discipline of any Village
officer or employee, or the investigation of charges against a
Village officer or employee, unless such officer or employee
consents to such disclosure.
(4) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(d), Wis. Stats., records concerning current
strategy for crime detection or prevention.
(5) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(e), Wis. Stats., records of current
deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of Village property,
investing of Village funds, or other Village business whenever
competitive or bargaining reasons require nondisclosure.
(6) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(f), Wis. Stats., financial, medical, social or
personal histories or disciplinary data of specific persons which, if
disclosed, would be likely to have a substantial adverse effect upon
the reputation of any person referred to in such history or data.
(7) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(g), Wis. Stats., communications between
legal counsel for the Village and any officer, agent or employee of
the Village, when advice is being rendered concerning strategy
with respect to current litigation in which the Village or any of its
officers, agents or employees is or is likely to become involved, or
communications which are privileged under § 905.03, Wis. Stats.
(8) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(h), Wis. Stats., requests for confidential
written advice from an ethics board, and records of advice given by
such ethics board on such requests.
D. If a record contains information that may be made public and
information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record
shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the
information that may not be made public from the record before
release. The custodian shall confer with the Village Attorney prior to
releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the Village
Attorney when separating out the exempt material. If, in the judgment
of the custodian and the Village Attorney, there is no feasible way to
separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without
reasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the
entire record shall be withheld from disclosure.
A. Historical records. Under § 19.21(4)(a), Wis. Stats., municipalities must
notify the State Historical Society of Wisconsin (SHSW) prior to
destroying records. However, the SHSW has waived the required 60
days' notice for any record marked "W" (waived notice). The SHSW
§ 122-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-7
1:85
Chapter 148
VILLAGE BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency government — See Ch. 44.
§ 148-1. Village government.
The Village of East Troy is a political corporate body with the powers of a
municipality at common law and governed by the provisions of Chapters 61
must be notified prior to destruction of a record marked "N"
(nonwaived). Notice is also required for any record not listed in the
records retention schedule. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
B. Microfilming or optical imaging of records. Local units of government
may keep and preserve public records through the use of microfilm,
provided that the microfilm or optical imaging meets the applicable
standards in § 16.612, Wis. Stats. Retention periods and estimated
costs and benefits of converting records between media should be
considered. After verification, paper records converted to microfilm or
optical imaging should be destroyed. The retention periods identified in
the records retention schedule apply to records in any media.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
C. Destruction after request for inspection. No requested records may be
destroyed until after the request is granted or 60 days after the request
is denied. If an action is commenced under § 19.37, Wis. Stats., the
requested record may not be destroyed until after a court order is
issued and all appeals have been completed. [See § 19.35(5), Wis.
Stats.]
D. Destruction pending litigation. No record subject to pending litigation
shall be destroyed until the litigation is resolved.
E. Review and approval by Public Records Board. This chapter and the
retention periods of less than seven years in the records retention
schedule have been reviewed and approved by the Public Records
Board. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
F. Schedule. The records retention schedule is adopted by resolution of
the Village Board and on file in the office of the Village Clerk.57
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
57.Editor's Note: Original § 3-3-8, Specific records retention provisions, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02.
§ 122-7 EAST TROY CODE § 148-1
1:86
and 66 of the Wisconsin Statutes, laws amending those chapters, other acts
of the Legislature and the Constitution of the State of Wisconsin.
§ 148-2. Village Board.
The Trustees of the Village of East Troy shall constitute the Village Board.
The Village Board shall be vested with all the powers of the Village not
specifically given some other officer, as well as those powers set forth
elsewhere throughout this Code.
§ 148-3. Trustees.
§ 148-4. Village President.
§ 148-5. Committee of the whole; special committees.
A. Election; term; number. The Village of East Troy shall have six Trustees
in addition to the President, who is a Trustee by virtue of his/her office
as President. The six Trustees shall constitute the Village Board. Three
Trustees shall be elected at each annual spring election for a term of
two years, commencing on the third Tuesday of April in the year of their
election.
B. Appointment as President. A Village Trustee shall be eligible for
appointment as Village President to fill an unexpired term.
A. Election. The Village President shall be elected at the annual spring
election in odd-numbered years, for a term of two years, commencing
on the third Tuesday of April in the year of his election.
B. Duties. The Village President shall, by virtue of his/her office, be a
Trustee and preside at all meetings of the Board, have a vote as
Trustee, and sign all ordinances, rules, bylaws, regulations and
commissions adopted or authorized by the Board and all orders drawn
on the treasury. The Village President shall maintain peace and good
order, see that the Village ordinances are faithfully obeyed and, in case
of disturbance, riot or other apparent necessity, appoint as many
special marshals as he shall deem necessary, who for the time being
shall possess all the powers and rights of constables.
A. The Village President may declare the entire Board a committee of the
whole for informal discussion at any meeting, or for any other purpose,
and shall ex officio be chairperson of the same.
B. The Village President may, from time to time, appoint such special
committee or committees as he deems advisable or as provided for by
motion or resolution by the Board, stating the number of members and
object thereof, to perform such duties as may be assigned to them. All
special committees shall cease to exist after the April Board meeting
unless reappointed by the Village President or extended by the Village
Board.
§ 148-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-6
1:87
§ 148-6. General powers.
A. General. The Village Board shall be vested with all the powers of the
Village not specifically given some other officer. Except as otherwise
provided by law, the Village Board shall have the management and
control of the Village property, finances, highways, streets, navigable
waters and the public service and shall have the power to act for the
government and good order of the Village, for its commercial benefit
and for the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public and
may carry its powers into effect by license, regulation, suppression,
borrowing, taxation, special assessment, appropriation, fine,
imprisonment and other necessary or convenient means. The powers
hereby conferred shall be in addition to all other grants and shall be
limited only by express language.
B. Acquisition and disposal of property. The Village Board may acquire
property, real or personal, within or outside the Village, for parks,
libraries, historic places, recreation, beautification, streets,
waterworks, sewage or waste disposal, public grounds, vehicle parking
areas and for any other public purpose; may acquire real property
within or contiguous to the Village, by means other than condemnation,
for industrial sites; may improve and beautify the same; may construct,
own, lease and maintain buildings on such property for instruction,
recreation, amusement and other public purposes; and may sell and
convey such property. Condemnation shall be as provided by the
Wisconsin Statutes.
C. Acquisition of easements and property rights. Confirming all powers
granted to the Village Board and in furtherance thereof, the Board is
expressly authorized to acquire, by gift, purchase or condemnation
under the Wisconsin Statutes, any and all property rights in lands or
waters, including rights of access and use, negative or positive
easements, restrictive covenants, covenants running with land, scenic
easements and any rights for use of property of any nature whatsoever,
however denominated, which may be lawfully acquired for the benefit
of the public or for any public purpose, including the exercise of powers
granted under §§ 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats., and may sell and convey
such easements or property rights when no longer needed for public
use or protection.
D. Village finances. The Village Board may levy and provide for the
collection of taxes and special assessments; may refund any tax or
special assessment paid, or any part thereof, when satisfied that the
same was unjust or illegal; and generally may manage the Village
finances. The Village Board may loan money to any school district
located within the Village or within which the Village is wholly or
partially located in such sums as are needed by such district to meet the
immediate expenses of operating the schools thereof, and the board of
the district may borrow money from such Village accordingly and give
its note therefor. No such loan shall be made to extend beyond August
30 next following the making thereof or in an amount exceeding 1/2 of
§ 148-6 EAST TROY CODE § 148-6
1:88
§ 148-7. Cooperation with other municipalities.
The Village Board, on behalf of the Village, may join with other counties,
villages, cities, towns or other governmental entities in a cooperative
arrangement for executing any power or duty in order to attain greater
economy or efficiency, including joint employment of appointed officers and
employees.
§ 148-8. Authority to preserve order at meetings; residency
requirement.
The Village Board has the power to preserve order at its meetings. Members
of the Village Board shall be residents of the Village at the time of their
election and during their terms of office.
§ 148-9. Salaries.
the estimated receipts for such district as certified by the State
Superintendent of Public Instruction and the local school clerk. The
rate of interest on any such loan shall be determined by the Village
Board.
E. Construction of powers. Consistent with the purpose of giving to
villages the largest measure of self-government in accordance with the
spirit of the home rule amendment to the Constitution, the grants of
power to the Village Board in this section and throughout this Code of
Ordinances shall be liberally construed in favor of the rights, powers
and privileges of villages to promote the general welfare, peace, good
order and prosperity of the village and its inhabitants.
A. Generally. The Village President and other Trustees who make up the
Village Board, whether operating under general or special law, may by
majority vote of all the members of the Village Board determine that a
salary be paid the President, Trustees, and other Village officials and
employees. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
B. Salaries and other benefits.
(1) Village President. The salary of the Village President shall be
$6,500. Beginning in May 2015, the salary of the Village President
shall be $8,000 per year upon election. [Amended 10-7-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-07]
(2) Village Trustees. The salary of all Trustees shall be $4,000 per year.
Beginning in May 2014, the salary shall be $5,500 upon election.
[Amended 10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-07]
(3) Other benefits. Except for those benefits mandated by federal and/
or state law, the Village President and the Village Trustees shall
receive no other benefits and/or compensation from the Village,
other than for reimbursement for expenses, as provided.
§ 148-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-9
1:89
§ 148-10. Regular meetings; organizational meeting.
(4) Expenses incurred. Expenses incurred by the President or the
Trustees while acting in their official capacities may be reimbursed
following proper audit and allowance, as called for by the
Wisconsin Statutes.
(5) Officials and employees. The salaries and other compensation of
other employees and officials of the Village shall be established,
from time to time, by resolution of the Village Board.
(6) In effect until commencement of new term. Notwithstanding the
provisions set forth in this chapter, the salaries established by this
chapter for the President and Trustees, or any one of them, shall
remain in full force until the commencement of a new term of
office, when any increase shall take effect.
(7) The Village President and Village Trustees shall not receive
additional compensation from the Village or any other entity for
any appointments made by the Village President or Village Board to
other boards, commissions or committees as a representative of the
Village. [Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-09]
A. Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Village Board shall be held
on the first and third Monday of each calendar month at 6:30 p.m., local
time, except when the day so designated falls on a legal holiday, in
which case the regular meeting shall be held the following day, or at
such other date and time as the Village Board shall designate. The
fourth Monday of each calendar month may be scheduled as a regular
meeting on an as-needed basis. When the Village Board designates a
date and time for the regular Board meeting, notice thereof shall be
posted at the Municipal Building in the Village of East Troy prior to
such rescheduled meeting date. All meetings of the Board shall be held
at the Municipal Building, unless specified otherwise in the minutes of
the preceding meeting, or by written notice posted at the regular
meeting place at least three hours prior to any meeting. In any event,
all regular Village Board meetings shall be held within the boundaries
of the Village. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-12]
B. Annual organizational meeting. The Village Board shall hold an annual
organizational meeting on the first regularly scheduled meeting after
the third Tuesday in April following the spring election. [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
C. Board minutes. The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all Board
proceedings and cause the proceedings to be published.
§ 148-9 EAST TROY CODE § 148-11
1:90
§ 148-11. Special meetings. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
Special meetings of the Board may be called by the Village President or by
two Trustees filing a request with the Village Clerk at least 48 hours prior
to the time specified for such meeting. The Village Clerk shall select the
day for the special meeting and immediately notify each Trustee of the time
and purpose of such meeting. The notice shall be delivered or mailed to
each Trustee personally or left at his usual place of abode a minimum of 24
hours prior to the meeting time. The Village Clerk shall cause a record of
such notice to be filed in their office prior to the time fixed for such special
meeting. No business shall be transacted at a special meeting except for the
purpose stated in the notice thereof. Notice to the public of special meetings
shall conform to the open meeting requirements of § 61.32 and Chapter 19,
Subchapter V, Wis. Stats. The Village Clerk shall give notice immediately
upon the call for such meeting being filed with him. The request for any
special meeting shall state the purpose for which the meeting is to be called,
and no business shall be transacted but that for which the meeting has been
called. Individuals requesting a special meeting of the Village Board shall
be required to pay a fee set by the Village Board for such meeting.
§ 148-12. Open meetings; adjournment of meetings.
§ 148-13. Quorum.
A. Open Meeting Law compliance. All meetings of the Village Board and
subunits thereof shall be open to the public, as provided in Subchapter
V of Chapter 19, §§ 19.81 through 19.89, Wis. Stats. Public notice of all
such meetings shall be given as provided in § 19.84, Wis. Stats.
B. Adjournment of meetings. An adjournment to a closed session may be
only for a permitted purpose, as enumerated in § 19.85, Wis. Stats., and
must meet the other requirements of said § 19.85, Wis. Stats.
C. Meetings to be open. During the holding of any open session in the
regular meeting room, or in the substituted meeting room, said room
and said meeting shall, at all times, be open and remain open to all
citizens.
D. Closed meetings. The provisions of this Code do not prohibit the Board
or any committee thereof from having a closed meeting which is legally
convened and legally held in a room in said building other than the
official meeting room or in some other building in the Village.
A. A majority of the members of the Village Board shall constitute a
quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn or compel attendance of
absent members if a majority is not present. The Village President shall
be counted in computing a quorum.
B. When the presiding officer shall have called the members to order, the
Village Clerk shall record the attendance, noting who is present and
§ 148-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-13
1:91
§ 148-14. Presiding officers.
§ 148-15. Meeting agendas; order of business.
who is absent, and if, after having gone through with the call, it shall
appear that a quorum is not present, the fact shall be entered in
the minutes, and the members present may adjourn to a later date
in the month. If they do not establish the next meeting date, the
Village Board shall stand adjourned to the time appointed for the next
regular meeting, unless a special meeting is called sooner. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
A. Village President to preside. The Village President shall preside over
meetings of the Village Board. In case of absence of the Village
President, the Village Clerk shall call the meeting to order and the
Trustees present shall elect one of their number Acting President.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Duties. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, decide
all questions of order, and conduct the proceedings of the meeting in
accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of
Order, unless otherwise provided by statute or by these rules. Any
member shall have the right to appeal from a decision of the presiding
officer. Such appeal is not debatable and must be sustained by a
majority vote of the members present, excluding the presiding officer.
A. Agenda.
(1) The business of the Village Board shall be transacted according to
the agenda prepared by the Village Clerk. All items to be placed on
the agenda shall be submitted to the Village Clerk by 12:00 noon on
Thursday prior to the regular Monday meeting. Copies thereof shall
be distributed or posted electronically by the Village Clerk by the
close of the business day on Friday. The President may waive the
filing deadline for emergency cause shown. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(2) A submitting department shall include copies of all material
necessary to consider the agenda item.
(3) The Village President shall advise the Village Clerk whether to
include an item on the agenda, except that any Village Trustee may
request that the Village Clerk place an item on the agenda and that
item shall then be included on the agenda. Trustees calling a
special meeting shall decide which items shall be on the agenda
and which items shall be first considered at such special meeting.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01; 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
§ 148-13 EAST TROY CODE § 148-15
1:92
§ 148-16. Introduction of business; resolutions and ordinances;
disposition of communications.
(4) The Village Clerk shall afford the Trustees maximum reasonable
notice of agenda items as each situation allows. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Order of business. Generally, the following order may be observed in
the conduct of all regular Board meetings:
(1) Call to order.
(2) Recording of attendance.
(3) Approval of minutes, and any corrections, of preceding regular and
special meetings.
(4) Unfinished business from the previous meeting.
(5) New business, including the introduction of ordinances and
resolutions.
(6) Reports of Village officers.
(7) Communications and miscellaneous business, as permitted by law.
(8) Adjournment.
C. Order to be followed. No business shall be taken up out of order, unless
authorized by the Village President or by majority consent of all
Trustees, and in the absence of any debate whatsoever.
D. Recognition of visitors. In order to maintain and hold meetings in an
orderly fashion, the Village Board of Trustees shall establish a written
policy setting forth the procedure which shall be followed regarding
visitors, unless having previously made a request to be placed on the
agenda for a specific item.
(1) All visitors will be recognized at the beginning of the meeting.
(2) No discussion is allowed from visitors during the course of the
meeting, unless requested by the Board.
(3) During the citizen participation portion of the regular meeting,
each visitor will be recognized and allowed to speak for no more
than five minutes. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
2-6-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-06]
A. Ordinances. All ordinances and resolutions shall be prepared as
follows:
(1) Each ordinance or resolution shall include a note stating the
purpose thereof prepared by the sponsor. All ordinances submitted
§ 148-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-16
1:93
to the Board shall be in writing and shall include, at the onset, a
brief statement of the subject matter and a title.
(2) The sponsor of an ordinance or resolution may be the President,
one or more Trustees, a department head or a committee, board or
commission. The Village Clerk or the Village Attorney may sponsor
ordinances or resolutions when changes in state law make it
necessary or desirable for the Village to act rapidly. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(3) Each ordinance or resolution may contain both a recommended
referral to appropriate subunits of the Board and a fiscal note
showing the contemplated fiscal impact, if any, of the proposal.
(4) On ordinances or resolutions that require special handling, the
Village Clerk shall assure that an editorial note is prepared
showing compliance with such special handling. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(5) The Village Clerk may reject any ordinance or resolution from
placement on the agenda which fails to comply with this section.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(6) Resolutions shall be in writing at the request of one Trustee; such
request shall be nondebatable.
(7) Unless requested by a Trustee before a final vote is taken, no
ordinance, resolution or bylaw need be read in full.
B. Subject and numbering of ordinances. Each ordinance shall be related
to no more than one subject. Amendment or repeal of ordinances shall
only be accomplished if the amending or repealing ordinance contains
the number and title of the ordinance to be amended or repealed, and
the title of amending and repealing ordinances shall reflect their
purpose to amend or repeal.
C. Notice. The Village Board may take action on an ordinance only if it
appears on the written agenda for the meeting at which action is
requested.
D. Effective date. Unless otherwise provided, all ordinances shall take
effect and be in force from and after passage and publication, and
published copies thereof shall have appended the date of first
publication.
E. Disposition of petitions, communications, etc. Every petition or other
correspondence from citizens addressed to the Village Board or to the
Village Clerk or other Village officer for reference to the Village Board
shall be delivered by such other Village officer to the Village President
or to the presiding officer of the Board as soon as convenient after
receipt of the same and in any event prior to or at the opening of the
next meeting of the Village Board following the receipt of the same.
§ 148-16 EAST TROY CODE § 148-16
1:94
§ 148-17. Publication and effect of ordinances.
§ 148-18. Conduct of deliberations.58 [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02]
Every such petition or other writing, and every paper, communication
or other proceeding which shall come before the Board for action,
may be referred by the Village President or presiding officer to the
appropriate committee or commission, unless objected to by some
member of the Board. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
F. Reference and reports. The presiding officer may refer new business
coming to the Board to the appropriate Board committee, unless
otherwise referred or acted upon by the Village Board. All referrals,
unless otherwise provided for in the referral, shall be reported on at the
next regular Board meeting. Village Board motions based upon
committee or commission action are permissible only on items
specifically on the agenda.
A. All general ordinances of the Village, and all regulations imposing any
penalty, shall be published either in their entirety or as a notice as
provided in § 61.50(1), Wis. Stats., in the official paper of the Village
once or posted according to state law and shall be immediately
recorded by the Village Clerk in a book kept for that purpose and/or the
Village Code of Ordinances. A printed copy of such ordinance or
regulation in any book, pamphlet or newspaper and published or
purporting to be published therein by direction of the Village Board
shall be prima facie proof of due passage, publication and recording
thereof. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. All ordinances shall take effect and be in force from and after passage
and publication/posting thereof, unless otherwise provided.
A. Meeting attendance. All members of the Village Board shall attend all
Board meetings, meetings of committees to which members have been
appointed, and special or adjourned meetings when duly notified
thereof. A member who does not appear in answer to his/her name
when the roll is called at any regular meeting or any special or
adjourned meeting, when notified thereof, shall be marked absent. Any
member seeking to be excused from attending any regular or special
meeting must notify the Village President or Village Clerk in advance of
such meeting, explaining the reason for his/her absence, and, upon
complying with this requirement, such members shall be duly excused
from attending said meeting. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
B. Recognition for debate.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 148-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-18
1:95
(1) When a member is to speak in debate, or deliver any matter to the
Board, he/she shall respectfully address himself/herself to the
presiding officer and confine his/her remarks to the question under
debate and avoid personalities.
(2) When two or more members address the presiding officer at the
same time, the presiding officer shall name the member who is to
speak first.
C. Voting; roll call vote procedure.
(1) The ayes and nays shall be ordered upon any question at the
request of any member of the Board or the Village Board, and the
Village Clerk shall call the roll starting with the Trustee whose last
name appears first on the list of the Trustees' names alphabetically
arranged and, on the next call of the roll, at the same or any
subsequent meeting, the Clerk shall start with the Trustee whose
name appears next on said alphabetical list, and each subsequent
call of roll shall begin with the name of the Trustee next on said
alphabetical list of Trustees; such order of roll call shall be followed
until the list of Trustees has been completed. Each time the list has
been completed, the Village Clerk shall again start on the top of the
list and proceed on down through the list. [Amended 12-16-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(2) The Village President may vote on questions before the Village
Board. A majority vote of all members of the Board in favor of any
proposed ordinance, resolution or appointment shall be necessary
for passage or approval, unless a larger number is required by
statute. Except as otherwise provided, a majority vote of those
present shall prevail in other cases.
(3) A member of the Board may not change his/her vote on any
question after the result has been announced.
D. Motions with preference. During any meeting of the Village Board,
certain motions will have preference. In order of precedence, they are:
(1) Motion to adjourn. This motion can be made at any time and has
first precedence. This is a nondebatable motion.
(2) Motion to lay on the table. This motion may be made when the
subject matter appropriate for tabling is to be debated or
discussed. This motion is a nondebatable motion.
(3) Motion to call previous question. This motion may be made at any
time after the debate or discussion commences related to an action
item, business item, motion or question that is properly before the
Village Board. This motion is a nondebatable motion. This motion, if
adopted, ends the debate and discussion at the meeting on the
action item, business item, motion or question. The motion, if
adopted, brings the Village Board to a direct vote with the first vote
§ 148-18 EAST TROY CODE § 148-18
1:96
on amendments, if any, and then to the main action item, business
item, motion or question.
(4) Motion to postpone to a date certain. This motion may be made at
any time after the debate or discussion commences on an action
item, business item, motion or question that is properly before the
Village Board. This motion is debatable. This motion, if adopted,
ends the debate and discussion at the meeting on the action item,
business item, motion or question. This motion must establish a
date and time certain when the debate and discussion before the
Village Board will continue. The date and time established must be
on a date and time for a regularly scheduled or special meeting of
the Village Board.
(5) Motion to a committee. This motion may be made at any time after
the debate or discussion commences on an action item, business
item, motion or question that is properly before the Village Board.
The motion is debatable. This motion, if adopted, ends the debate
and discussion at this meeting on the action item, business item,
motion or question. This motion, if adopted, forwards the action
item, business item, motion or question to a committee for further
review and discussion. The committee must be a committee of the
Village Board.
(6) Motion to amend or divide the question. This motion may be made
at any time after debate or discussion commences on the action
item, business item, motion or question properly before the Village
Board. The motion is debatable. This motion, if adopted, divides the
main action item, main business item, main motion or main
question pursuant to the method described and adopted in the
motion to divide.
(7) Motion to postpone indefinitely. This motion may be made at any
time after debate or discussion commences on the action item,
business item, motion or question properly before the Village
Board. This motion is debatable. This motion, if adopted, ends the
debate and discussion at the meeting on the action item, business
item, motion or question.
(8) Motion to introduce a matter related to the action item, business
item, motion or question. This motion may be made at any time
after the debate or discussion commences on the action item,
business item, motion or question properly before the Village
Board. This motion is debatable. This motion, if adopted, expands
or adds to the debate and discussion new items related to the main
action item, main business item, main motion or main question
pursuant to the method described and approved in the motion to
introduce a matter related.
E. Public directory votes. No member of the Village Board shall request, at
a meeting of the Village Board, a vote from the general public unless
§ 148-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-18
1:97
§ 148-19. Procedure at public hearings.
The following procedures shall be followed at public hearings and may also
be followed when citizen input is necessary during regular items of business
before the Village Board:
the proposed vote of the general public is so noted by the presiding
officer of the meeting as strictly an advisory vote to the Village Board.
Any vote taken by the general public at a meeting of the Village Board
shall be considered by the Village Board only as an advisory vote and
shall not be considered as a directory vote.
F. Rules of parliamentary procedure. The rules of parliamentary practice
in Robert's Rules of Order, which is hereby incorporated by reference,
shall govern the proceedings of the Village Board in all cases to which
they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with these
rules or with the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
A. The presiding officer shall generally call on those persons who wish to
speak on the matter, or call initially on those persons who wish to speak
for the proposition. Each person wishing to speak for the proposition
shall give his or her name and address.
B. Each person speaking initially on the matter or specifically on behalf of
the proposition shall be limited in time to three minutes.59
C. The presiding officer shall then call on those persons who wish to
oppose the proposition if the presiding officer has first asked for only
those favoring the proposition to speak.
D. Each such person speaking in opposition to the proposition shall give
his or her name and address and shall also be limited to three
minutes.60
E. Any person wishing to speak in rebuttal to any statements made may,
with the permission of the presiding officer, do so; provided, however,
that such rebuttal statement shall be limited to two minutes by any one
individual.61
F. When the presiding officer in his/her discretion is satisfied that the
proposition has been heard, he/she shall announce the fact that the
hearing is concluded.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 148-18 EAST TROY CODE § 148-20
1:98
§ 148-20. Reconsideration of motions.62
When a motion has been decided, it shall be in order for any member who
voted in the majority to move a reconsideration thereof, at the same or next
succeeding meeting, except those which cannot be reconsidered pursuant
to Robert's Rules of Order, and the Village President shall call for a roll call
of the Trustees. If a majority of the members present shall be in favor of a
reconsideration, the subject shall be before the Board for further action. A
Trustee may not change his/her vote on any question after the result has
been announced. A motion to reconsider being put and lost shall not be
renewed.
§ 148-21. Disturbances and disorderly conduct.
Whenever any disturbance or disorderly conduct shall occur in any of the
meetings of the Board, the President may cause the room to be cleared of
all persons causing such disorderly conduct.
§ 148-22. Amendment of rules.
The rules of §§ 148-18 through 148-21 shall not be rescinded or amended
unless the proposed amendment or motion to rescind has laid over from a
regular meeting, and then it shall require a vote of 2/3 of all members of the
Board.
§ 148-23. Suspension of rules.
These rules shall not be suspended except by a two-thirds vote of all the
members of the Board.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 170
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 305.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 366.
Zoning — See Ch. 510.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 148-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1
1:99
§ 170-1. Definitions.63
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT BATHHOUSE — An establishment or business which provides the
service of baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of
hydrotherapy, which is not operated by a medical practitioner or a
professional physical therapist licensed by the State of Wisconsin, and
which establishment provides to its patrons an opportunity for engaging in
specified sexual activities, as defined in this chapter.
ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO — An establishment or business wherein
patrons are afforded an opportunity to paint images on a body which is
wholly or partially nude. For purposes of this chapter, "adult body painting
studio" shall not be deemed to include a tattoo parlor.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade, for sale, rent, lease, inspection or
viewing, books, films, videocassettes, magazines or other periodicals which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting,
describing or related to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities, as defined below, or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale, rental or display of such material.
ADULT CABARET — A cabaret which features dancers, strippers, male
or female impersonators, or similar entertainers performing or presenting
material having as its dominant theme, or distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on, any actual or simulated specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined below.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any motion pictures, live
performances, display or dance of any type which has as its dominant
theme or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on any actual
or simulated specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
defined below.
ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment or business, with or without
sleeping accommodations, which provides services of massage and body
manipulation, including exercises, heat and light treatments of the body,
and all forms and methods of physiotherapy, not operated by a medical
practitioner or professional physical therapist licensed by the State of
Wisconsin, and which establishment provides for its patrons the opportunity
to engage in specified sexual activity, as defined in this chapter.
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of fewer than 50 persons used for presenting material having
as its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matters depicting, describing or related to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons
therein.
63.Editor's Note: Original § 7-8-1, Purpose, which immediately preceded this section, was
repealed 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02.
§ 170-1 EAST TROY CODE § 170-1
1:100
ADULT MODELING STUDIO — An establishment or business which
provides the service of modeling for the purpose of reproducing the human
body wholly or partially in the nude, by means of photography, painting,
sketching, drawing or otherwise.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material having as
its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT NOVELTY SHOP — An establishment or business having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in novelty or other
items, including but not limited to movies, tapes, videos, books, etc., which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on, or designed for,
specified sexual activity, or simulating such activity, as defined herein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises, including, without
limitation, adult bathhouses, adult body painting studios, adult bookstores,
adult cabarets, adult massage parlors, adult mini motion-picture theaters,
adult modeling studios, adult motion-picture theaters or adult novelty
shops. It further means any premises to which public patrons or members
are invited or admitted and which is physically arranged so as to provide
booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common
area of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion
pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a
member of the public, a patron or a member, whether or not such adult
entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct
or indirect. "Adult-oriented establishment" further includes, without
limitation, any premises physically arranged and used as such whether
advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio,
exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio, or
any other term of like import.64
BOOTHS/CUBICLES/ROOMS/COMPARTMENTS/STALLS — Enclosures that
are specifically offered to the public or members of an adult-oriented
establishment for hire or for a fee, as part of a business operated on the
premises which offers as part of its business the entertainment to be viewed
within the enclosure. This shall include, without limitation, such enclosures
wherein the entertainment is dispensed for a fee, but a fee is not charged
for mere access to the enclosure. However, "booth," "cubicle," "room,"
"compartment" or "stall" does not mean such enclosures that are private
offices used by the owners, managers or persons employed on the premises
for attending to the tasks of their employment, which enclosures are not
held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee,
or for the purpose of viewing entertainment for a fee, and are not open to
any person other than employees, nor shall this definition apply to hotels,
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1
1:101
motels, or other similar establishments licensed by the State of Wisconsin,
pursuant to Wisconsin law.
ENTERTAINER — A dancer, stripper, impersonator or similar performer
referred to in the definition of "adult cabaret" in this section.
OPERATOR — Any person, association, partnership or corporation
operating, conducting, maintaining or owning any adult-oriented
establishment.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Simulated or actual:
§ 170-2. License procedure.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, perineum, buttocks, or female breasts below the point
immediately above the top of the areola.
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if opaquely
covered.
B.
A. Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus.
B.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or female breasts.
C.
A. License.
(1) Except as provided below, from and after the effective date of this
chapter, no adult-oriented establishment shall be operated or
maintained in the Village of East Troy without first obtaining a
license to operate issued by the Village of East Troy Board.
(2) A license may be issued only for one adult-oriented establishment
located at a fixed and certain location. Any person who desires to
operate more than one adult-oriented establishment must have a
license for each.
(3) No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person.
(4) All adult-oriented establishments existing at the time of the
passage of this chapter must submit an application for a license
within 90 days of the passage of this chapter. If an application is not
received within said ninety-day period, then such existing adultoriented
establishment shall cease operations.
B. Application for license. Any person, partnership or corporation desiring
to secure a license shall make application to the Village Clerk. The
application shall be dated by the Village Clerk. A copy of the application
shall be distributed promptly to the Village of East Troy Police
§ 170-1 EAST TROY CODE § 170-2
1:102
Department. The application for a license shall be upon a form provided
by the Village Clerk. An applicant for a license interested directly in
the ownership or operation of the business shall furnish the following
information, under oath: [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-02]
(1) The name and address of the intended operator.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the premises, if different
from the operator.
(3) The name and address of the adult-oriented establishment to be
operated by the applicant.
(4) Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
(5) The address of the adult-oriented establishment to be operated by
the applicant, and the exact nature of the adult-oriented use to be
conducted at the address.
(6) If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the
name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the
name and address of the registered agents, and the name and
address of all shareholders who individually or jointly own or
control more than 49% of the stock in said corporation, and all
persons responsible for the management and operation of the
adult-oriented establishment.
(7) If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner
acquired the establishment for which the license is sought and the
date on which the establishment began operations as an adultoriented
business at the location for which the license is being
sought.
(8) If the establishment is a corporation, a certified copy of the articles
of incorporation and a certified copy of a certificate of good
standing, disclosing that the corporation is authorized to transact
business in the State of Wisconsin.
(9) Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the
establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of a recorded
deed.
(10) If the operator is not the fee owner of the tract of land, then the
lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option
contract, or other documents evidencing the legally enforceable
right of the owners or proposed owners of the establishment to
have or obtain the use and possession of the tract of land for the
establishment.
(11) If the applicant is a partnership or joint venture, or any other type
of organization where two or more persons have a financial
interest, the application shall specify the name of the entity, the
§ 170-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2
1:103
name and address of any general partner(s) and all persons
responsible for the management and operation of the adultoriented
establishment.
C. Issuance or denial. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(1) Within 60 days of receiving an application for a license, the
Village Clerk shall notify the applicant whether the application is
granted or denied, or being held for up to an additional 60 days,
unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant.
(2) Whenever an application is denied, the Village Clerk shall advise
the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for such action. If the
applicant requests a hearing within 10 days of receipt of
notification of denial, a public hearing shall be held before the
Village Board.
(3) Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant
to the investigation of the application, or his/her refusal or failure
to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under
oath regarding said application, or his/her refusal to submit to or
cooperate with any investigation required by this chapter, shall
constitute an admission by the applicant that he/she is ineligible for
such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the
Village Clerk.
D. Standards for issuance of license. To receive a license to operate an
adult-oriented establishment, an application must meet the following
standards:
(1) If the applicant is an individual:
(a) The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age.
(b) The applicant shall not have been found to have previously
violated this chapter or an ordinance of like terms in another
jurisdiction, or have been arrested or convicted for a violation
for which license may be denied under § 111.335, Wis. Stats.,
within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
(2) If the applicant is a corporation:
(a) All persons required to be named under Subsection B above
shall be at least 18 years of age.
(b) No person required to be named under Subsection B above
shall have been found to have previously violated this chapter
or an ordinance of like terms in another jurisdiction, or have
been arrested or convicted for a violation for which license
may be denied under § 111.335, Wis. Stats., within five years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
§ 170-2 EAST TROY CODE § 170-2
1:104
(3) If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of
organization where two or more persons have a financial interest:
(a) All persons required to be named under Subsection B(11) shall
be at least 18 years of age.
(b) No person required to be named under Subsection B(11) shall
have been found to have violated any provision of this chapter
or any ordinance of like terms in another jurisdiction, or have
been arrested or convicted for a violation for which license
may be denied under § 111.335, Wis. Stats., within five years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
E. Fees. A license fee set by the Village Board shall be submitted with the
application for a license. If the application is denied, 1/2 of the fee shall
be returned. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
F. Display of license.
(1) The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the
adult-oriented establishment.
(2) Any licenses of employees or agents that work in said
establishment that relate to this license or establishment shall be
displayed with the adult establishment license.
G. Renewal of license.
(1) Every license issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of issuance or the following
June 30, whichever is earlier, unless sooner revoked, and must be
renewed before operation is allowed in the following fiscal year.
Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to
the Village Clerk. The application for renewal must be filed not
later than 90 days before the license expires. The application for
renewal shall be filed with and dated by the Village Clerk. A copy of
the application for renewal shall be distributed promptly to the
East Troy Police Department. The Clerk shall require complete
information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as is
required for an application for a new license. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
(2) A license renewal fee set by the Village Board shall be submitted
with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a
late fee set by the Village Board shall be assessed against an
applicant who files for a renewal less than 90 days before the
license expires. If the application is denied, 1/2 of the total fees
collected shall be returned. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
H. Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 170-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2
1:105
§ 170-3. Physical layout and operation.
(1) The Village Board may revoke a license for any of the following
reasons:
(a) Discovery that false or misleading information or data was
given on any application, or material facts were omitted from
any application.
(b) The operator or any employee of the operator violated any
provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted by
the Village Board pursuant to this chapter; provided, however,
that in the case of a first offense by an operator where the
conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall not
exceed a suspension of 60 days, if the Village Board shall find
that the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of
such violation and could not, by the exercise of due diligence,
have such actual or constructive knowledge.
(c) The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license.
(d) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this chapter is not paid.
(e) Any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage is served
or consumed on the premises of the adult-oriented
establishment, unless the premises has a liquor license and all
appropriate zoning and conditional use permits.65
(2) The Village Board, before revoking or suspending any license or
permit, shall give the operator at least 10 days' written notice of
the charges against the operator and the opportunity for a public
hearing before the Village Board.
(3) The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall
automatically and immediately revoke the license.
(4) Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to
receive a license for one year from the date of revocation. No
location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be
used as an adult-oriented establishment for six months from the
date of revocation of the license.
A. Exterior. It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of an adultoriented
establishment:
(1) To allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be
visible from a point outside the establishment.
(2) To allow the exterior portion of the adult-oriented establishment to
have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs,
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 170-2 EAST TROY CODE § 170-3
1:106
silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner,
except to the extent permitted by this chapter.
(3) To allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted in a
color other than a single color.
B. Signage. The operator shall comply with Chapter 510, Zoning, Article
XV, Signage Regulations. In addition, the display surfaces of the sign
shall not contain any flashing lights or photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner, except for the
name of the enterprise.
C. Booth/room/cubicle. Any adult-oriented establishment having available
for customers, patrons or members a booth, room or cubicle for the
private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the
following requirements:
(1) Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to
and from aisles and public areas of the adult-oriented
establishment and shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other
control-type devices.
(2) Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following
construction requirements:
(a) Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent
booths, rooms or cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall.
(b) Each booth, room or cubicle shall have at least one side totally
open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed
view at all times of anyone occupying the same.
(c) All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended
from the floor to a height of not less than six feet, and be light
colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable.
(d) The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured
and easily cleanable.
(e) The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in
use, shall be a minimum of 10 footcandles at all times, as
measured from the floor.
(3) Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or
cubicle at any time. No occupants shall engage in any type of
sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge, or litter while in the
booth. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the
booth.
D. Responsibilities of the operator.
(1) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of
§ 170-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3
1:107
the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the
authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result
of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's
conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or
omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act
or caused by omission.
(2) Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of
the operator for the purpose of determining whether the operator's
license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
(3) No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall
allow any minor to loiter around or to frequent an adult-oriented
establishment or allow any minor to view adult entertainment as
defined herein.
(4) The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary
manner at all times.
(5) The operator shall maintain at least 10 footcandles of light in the
public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times.
However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be
necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a
booth, room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of
illumination may be maintained in such aisles; provided, however,
that at no time shall there be less than one footcandle of
illumination in said aisles, as measured from the floor.
(6) The operator shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its
patrons with the provisions of this chapter.
(7) No operator shall suffer, allow or permit any employee or
performer to touch, and no employee or performer shall
intentionally touch, the clothed or unclothed body of any patron or
customer at the establishment premises, at any point below the
neck and above the knee of the person, excluding that part of the
person's arm below the wrist, commonly referred to as the hand. It
shall further be unlawful for any patron or customer in or upon the
establishment premises to touch any portion of the clothed or
unclothed body of an operator, employee or performer below the
neck and above the knee, excluding that part of the operator's,
employee's or performer's arm below the wrist.
E. Display of chapter. This chapter shall be displayed on the exterior of
every licensed premises with such chapter to be clearly visible to
patrons entering the premises from the outside and shall be posted
within eight feet of any exterior entryway. This chapter shall also be
placed in each room and any enclosed location or booth within an
establishment licensed under this chapter. The Village Board may, by
formal motion or resolution, authorize the posting of an abbreviated
form of this chapter, so as to notify patrons, employees and operators of
§ 170-3 EAST TROY CODE § 170-3
1:108
§ 170-4. Registration of entertainers.
§ 170-5. Exclusions.
All private schools and public schools as defined in Ch. 115, Wis. Stats.,
located within the Village of East Troy are exempt from obtaining a license
hereunder when instructing pupils in professional nursing care or human
growth and development as a part of their curriculum. All licensed medical
care or professional nursing care facilities located within the Village of East
Troy, and agents of the Village of East Troy and Walworth County Health
Department, are exempt from obtaining a license hereunder when engaged
in the providing of medical care or human growth and development
education.
the regulations stated in this section. The exterior signs shall be in
block letters, written in black on a white background surface, and be no
less than one inch in size. The interior signs shall be of a similar type
and color, with a minimum height of 1/2 inch each. Upon application
of the owner, abbreviated versions of this chapter may be posted or
other amendments to this section may be approved, consistent with
the intent of this chapter in keeping affected persons apprised of the
requirements of this chapter.
A. Any person desiring to provide entertainment in the Village of East Troy
as an entertainer at any facility governed by this chapter, before
engaging in any such entertainment, shall register at the Village of East
Troy Police Department. The individual shall provide full name and
permanent address, date and place of birth, information concerning
height, weight, hair and eye color, gender and race, two forms of
identification, with at least one form being photo identification,
confirming such information, fingerprints, stage name and booking
agent, if any, accompanied by a fee set by the Village Board. Such
registration shall be valid for one year from date of registration or, if
employed by an establishment holding a liquor license, such
registration shall be valid until June 30 following issuance.66
B. Upon registration, the Police Department will provide to each
registered entertainer an identification card containing the individual's
photograph. Upon request of any law enforcement officer, this
identification card shall be made available for inspection, at any time
the individual is performing duties upon the premises. A duplicate
original shall be displayed at the licensed premises.
C. No person shall permit entertainment by an individual subject to this
section without prior registration, as required in Subsection A above.67
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
67.Editor's Note: Original § 7-8-6, Administrative procedure and review, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II). See Ch. 6, Administrative Review.
§ 170-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-6
1:109
§ 170-6. Violations and penalties.68
In addition to all other remedies available in the Village in equity and under
law, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or who shall
fail to obtain a license or permit as required hereunder, or who shall operate
after his/her license is revoked, shall be subject to penalty, on a per diem or
per occurrence basis, as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Any violation of this
chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance, and the Village Board may seek
to enjoin or otherwise obtain relief and remedy of such violation in addition
to any forfeiture action.
Chapter 176
AIRPORT
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 170-6 EAST TROY CODE § 170-6
1:110
ARTICLE I
Aeronautical Services
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 10, Ch. 6, of the 2000
Code]
§ 176-1. Definitions.
The following definitions are applicable in this article:
AERONAUTICAL SERVICES — Any service which involves, makes possible,
or is required for the operation of aircraft, or which contributes to or is
required for the safety of such operations.
AGRICULTURAL LANDS — Airport-owned property that is not presently
needed for aeronautical use and is available for agrarian purposes.
AIRPORT — The East Troy Municipal Airport.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
LEASE — The right to conduct commercial, aeronautical or agricultural
activities on the airport, as defined within the parameters of the established
minimum standards.
MINIMUM STANDARDS — The qualifications which are established herein
by the airport owner as the minimum requirements to be met as a condition
for the right to conduct an aeronautical activity on the airport.
OPERATOR — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or
group providing any one or a combination of aeronautical services to or for
aviation users at the airport.
OWNER — The Village of East Troy.
§ 176-2. Purpose.
A. The Village of East Troy, Wisconsin, is the owner and is in a position of
responsibility for the administration of the East Troy Municipal Airport,
Walworth County, Wisconsin. This article is adopted in order to ensure
adequate aeronautical services and facilities to the users of the East
Troy Municipal Airport and specifically:
(1) To encourage the development of the airport and its activity; and
(2) To foster the economic health and orderly development of
commercial aeronautical operators at the airport.
B. This article provides:
(1) The minimum standards for a person or persons, firm or
corporation based upon and engaging in one or more aeronautical
services at the East Troy Municipal Airport.
(2) Requirements for all aviation sports clubs based at the East Troy
Municipal Airport.
§ 176-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-2
1:111
§ 176-3. Minimum standards for all operators or tenants.69
The following standards shall apply to all operators, with the exception
of aviation sports clubs whose complete list of standards is presented in
§ 176-14 which pertains solely to that type of operation:
(3) Minimum standards for all noncommercial aviation fuel users.
(4) Penalties for violation of the minimum standards herein provided.
A. Leases. The lease shall be for a term to be mutually agreed upon
between the parties commensurate with the operator's financial
investment in his/her facility. If the duration of the lease is to exceed
five years in length, provisions shall be made to review the terms,
lengths and rents of the lease relative to other changes in the airport
environment that have occurred during that period.
B. Operator qualifications. The operator shall have the experience
necessary to conduct any aeronautical service he/she wishes to provide
to the public and shall submit a statement of qualifications to the owner
upon request. It will be satisfactory if the operator has, in a reasonable
supervisory position, a person of such experience. Should an operator
not have such experience but can demonstrate to the owner's
satisfaction that he/she has had equivalent related experience or
training, such will be deemed acceptable. The operator shall submit a
letter of intent detailing the services which he/she wishes to provide,
compliance with the relevant minimum standards as presented in this
article, ratings and licenses his/her organization will have, and general
scope of the operation.
C. Letter of financial integrity. Any operator seeking to conduct
aeronautical services at the airport must provide the owner a letter of
financial integrity, to the owner's satisfaction, from a bank or trust
company doing business in the area, or other such source that may be
readily verified through normal banking channels. The operator must
also demonstrate that he/she has the financial ability or backing, where
applicable, for the construction of facilities that may be required for the
proposed concept of operation. In addition, the financial institution
letter should include a current financial net worth showing that the
applicant holds unencumbered current assets in a total amount at least
equaling three months' estimated maintenance and operating
expenses.
D. Insurance.
(1) All operators shall demonstrate to the owner's satisfaction
evidence of their ability to acquire insurance coverage, as
stipulated for each particular type of operation. The following shall
be established as a minimum coverage:
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 176-2 EAST TROY CODE § 176-3
1:112
(a) Aircraft liability. Bodily injury and property damage combined
single limit: $200,000.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular. Bodily injury and property
damage combined single limit: $1,000,000.
(c) Student liability: $100,000 each incident.
(d) Documentation of financial responsibility compliance: limits as
required by the Environmental Protection Agency.
(2) In addition, the owner requires the operator to include the owner
as an additional insured and stipulates the operator hold harmless
the owner in all actions against it.
E. Required lease provisions.
(1) Each lease for ground space and contract for business at the
airport, entered into by the owner, shall include each of the
following provisions, as are required by the state and federal
governments:
(a) Fair and nondiscriminatory provisions.
(b) Affirmative action assurances.
(c) Civil rights assurances.
(d) Nonexclusive rights provisions.
(e) Other mandated provisions.
(2) The most current amendment or form of such mandatory lease
provisions shall be obtained from the state or federal government
and shall be included in each lease at the time of execution.
F. Common area use. All operators shall have the right, in common with
others so authorized, to use common areas of the airport, including
runways, taxiways, aprons, roadways, floodlights, landing lights,
signals and other conveniences of the take off, flying and landing of
aircraft.
G. Outside storage. No outside storage of any equipment or materials is
permitted. All personal property must be kept within the confinement of
the hangar.
H. Construction. Any construction required of any operator shall be in
accordance with design and construction requirements of the owner,
state and federal regulations, and applicable codes. All plans and
specifications shall be submitted to the owner for approval.
I. Paved aircraft apron. The operator shall provide a paved aircraft apron
to accommodate aircraft movement from the operator's building to the
§ 176-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-3
1:113
§ 176-4. Aircraft sales.
taxiway or the access to the taxiway that has been or will be provided
for the operator.
J. Review of standards. These minimum standards should be renewed on
a periodic basis and adjusted, if necessary, to reflect changes to the
airport environs, compliance requirements and lease terms, as they
relate to the existing minimum standards.
K. Nonconforming operators. All present operators conducting operation
on the airport prior to the installation of these minimum standards shall
be required to fully comply with them within six months of the adoption
of this article. At the termination of the operator's present lease, all
succeeding operators or tenants will be required to comply with these
minimum standards.
L. Prohibited fueling practices. No operators will be allowed to fuel or
defuel aircraft while such aircraft are inside hangars or other
structures.
A. Statement of concept. An aircraft sales operator engages in the sale of
new aircraft through franchises or licensed dealership or
distributorship, either on a retail or wholesale basis, of an aircraft
manufacturer or used aircraft, and makes available such repair services
and parts as necessary to meet any guarantee or warranty on aircraft
sold.
B. Minimum standards.
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner floor space for office and
shall have a telephone for business use.
(2) The operator shall provide necessary and satisfactory
arrangements for repair and servicing of aircraft, but only for the
duration of any sales guarantee or warranty period. The operator
who is engaged in the business of selling new aircraft shall have
available or on call at least one demonstrator.
(3) The following types of insurance are required:
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(4) The operator shall have in his/her employ, and on duty during the
appropriate business hours, trained personnel in such numbers as
are required to meet the minimum standards set forth in an
efficient manner. The operator shall also maintain, during all
business hours, a responsible person in charge to supervise the
operations in the leased area with the authorization to represent
and act for and on behalf of the operator.
§ 176-3 EAST TROY CODE § 176-5
1:114
§ 176-5. Aircraft airframe, engine and accessory maintenance and
repair.
§ 176-6. Aircraft lease and rental.
A. Statement of concept. An aircraft airframe, engine and accessory
maintenance and repair operator provides one or a combination of
airframe, engine and accessory overhauls and repair services on
aircraft, up to and including business jet aircraft and helicopters. This
category shall also include the sale of aircraft parts and accessories,
but such is not an exclusive right.
B. Minimum standards.
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner space for office and shall
have a telephone for business use.
(2) The operator shall provide sufficient equipment, supplies and parts
availability as required by the FAA relevant to the type of
maintenance engaged in.
(3) The following types of insurance are required:
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(4) The operator shall have in his/her employ not less than one person
currently certified by the FAA with ratings appropriate to the work
being performed and who holds an airframe, power plant or an
aircraft inspection rating.
A. Statement of concept. An aircraft lease or rental operator engages in
the rental or lease of aircraft to the public.
B. Minimum standards.
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner floor space for office and
shall have a telephone for business use.
(2) The operator shall have available for rental, either owned or under
written lease to operator, at least one certified and currently
airworthy aircraft.
(3) The following types of insurance are required:
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(c) Student liability.
§ 176-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-6
1:115
§ 176-7. Flight training.
§ 176-8. Aircraft fuel and oil services.
(4) The operator shall have a least one flight instructor who has been
properly certified by the FAA to provide the type of training offered.
A. Statement of concept. A flight training operator engages in instructing
pilots in dual and solo flight training, in fixed or rotary wing aircraft,
and provides such related ground school instruction as is necessary
preparatory to taking a written examination and flight check ride for
the category or categories of pilots' licenses and ratings involved.
B. Minimum standards.
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner floor space and classroom,
which shall be properly heated and lighted, and shall have a
telephone for business use.
(2) The operator shall have available for use in flight training, either
owned or under written lease to operator, at least one properly
certified aircraft.
(3) The following types of insurance are required:
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(c) Student liability.
(4) The operator shall have at least one flight instructor who has been
properly certified by the FAA to provide the type of training offered.
A. Statement of concept. Fuel and oil services include the storage of and/
or the into plane delivery of recognized brands of aviation fuels,
lubricants and other related aviation petroleum products.
B. Minimum standards for bulk petroleum product storage.
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area on which shall be
erected storage facilities required.
(2) The operator shall provide the required pumping equipment, either
mobile or fixed, to meet all applicable safety requirements relative
to bulk fuel dispensing, as required by federal, state and local
regulations, and shall provide reliable metering devices which
conform to federal, state and local regulations.
(3) The operator shall pay within 10 days of delivery an established
flowage fee to the owner for aviation fuels required by the facility.
§ 176-6 EAST TROY CODE § 176-8
1:116
§ 176-9. Minimum standards for petroleum product delivery.
§ 176-10. Radio, instrument or propeller repair station.
(4) The operator must make available to all participants of the airport
access to purchase in bulk stored petroleum products of the facility,
in an undiscriminating manner.
(5) The following types of insurance are required:
(a) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(b) Fuel tank financial responsibility.
A. The operator shall provide petroleum products to participants of the
airport making use of approved petroleum dispensing equipment with
required certification, safety backup and trained personnel.
B. The operator shall lease from the owner the necessary approved area to
safely store the dispensing equipment.
C. The operator shall publish and post normal business hours and an after
hours emergency contact phone number.
D. The operator shall maintain an accurate record of all deliveries of
aviation fuel and oil, and such records shall be subject to examination
and audit by the owner or its representatives.
E. The operator shall pay to the owner the established flowage fee for any
fuel delivered not obtained from an airport fuel facility already paying
the fee. Payment is due the 10th of the month following the sale.
F. The following types of insurance are required:
(1) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(2) Fuel tank financial responsibility.
A. Statement of concept. A radio, instrument or propeller repair station
operator engages in the business of, and providing a shop for, the repair
of aircraft radios, propellers or instruments for general aviation
aircraft. This category shall include the sale of new or used aircraft
radios, propellers and instruments, but such is not an exclusive right.
The operator shall hold the appropriate repair shop certificates issued
by the FAA.
B. Minimum standards.
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area to house all
equipment and to provide an office and shop and shall have a
telephone for business use.
§ 176-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-10
1:117
§ 176-11. Aircraft charter and air taxi.
§ 176-12. Aircraft storage.
(2) The following types of insurance are required:
(a) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(3) The operator shall have in his/her employ and on duty during the
appropriate business hours trained personnel in such numbers as
are required to meet the minimum standards set forth in this
category in an efficient manner, but never less than one person who
is FAA rated appropriately for the service offered.
A. Statement of concept. An aircraft and an air taxi operator engages in
the business of providing air transportation (persons or property) to the
general public for hire, either on a charter basis or as an air taxi
operator, as defined by the Federal Aviation Regulations.
B. Minimum standards.
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area to provide an office
and shall provide a telephone for business use. Customer lounge
and rest rooms must be made available.
(2) The operator shall provide, either owned or under written lease to
the operator, the appropriate aircraft which meets the
requirements of the air taxi commercial operator certificate held by
the operator.
(3) The following types of insurance are required:
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(4) The operator shall have his/her premises open and services
available as necessary. The operator shall provide on-call service
during hours other than the aforementioned.
(5) The operator shall have in his/her employ trained personnel in such
numbers as are required to meet the minimum standards set forth
in this category in an efficient manner, but never less than one
person who is an FAA certified commercial pilot and otherwise
appropriately rated to permit the flight activity offered by the
operator.
A. Statement of concept. An aircraft storage operator engages in the
rental of conventional hangars or multiple T-hangars.
B. Minimum standards.
§ 176-10 EAST TROY CODE § 176-12
1:118
§ 176-13. Specialized commercial flying services.
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area on which shall be
erected a building to provide floor space for aircraft storage.
(2) The following types of insurance are required:
(a) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(3) The conventional hangar operator shall have his/her facilities
available for the tenant's aircraft removal and storage 24 hours per
day, seven days a week, 52 weeks per year.
(4) The operator shall demonstrate that he/she can provide sufficient
personnel trained to meet all requirements for the storage of
aircraft with appropriate equipment.
A. Statement of concept. A specialized commercial flying services
operator engages in air transportation for hire, for the purposes of
providing the use of aircraft for the activities listed below:
(1) Nonstop sightseeing flights that begin and end at the same
location.
(2) Crop dusting, seeding, spraying and bird chasing.
(3) Banner towing and aerial advertising.
(4) Aerial photography or survey.
(5) Power line or pipeline patrol.
(6) Any other operations specifically excluded from Part 135 of the
Federal Aviation Regulations.
B. Minimum standards.
(1) The operator shall lease land from the owner sufficient to
accommodate all activities and operations proposed by the
operator. The minimum areas in each instance shall be subject to
the approval of the owner. In the case of crop dusting and aerial
application, the operator shall make suitable arrangements and
have such space available in his/her leased area for safe loading,
unloading, storage, containment and disposal of chemical
materials. He/she shall also provide a centrally drained, paved area
large enough to contain washing and loading spillage and to
facilitate its removal from the airport property. All operators shall
demonstrate they have the availability of aircraft suitably equipped
for the particular type of operation they intend to perform.
(2) The owner shall set the minimum insurance requirements as they
pertain to the particular type of operation to be performed. These
minimum requirements shall be applicable to all operations of a
§ 176-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-13
1:119
§ 176-14. Aviation sports clubs.
§ 176-15. Noncommercial aviation fuel usage.
similar nature. All operators will, however, be required to maintain
the aircraft liability coverage, as set forth for all operators.
(3) The operator shall have in his/her employ, and on duty during
appropriate business hours, trained personnel in such numbers as
may be required to meet the minimum standards herein set forth in
an efficient manner.
(4) The operator must provide, by means of an office or telephone, a
point of contact for the public desiring to utilize the operator's
services.
A. Statement of concept. The club must be a Wisconsin corporation or
partnership. Each member must be a bona fide shareholder of the
corporation.
B. Minimum standards.
(1) The club may not derive greater revenue from the use of its aircraft
than the amount necessary for the actual cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement of its aircraft.
(2) The club's aircraft will not be used by other than bona fide
members and by no one for hire, charter or air taxi.
(3) In the event the club fails to comply with these conditions, the
owner will notify the club, in writing, of such violations. The club
shall have 14 days to correct such violations. If the club fails to
correct the violations, the owner may demand the club's removal
from the airport.
(4) The club must agree and provide as a minimum insurance in the
following categories to the same level as required for all
noncommercial operators:
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(5) Aircraft maintenance performed by the club shall be limited to only
that maintenance that does not require a certified mechanic. All
other maintenance must be by a properly certified mechanic.
A. Statement of concept. A noncommercial aviation fuel user maintains
fuel storage and transfer only for his/her own aircraft or aircraft leased
for his/her exclusive use.
B. Minimum standards.
§ 176-13 EAST TROY CODE § 176-15
1:120
§ 176-16. Operators subleasing from another commercial operator.
§ 176-17. Regulation of vehicles on airport.
(1) No person shall engage in the activity of storing, transporting,
dispensing or defueling of noncommercial aviation fuels, except
those persons completing an annual safety certification sponsored
by the owner.
(2) A lessee, planning to have fuel storage, shall install and maintain all
fuel in accordance with plans and specifications approved in
writing by the owner.
(3) All fuel storage plans and specifications shall be approved by the
owner. Only containers that can be sufficiently grounded may be
used during fueling and defueling operations.
(4) An annual permit issued by the owner, in lieu of flowage fees, shall
be required for each aircraft being fueled under this standard.
A. Prior to finalizing an agreement, the lessee and sublessee shall obtain
the written approval of the owner for the business proposed. Said
sublease shall define the type of business and service to be offered by
the sublessee operator.
B. The sublessee operator shall meet all of the minimum standards
established by the owner for the categories of services to be furnished
by the operator. The minimum standards may be met in combination
between lessee and sublessee. The sublease agreement shall
specifically define those services to be provided by the lessee to the
sublessee that shall be used to meet the standards.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT — Crash, fire and rescue, or police motor
vehicles or bicycles and such other equipment as the Village Police
Chief may designate as necessary to safeguard airport runways,
taxiways, ramps, buildings and other property.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
SERVICE, MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT —
Approved equipment normally operated by the airport owner, its agents
or under contract, fixed base operator(s), or other governmental
agencies performing official duties on landing areas, runways, taxiways
and peripheral roads for the servicing, maintenance and construction
of airport facilities and services or for the servicing of aircraft. This
definition shall include equipment owned and operated by a contractor
performing work on the airport under a contractual agreement with the
Village of East Troy.
§ 176-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-17
1:121
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn, excepting aircraft
B. Operation of vehicles on runways, taxiways and ramps. No vehicle shall
enter or be driven upon or operated upon any airport runway, taxiway,
ramp, or tie-down area as posted by signs prohibiting the entrance
thereon. The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency
equipment or service, maintenance, and construction equipment when
engaged in performing normal duties. Aircraft owners may be granted
authorization by the Village Police Chief to operate a vehicle to reach
their own aircraft in a tie-down area. Unless specifically authorized,
aircraft owners shall not pass over any runway and shall proceed
through the tie-down area at a speed not to exceed the posted speed
limit. They shall not at any time park a vehicle on any area used for the
movement of aircraft. Employees, business contacts, guests of aircraft
owners and others may not drive or operate vehicles on the tie-down or
runway areas without first obtaining authorization from a fixed base
operator or the Chief of Police. Authorization to drive onto the tie-down
area will be for a specific date and time period, not to exceed 24 hours.
The fixed base operator will forward to the Police Department a written
authorization notice listing the name and date of birth of the driver
along with the vehicle's registration and description.
C. Speed of vehicles. No vehicle shall be driven upon any road within the
perimeter of the airport or upon other airport areas in excess of the
speed limit posted, nor shall the driver of any vehicle fail to adhere to
any sign posted to regulate vehicle traffic on or about the airport.
D. Pedestrian traffic on airport. No pedestrian shall be allowed beyond the
administration area or upon the apron or aircraft tie-down area unless
for the purpose of embarking in or disembarking from an aircraft, or
unless authorized by a fixed base operator or the Chief of Police. Nonaviation-
related pedestrian traffic is prohibited on taxiway, runways,
and outlying areas of the airport except for those employees of the
Village, county, state or federal government or contractors engaged in
airport construction or maintenance work. Persons engaged in flight
operations, skydiving or skydiver recovery are exempt and may enter
onto airport property when necessary to complete flight operations or
skydiver recovery. This does not allow for viewing of these activities
beyond the administration area.
E. Vehicle parking. All vehicles parked on the airport shall be parked in
designated areas and in accordance with posted signs or other
markings. Fines or forfeitures may be levied in accordance with
Subsection G.
F. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the police of the Village of East Troy
to enforce the provisions of this section.
G. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture as
§ 176-17 EAST TROY CODE § 176-17
1:122
prescribed by the Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule, together
with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of the forfeiture
and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said
forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. Each violation
and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate
offense. In addition, the Village shall have any and all other remedies
afforded by the Wisconsin Statutes in addition to the forfeiture and
costs of prosecution.70
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 176-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-17
1:123
Chapter 181
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 181-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards and
controls relating to the use and installation of police alarm devices,
monitored by a private alarm company or any other person, firm or
corporation, and to minimize false alarms.
§ 181-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
specified below:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any person engaged in selling, leasing, renting,
installing, monitoring, servicing, altering, moving or causing any alarm
system to be sold, leased, rented, installed, monitored, serviced or altered in
or on any building, place of business, structure, residence or other facility.
Excluded from this definition are sellers of alarm systems from a retail or
wholesale store, who do not visit the site where the alarm system is to be
installed, or design the system for the location, or install, monitor, service
or alter any existing alarm systems.
FALSE ALARM — A signal from an alarm system resulting in a response
by the personnel of the Police or Fire Department, when an emergency
situation or unlawful situation does not exist.
POLICE ALARM — Any device which, when activated by a criminal act or
other emergency requiring police response, transmits a signal to a central
alarm system or produces an audible or visible signal designed to notify
persons within audible or visual range of the signal.
§ 181-3. False alarms.
A. The user of any private alarm system shall not allow false alarms to be
received by the Police or Fire Department. The fines for false alarms
occurring during the calendar year are:71
(1) One to three false alarms per calendar year: no charge.
(2) Four to six false alarms per calendar year: $25 per occurrence.
(3) Seven or more false alarms per calendar year: $100 per
occurrence.
B. The user of a private alarm shall be considered to be the manager or
supervisor responsible for the premises in the case of a business or the
owner in the case of a private premises.
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 176-17 EAST TROY CODE § 181-3
1:124
§ 181-4. Repair of malfunction or design error.
Any alarm business which has received notification from the owner/lessee
of the property or the Police Department of a malfunction or design error
in the alarm system shall repair the malfunction or design error within
three working days from the date of notification. False alarms relating to
the malfunction which are received after the three-day working repair time
period shall be considered a violation of this chapter, and fines will be
imposed against the alarm business per § 181-3.
§ 181-5. Audible or visual alarm systems.
Any person who maintains an audible or visual alarm on premises shall
be subject to the provisions of this chapter under the same conditions as
central alarm systems.
§ 181-6. Intentional false alarm.
No person shall intentionally cause the activation of a police alarm device,
knowing that no crime or emergency exists.
§ 181-7. Audible police alarms.
No person shall sell, use or install a police alarm which, upon activation,
emits a sound the same as or similar to emergency vehicle sirens or civil
defense sirens. All audible sirens must be able to reset themselves after 15
minutes of operation.
§ 181-8. Alarm system key holders.
Any business or private residence having a police or fire alarm system
shall designate a person who will have access to the property and be
knowledgeable of the system. The owner/lessee of the property shall
register with the Police Department the designated person's name, address
and telephone number. The registered person will be required to respond if
request is made by Police Department personnel.
C. A two-week grace period from penalties will be given for false alarms
produced in regard to the installation of a new private alarm system.
D. False alarm violations may be waived if weather is the cause for alarm
activation.
E. Failure to remit the required fine for police response to a false alarm
within 30 days of billing may result in the false alarm fine being added
to the property tax bill.72
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 181-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-9
1:125
§ 181-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to
penalties as defined in § 1-4 of this Code.
Chapter 185
AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND ARCADES
§ 185-1. Purpose. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
It is the desire of the Village to provide for the regulation and supervision
of business establishments which maintain amusement devices for public
use. It is the intent of this chapter to ensure that such establishments are
operated in an orderly manner and that such machines are not used for
illegal gambling and do not constitute a public nuisance or contribute to
disturbances of the peace.
§ 185-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — Any establishment or location at which 15 or
more amusement devices, as defined in this chapter, are maintained for
public use. Amusement devices which are maintained in a private residence
and which are not held out for public use do not constitute an amusement
arcade under this chapter.[Amended 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine, whether mechanical or electronic,
or other device which is held out for public use as a game of entertainment,
amusement, skill or chance, whether or not a fee is charged for such
play. Amusement devices include, but are not limited to, pinball machines,
electronic game machines and pool tables. Amusement devices do not
include gambling devices as defined in Wis. Stats. § 945.01(3).[Amended
2-6-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-14]
GOOD MORAL CHARACTER — Conduct consistent with that of the average
person with regard to reputation, citizenship, decency, honesty and respect
for law and order. The following, without limitation due to enumeration
herein, shall be considered to be evidence of activities inconsistent with
good moral character:
Conviction, within five years preceding application for license or
permit, of a crime involving moral turpitude.
A.
Conviction of the offenses of contributing to the delinquency of minors,
exposing minors to harmful materials, liquor law violations involving
minors, sex offenses or sexual assaults involving minors, or offenses
against the Controlled Substances Act,73 which offenses are hereby
B.
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
§ 181-9 EAST TROY CODE § 185-2
1:126
§ 185-3. Amusement arcade license.
§ 185-4. (Reserved)74
§ 185-5. Exemptions.
Exempted from the provisions of this chapter shall be:
§ 185-6. Procedure for issuance of license or permit.
deemed to be of special concern, affecting the health, safety and
welfare of youth.
Being the subject of any criminal prosecution for a crime involving
moral turpitude in the courts of any state or of the federal government.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any such person from
reapplying for a license or permit under this chapter after the
conclusion of said proceedings. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
C.
A. License required. No person, firm or corporation shall operate a
business or maintain a location which constitutes, in whole or in part,
an amusement arcade as defined herein without first having obtained
an amusement arcade license as set forth in this chapter.
B. License fee. The license fee is included on the most recent fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Village Board. The license fee is to be paid
in addition to the device permit fee for each device on the premises.
License fees shall not be prorated. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
A. Educational, religious, and charitable institutions and fraternal
organizations which prohibit use of games of amusement on their
premises by the general public and are nonprofit organizations.
B. Those places of business and institutions which provide games of
amusement for use on an occasional basis. "Occasional basis" is defined
herein as no more than three times per year.75
A. Application. Application for an arcade license shall be on forms
provided by the Village Clerk, shall be under oath, and shall contain the
following statements: [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(1) The name and address of the applicant or agent.
(2) In case of a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners
should be included.
74.Editor’s Note: Former § 185-4, Amusement device permit, as amended, was repealed
1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01.
75.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, regarding sale of fermented malt beverages and/or
liquor, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 1-7-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-01.
§ 185-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-6
1:127
(3) In case of a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers,
directors and stockholders.
(4) In the case of clubs, associations or other organizations, the names
and addresses of all officers.
(5) The name, address and specific location of the premises at which
the amusement devices will be placed and operated and the name
and address of the owner or owners of said premises.
(6) The number and type of machines and devices at that premises.
(7) A statement that the applicant understands and agrees to the
conditions of the license or permit.
(8) Whether or not the person or persons named in the application
have ever been convicted of any violation of federal, state or
municipal law, other than traffic offenses, as set forth in Chs. 340 to
349, Wis. Stats.
B. Investigation. The application shall be investigated by the Chief of
Police and Building Inspector, who shall report their findings and make
a recommendation to the Village Clerk prior to issuance of the license
or permit. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-18]
C. (Reserved)76
D. Issuance of an amusement arcade license. If an application filed under
this chapter indicates that the premises described will constitute an
amusement arcade, the Village Clerk shall receive a combined fee for
the amusement arcade license and the specified number of amusement
devices and shall refer the application to the Village Board. The Village
Board shall not issue an amusement arcade license unless it is satisfied
that the applicant for such license meets the requirements set forth
herein and that the issuance of such license is consistent with the
purposes of this chapter. Any license granted under this chapter shall
be for a period not to exceed 12 months and shall expire on June 30 of
each year. Should an applicant desire to increase the number of
machines permitted under the license, an amended application shall be
filed with the Village Clerk along with payment of any additional fee. An
amended application shall be considered in the same manner as a
regular application. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
E. Qualifications. In determining whether an applicant is qualified for a
license/permit under this chapter, the following factors shall be
considered:
(1) No license or permit shall be issued if the applicant, or any partner,
or the principal officer or any stockholder holding more than 20%
76.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Issuance of an amusement device permit, was
repealed 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01.
§ 185-6 EAST TROY CODE § 185-6
1:128
§ 185-7. Conditions of license or permit.
The licensee or permittee under this chapter shall comply with the following
requirements:
of the capital stock of the corporation if the applicant is a
corporation:
(a) Is not of good moral character (as defined herein); or
(b) Is under 18 years of age.
(2) No license or permit shall be granted if the applicant fails to
complete the application, if the applicant refuses to disclose any
information required thereby, or if the applicant misrepresents,
evades or lies with respect to any answer. [Amended 6-15-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-02]
F. License or permit for corporations or clubs. No corporation, firm,
association or club shall be granted a license or permit hereunder
except through an agent thereof first duly appointed by it, who is at the
time of filing the application an officer, manager or member thereof,
and who shall have vested in him/her, by proper written and executed
authorization, full authority and control of the premises described on
the application, shall be qualified for a license or permit under
Subsection E above, and shall be personally responsible for compliance
with all the terms and provisions of this chapter. If such appointed
agent shall, during the license/permit year, cease to be an officer,
manager or member of the corporation, firm, association or club on
whose behalf the license/permit was issued, a new license/permit shall
be required and application therefor shall be made pursuant to the
terms and provisions of this chapter. A license or permit issued to a
corporation shall be voided if an unqualified person becomes a principal
officer or stockholder owning 20% or more of the capital stock in the
corporation. All changes in the identity of the principal officers or
stockholders owning 20% or more the capital stock of a corporation
shall be reported to the Village Clerk within 10 days after they occur.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
G. License or permit for partnerships. A license or permit issued to a
partnership shall not be voided by withdrawal of a partner so long as
one of the original partners remains. A new license or permit shall be
required if a new partner becomes a member, unless he/she already
holds a license or permit. All changes in the membership of a
partnership must be reported to the Village Clerk within 10 days after
they occur. No unqualified person may be a partner. [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
§ 185-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:129
A. The total number of amusement devices may not exceed the maximum
number specified on the permit or license at the location for which the
permit or license was granted.
B. The license or permit certificate shall be displayed in a public area of
the premises.
C. No amusement device covered by this chapter may be used in violation
of Ch. 945, Wis. Stats.
D. There shall be constant, adequate supervision by an adult supervisor on
the premises of persons using the premises, so as to prevent violation of
any law or ordinance.
E. Music or noise generated by any device shall not unreasonably disturb
the owners or occupiers of adjoining property, including property next
to, above and below the licensed premises.
F. Premises in which amusement devices are located and used by the
public shall, at all times, be kept in a clean, healthy and sanitary
condition with ample approved lighting and ventilation, in accordance
with Village Code requirements; operation shall at all times be in
conformance with Village building and zoning codes.
G. Amusement arcade licenses and amusement device permits shall not be
transferable. Upon the dissolution of the business in whose name the
license or permit is issued, or in the event of the death of the license or
permit holder, said license or permit shall immediately terminate.
However, one amusement device may be substituted for another
without permission from the Village. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02]
H. There shall be no operation of amusement devices, as defined herein,
without a license or permit, during suspension or after revocation.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
I. No intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage may be possessed or
consumed on the premises unless the premises is licensed for such
purpose, nor may controlled substances, as defined in Ch. 961, Wis.
Stats., be consumed on the premises.
J. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the licensed
premises where the use of games of amusement is offered to the public
for a fee before the hour of 3:00 p.m. on any day the East Troy public
schools are in session, unless accompanied by his/her parent or legal
guardian.
K. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the licensed
premises where the use of games of amusement is offered to the public
for a fee after the hour of 11:00 p.m. on any day, unless accompanied by
his/her parent or legal guardian.
§ 185-7 EAST TROY CODE § 185-8
1:130
§ 185-8. Revocation of license or permit. [Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02]
Chapter 189
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 354.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 362.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 366.
§ 189-1. Definitions.77
In this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ANIMAL — Mammals, reptiles and birds.
AT LARGE — To be off the premises of the owner and not under the control
of some person, either by leash or otherwise, but a dog or cat within an
automobile of its owner, or in an automobile of any other person with the
consent of the owner of said dog or cat, shall be deemed to be upon the
owner's premises.
A. The Village Board of the Village of East Troy may suspend or revoke any
license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter at any time, for any
reasonable cause, which shall be in the best interest and good order of
the Village, provided that the licensee or permittee shall be accorded
due process of law. Cause for such revocation, suspension or denial
shall include, without limitation for lack of reference herein, any
violation of the provisions of this chapter, or other provisions of the East
Troy Municipal Code, relevant to the operation of said business. A
license or permit may be suspended and machines sealed by the Chief
of Police or his designee whenever there is reasonable cause to believe
that there is an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare
by violation of a law or ordinance. Such suspension shall not be
effective for more than 10 days without a hearing, unless agreed to by
the Village and the licensee or permittee.
B. No refund shall be made of fees paid by a licensee or permittee subject
to suspension or revocation.
C. Enforcement; general penalty. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
§ 1-4 of this Code.
77.Editor's Note: Original § 7-1-1(a), License required, which appeared at the beginning of
this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). See § 189-3, Dog and kennel licenses.
§ 185-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-1
1:131
CAT — Any feline, regardless of age or sex.
CRUEL — Causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering or
unjustifiable injury or death.
DOG — Any canine, regardless of age or sex.
FARM ANIMAL — Any warm-blooded animal normally raised on farms in the
United States and used for food or fiber.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Has that meaning as appears in
§ 967.02(5), Wis. Stats., and includes a humane officer under § 173.03, Wis.
Stats., but does not include a conservation warden appointed under § 23.10,
Wis. Stats.
NEUTERED — As used herein as describing a dog or cat shall mean a dog
or cat having nonfunctional reproductive organs.
OWNER — Any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog or cat and the
occupant of any premises on which a dog or cat remains or to which it
customarily returns daily for a period of 10 days; such person is presumed
to be harboring or keeping the dog or cat within the meaning of this chapter.
PET — An animal kept and treated as a pet.
§ 189-2. Rabies vaccination.
A. Rabies vaccination required. The owner of a dog shall have the dog
vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian at no later than five months
of age and revaccinated within one year after the initial vaccination. If
the owner obtains the dog or brings the dog into the Village of East Troy
after the dog has reached five months of age, the owner shall have the
dog vaccinated against rabies within 30 days after the dog is obtained
or brought into the Village, unless the dog has been vaccinated as
evidenced by a current certificate of rabies vaccination. The owner of a
dog shall have the dog revaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian
before the date of initial immunization expires as stated on the
certificate of vaccination or, if no date is specified, within three years
after the previous vaccination. The certificate of vaccination shall meet
the requirements of § 95.21(2), Wis. Stats.78
B. Issuance of certificate of rabies vaccination. A veterinarian who
vaccinates a dog against rabies shall complete and issue to the owner a
certificate of rabies vaccination bearing a serial number and in the form
approved by the Village, stating the owner's name and address, the
dog's name and sex, spayed or unspayed, neutered or unneutered,
breed and color of the dog, the date of the vaccination, the type of
rabies vaccination administered and the manufacturer's serial number
and the date that the immunization expires as specified for that type of
vaccine by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of the United
States Department of Health and Human Services.79
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 189-1 EAST TROY CODE § 189-2
1:132
§ 189-3. Dog and kennel licenses.
C. Copies of certificate. The veterinarian shall keep a copy of each
certificate of rabies vaccination in a file maintained for this purpose
until the date that the immunization expires or until the dog is
revaccinated, whichever occurs first.
D. Rabies vaccination tag. After issuing the certificate of rabies
vaccination, the veterinarian shall deliver to the owner a rabies
vaccination tag of durable material bearing the same serial number as
the certificate, the year the vaccination was given, and the name,
address and telephone number of the veterinarian.
E. Tag to be attached. The owner shall attach the rabies vaccination tag or
a substitute tag to a collar, and a collar with the tag attached shall be
kept on the dog at all times, but this requirement does not apply to a
dog during competition or training, to a dog while hunting, to a dog
securely confined indoors, or to a dog securely confined in a fenced
area. The substitute tag shall be of a durable material and contain the
same information as the rabies vaccination tag. The requirements of
this subsection do not apply to a dog which is not required to be
vaccinated under Subsection A.
F. Duplicate tag. The veterinarian may furnish a new rabies vaccination
tag with a new serial number to an owner, in place of the original tag,
upon presentation of the certificate of rabies vaccination. The
veterinarian shall then indicate the new tag number on the certificate
and keep a record in the file.
G. Cost. The owner shall pay the cost of the rabies vaccination and the cost
associated with the issuance of a certificate of rabies vaccination and
the delivery of a rabies vaccination tag.
A. Dog licenses.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person in the Village of East Troy to
own, harbor or keep any dog more than five months of age without
complying with the provisions of §§ 174.05 through 174.10, Wis.
Stats., relating to the listing, licensing and tagging of the same.
(2) The owner of any dog more than five months of age on January 1 of
any year, or five months of age within the license year, shall
annually, or on or before the date the dog becomes five months of
age, pay a license tax and obtain a license.
(3) The license tax shall be set by the Village Board. The license year
shall commence January 1 and end December 31. [Amended
9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07; 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 189-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-3
1:133
(4) Upon payment of the required license tax and upon presentation of
evidence that the dog is currently immunized against rabies, as
required by § 189-2 of this chapter, the Village Clerk shall complete
and issue to the owner a license for such dog containing all
information required by state law. The Village Clerk shall also
deliver to the owner, at the time of issuance of the license, a tag of
durable material bearing the same serial number as the license, the
name of the county in which issued and the license year.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
(5) The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar, and the collar
with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog for which the license
is issued at all times, except as provided in § 189-2E.
(6) The fact that a dog is without a tag attached to the dog by means of
a collar shall be presumptive evidence that the dog is unlicensed.
Any law enforcement or humane officer shall seize, impound or
restrain any dog for which a dog license is required which is found
without such tag attached.
(7) Notwithstanding the foregoing, every dog specifically trained to
lead blind or deaf persons is exempt from the dog license tax, and
every person owning such a dog shall receive annually a free dog
license from the Village Clerk upon application therefor.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
B. Application for dog license.
(1) Application for a dog license shall be made to the Village Clerk or
other proper officer of the Village and shall be accompanied by the
proper fee. Application forms shall be provided and shall include
the following information: [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-02]
(a) The full name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(b) A description of the dog to be licensed.
(c) Required fee.
(d) If the dog is altered, written proof thereof signed by a
veterinarian.
(e) A certificate of rabies vaccination issued by a licensed
veterinarian. No license shall be issued for any dog unless such
inoculation certificate bears a date within one year prior to the
date of application for license.
(2) In addition, Lakeland Animal Welfare Society, Inc., and its
authorized employees are hereby designated as proper collecting
officials of the licenses and collar tags pursuant to § 174.07, Wis.
Stats.
§ 189-3 EAST TROY CODE § 189-3
1:134
(3) Lakeland Animal Welfare Society, Inc., shall remit all license fees
and license blanks to the Village Clerk, as directed by the Village.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
C. Kennel licenses.
(1) Any person who keeps or operates a kennel may, instead of the
license tax for each dog required by this chapter, apply for a kennel
license for the keeping or operating of the kennel. Such person
shall pay for the license year a license tax set by the Village Board.
Upon payment of the required kennel license tax and, if required by
the Village Board, upon presentation of evidence that all dogs over
five months of age are currently immunized against rabies, the
Village Clerk shall issue the kennel license and a number of tags
equal to the number of dogs authorized to be kept in the kennel.
Kennels may only be located in residential areas following a public
hearing and approval by the Village Board; the Board may attach
conditions to such approval as a conditional use under
Chapter 510, Zoning, of this Code. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(2) The owner or keeper of a kennel shall keep at all times a kennel
license tag attached to the collar of each dog over five months old
kept by the owner or keeper under a kennel license, but this
requirement does not apply to a show dog during competition, to a
dog securely confined indoors, or to a dog securely confined in a
fenced area. These tags may be transferred from one dog to
another within the kennel whenever any dog is removed from the
kennel. The rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag shall remain
attached to the dog for which it is issued at all times, but this
requirement does not apply to a show dog during competition, to a
dog securely confined indoors, or to a dog securely confined in a
fenced area. No dog bearing a kennel tag shall be permitted to
stray or to be taken anywhere outside the limits of the kennel
unless the dog is on a leash, or temporarily for the purposes of
hunting, breeding, trial, training or competition.
(3) The term "kennel" means any establishment wherein or whereon
four or more dogs are kept.
(4) No kennel license shall be issued to the keeper or operator of a
kennel who fails to provide proper food and drink and proper
shelter for the dogs in said kennel or who neglects or abandons
said dogs. Designated officials shall investigate any complaints
regarding the failure to maintain proper standards or investigate
any kennel premises upon their own initiative. Expressly
incorporated by reference in this section as minimum standards for
kennel keepers or operators are the relevant provisions of Ch. 951,
Wis. Stats.
§ 189-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-3
1:135
§ 189-4. Late fee. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
The Village Clerk shall assess a a late fee set by the Village Board to be
collected by the Village Treasurer from every owner of a dog five months of
age or over if the owner failed to obtain a license prior to April 1 of each
year, or within 30 days of acquiring ownership of a licensable dog, or if the
owner failed to obtain a license on or before the dog reached licensable age.
Said late fee shall be charged in addition to the required license fee.
§ 189-5. Rabies quarantine.
(5) A condition of a kennel license shall be that the licensed premises
may be entered and inspected at any reasonable hour by
appropriate Village officials without any warrant, and the
application for a license hereunder shall be deemed a consent to
this provision. Any refusal to permit such inspection shall
automatically operate as a revocation of any license issued
hereunder and shall be deemed a violation of this section. Should
any kennel be found to constitute a public nuisance, the license
shall be revoked and the nuisance abated pursuant to Village
ordinances.
A. Dogs and cats confined. If the Village is quarantined for rabies, all dogs
and cats within the Village shall be kept securely confined, tied, leashed
or muzzled. Any dog or cat not confined, tied, leashed or muzzled is
declared a public nuisance and may be impounded. All officers shall
cooperate in the enforcement of the quarantine. The Village Clerk shall
promptly post, in at least three public places in the Village, notices of
quarantine. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Exemption of vaccinated dog or cat from Village quarantine. A dog or
cat which is immunized currently against rabies, as evidenced by a valid
certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence, is exempt from the
Village quarantine provisions of Subsection A if a rabies vaccination tag
or substitute tag is attached to the dog's or cat's collar.
C. Quarantine or sacrifice of an animal suspected of biting a person or
being infected or exposed to rabies.
(1) Quarantine or sacrifice of dog or cat. An officer or animal warden
shall order a dog or cat quarantined if the officer has reason to
believe that the animal bit a person, is infected with rabies, or has
been in contact with a rabid animal. If a quarantine cannot be
imposed because the dog or cat cannot be captured, the officer may
kill the animal. The officer shall attempt to kill the animal in a
humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage to the
animal's head.
§ 189-3 EAST TROY CODE § 189-5
1:136
(2) Sacrifice of other animals. An officer may order killed or may kill an
animal other than a dog or cat if the officer has reason to believe
that the animal bit a person or is infected with rabies.
D. Quarantine of dog or cat.
(1) Delivery to isolation facility or quarantine on premises of owner. An
officer or animal warden who orders a dog or cat to be quarantined
shall deliver the animal or shall order the animal delivered to an
isolation facility as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours
after the original order is issued, or the officer may order the
animal to be quarantined on the premises of the owner if the animal
is immunized currently against rabies, as evidenced by a valid
certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence.
(2) Health risk to humans. If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined
because there is reason to believe that the animal bit a person, the
custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the animal
under strict isolation under the supervision of a veterinarian for at
least 10 days after the incident occurred. In this subsection,
"supervision of a veterinarian" includes, at a minimum,
examination of the animal on the first day of isolation, on the last
day of isolation, and on one intervening day. If the observation
period is not extended and if the veterinarian certifies that the dog
or cat has not exhibited any signs of rabies, the animal may be
released from quarantine at the end of the observation period.
(3) Risk to animal health.
(a) If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is
reason to believe that the animal has been exposed to a rabid
animal, and if the dog or cat is not currently immunized against
rabies, the custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall
keep the animal leashed or confined for 180 days. The owner
shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies between 155
and 165 days after the exposure to a rabid animal.
(b) If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is
reason to believe that the animal has been exposed to a rabid
animal, but if the dog or cat is immunized against rabies, the
custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the
animal leashed or confined for 60 days. The owner shall have
the animal revaccinated against rabies as soon as possible
after exposure to a rabid animal.
(4) Destruction of a dog or cat exhibiting symptoms of rabies. If a
veterinarian determines that a dog or cat exhibits symptoms of
rabies during the original or extended observation period, the
veterinarian shall notify the owner and the officer who ordered the
animal quarantined, and the officer or veterinarian shall kill the
animal in a humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage
to the animal's head. If the dog or cat is suspected to have bitten a
§ 189-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-5
1:137
§ 189-6. Restrictions on keeping of dogs, cats, fowl and other
animals.
person, the veterinarian shall notify the person or the person's
physician.
E. Delivery of carcass; preparation; examination by Laboratory of
Hygiene. An officer who kills an animal shall deliver the carcass to a
veterinarian or local health department. The veterinarian or local
health department shall prepare the carcass, properly prepare and
package the head of the animal in a manner to minimize deterioration,
arrange for delivery by the most expeditious means feasible of the head
of the animal to the State Laboratory of Hygiene, and dispose of or
arrange for the disposal of the remainder of the carcass in a manner
which minimizes the risk of exposure to any rabies virus. The
Laboratory of Hygiene shall examine the specimen and determine if the
animal was infected with rabies. The State Laboratory of Hygiene shall
notify the Village, the veterinarian or local health department which
prepared the carcass and, if the animal is suspected to have bitten a
person, that person or the person's physician.
F. Cooperation of veterinarian. Any practicing veterinarian who is
requested to be involved in the rabies control program by an officer is
encouraged to cooperate in a professional capacity with the Village, the
Laboratory of Hygiene, the local health department, the officer involved
and, if the animal is suspected to have bitten a person, the person's
physician.
G. Responsibility for quarantine and laboratory expenses. The owner of an
animal is responsible for any expenses incurred in connection with
keeping the animal in an isolation facility, supervision and examination
of the animal by a veterinarian, preparation of the carcass for
laboratory examination, and the fee for the laboratory examination. If
the owner is unknown, the county is responsible for these expenses.
A. Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village of
East Troy to own, harbor or keep any dog or cat which:
(1) Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or
highway in the Village.
(2) Assaults or attacks any person or destroys property.
(3) Is at large within the limits of the Village.
(4) Habitually barks or howls to the annoyance of any person or
persons. (See § 189-11.)
(5) Kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal.
(6) Is known by such person to be infected with rabies or to have been
bitten by an animal known to have been infected with rabies.
§ 189-5 EAST TROY CODE § 189-6
1:138
§ 189-7. Impoundment of animals; animal control agency.
(7) In the case of a dog, is unlicensed as defined by § 189-3.
B. Vicious dogs and animals.
(1) No vicious dog shall be allowed off the premises of its owner unless
muzzled or on a leash in charge of the owner or a member of the
owner's immediate family over 16 years of age. For purposes of
enforcing this subsection, a dog shall be deemed as being of a
vicious disposition if, within any twelve-month period, it bites two
or more persons or inflicts serious injury to one person in
unprovoked circumstances off the owner's premises.
(2) No person shall harbor or permit to remain on his/her premises any
animal that is habitually inclined towards attacking persons or
animals, destroying property, barking excessively or making
excessive noises or running after automobiles.
C. Animals running at large. No person having in his possession or
ownership any animal or fowl shall allow the same to run at large within
the Village. The owner of an animal, whether licensed or unlicensed,
shall keep his animal from interfering with the passing public or
neighbors. Any animal running at large not licensed, unattended and
required by state law or Village ordinance to be licensed shall be seized
and impounded by a humane or law enforcement officer or animal
warden.
D. Owner's liability for damage caused by dogs; penalties. The provisions
of § 174.02, Wis. Stats., relating to the owner's liability for damage
caused by dogs, together with the penalties therein set forth, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
A. Animal control agency.
(1) The Village of East Troy may contract with, or enter into an
agreement with, such person, persons, organization or corporation
to provide for the operation of an animal shelter, impoundment of
stray animals, confinement of certain animals, disposition of
impounded animals, and for assisting in the administration of
rabies vaccination programs.
(2) The Village of East Troy does hereby delegate to any such animal
control agency the authority to act pursuant to the provisions of
this section.
B. Impounding of animals. In addition to any penalty hereinafter provided
for a violation of this chapter, a law enforcement or animal control
officer may impound any dog, cat or other animal which habitually
pursues any vehicle upon any street, alley or highway of this Village,
assaults or attacks any person, is at large within the Village, habitually
barks, cries or howls, kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal or is
§ 189-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-7
1:139
§ 189-8. Duty of owner in case of dog or cat bite.
Every owner or person harboring or keeping a dog or cat, who knows that
such dog or cat has bitten any person, shall immediately report such fact
to the Village Police Department and shall keep such dog or cat confined
for not less than 10 days or for such period of time as directed. The owner
or keeper of any such dog or cat shall surrender the dog or cat to a law
enforcement or humane officer upon demand for examination.
§ 189-9. Animal feces.
infected with rabies. In order for an animal to be impounded, the
impounding officer must see or hear the violation of this section or have
in his/her possession a signed statement of a complaining witness made
under oath alleging the facts regarding the violation and containing
an agreement to reimburse the Village for any damages it sustains for
improper or illegal seizure.
C. Claiming animal; disposal of unclaimed animals. After seizure of
animals under this section by a law enforcement or animal control
officer, the animal shall be impounded. The officer shall notify the
owner, personally or through the U.S. Mail, if such owner is known to
the officer or can be ascertained with reasonable effort, but if such
owner is unknown or unascertainable, the officer shall post written
notice in three public places in the Village, giving a description of the
animal and stating where it is impounded and the conditions for its
release, after the officer or warden has taken such animal into his/her
possession. If, within seven days after such notice, the owner does not
claim such animal, the officer may dispose of the animal in a proper and
humane manner, provided that, if an animal before being impounded
has bitten a person, the animal shall be retained in the animal shelter
for 10 days for observation purposes. Within such time, the owner may
reclaim the animal upon payment of impoundment fees as established
by resolution of the Village Board. No animal shall be released from
impoundment without being properly licensed if so required by state
law or Village ordinance.
D. Sale of impounded animals. If the owner does not reclaim the animal
within seven days, the animal control officer may sell the animal to any
willing buyer.
E. Village not liable. The Village and/or its animal control agency shall not
be liable for the death of any animal which has been impounded or
disposed of pursuant to this section.
A. Removal of fecal matter. The owner or person in charge of any dog, cat,
horse, or other animal shall not permit solid fecal matter of such animal
to deposit on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public or private
property, unless such matter is immediately removed therefrom by said
owner or person in charge. This section shall not apply to a person who
is visually or physically handicapped.
§ 189-7 EAST TROY CODE § 189-9
1:140
§ 189-10. Injury to property by animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing an animal, dog or
cat to permit such animal, dog or cat to go upon any parkway or private
lands or premises without the permission of the owner of such premises and
break, bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, flowerbed, plant, shrub,
tree or garden in any manner whatsoever, or to defecate thereon.
§ 189-11. Barking dogs or crying cats.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to keep or harbor any dog
which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which habitually cries or
howls, to the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood,
or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in the
neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance. A dog or cat is considered to be in
violation of this section when two formal, written complaints are filed with
the Village Police Department within a four-week period.
§ 189-12. Prohibited and protected animals, fowl, reptiles and
insects.
B. Accumulation of fecal matter prohibited in private yards. The owner or
person in charge of a dog or cat must also prevent accumulation of
animal waste on his own property, by regularly patrolling and properly
disposing of the fecal matter.
A. Protected animals.
(1) Possession and sale of protected animals. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to possess with intent to sell or
offer for sale, or buy or attempt to buy, within the Village any of the
following animals, alive or dead, or any part or product thereof: all
wild cats of the family Felidae, polar bear (Thalarctos maritimus),
red wolf (Canis rufus), vicuna (Vicugna), gray or timber wolf (Canis
lupus), sea otter (Enhydra lutris), Pacific ridley turtle (Lepidochelys
olivacea), Atlantic green turtle (Chelonia mydas), or Mexican ridley
turtle (Lepidochelys kempii).
(2) Compliance with federal regulations. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to buy, sell or offer for sale a native or
foreign species or subspecies of mammal, bird, amphibian or
reptile, or the dead body or parts thereof, which appears on the
endangered species list designated by the United States Secretary
of the Interior and published in the Code of Federal Regulations
pursuant to the Endangered Species Act of 1969 (Public Law 135,
91st Congress).
(3) Regulating the importation of certain birds. No person, firm or
corporation shall import or cause to be imported into this Village
any part of the plumage, skin or dead body of any species of hawk,
§ 189-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-12
1:141
owl or eagle. This subsection shall not be construed to forbid or
restrict the importation or use of the plumage, skin, body or any
part thereof legally collected for use by the American Indians for
ceremonial purposes or in the preservation of their tribal customs
and heritage.
B. Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection A above shall not be deemed
to prevent the lawful importation, possession, purchase or sale of any
species by any public agency, institute of higher learning, persons
holding federal permits, or by a person holding a scientific collector's
permit issued by the Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources
of the state, or any person or organization licensed to present a circus.
C. Wild animals; prohibition on keeping. It shall be unlawful for any person
to keep, maintain or have in his/her possession or under his/her control,
within the Village, any poisonous reptile or any other dangerous or
carnivorous wild animal, insect or reptile, any vicious or dangerous
domesticated animal or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious or
dangerous propensities. Specifically, it shall be unlawful for any person
to keep, maintain or have in his/her possession or under his/her control,
within the Village, any of the following animals, reptiles or insects:
(1) All poisonous animals and reptiles, including rear-fang snakes.
(2) Apes: chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (Hylobates); gorillas (Gorilla);
orangutans (Pongo); and siamangs (Symphalangus).
(3) Baboons (Papio, Mandrillus).
(4) Bears (Ursidae).
(5) Bison (Bison).
(6) Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus).
(7) Crocodilians (Crocodilia), 30 inches in length or more.
(8) Constrictor snakes.
(9) Coyotes (Canis latrans).
(10) Deer (Cervidae). Includes all members of the deer family; for
example, white-tailed deer, elk, antelope and moose.
(11) Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonta).
(12) Ferret.
(13) Game cocks and other fighting birds.
(14) Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae).
(15) Hyenas (Hyaenidae).
(16) Jaguars (Panthera onca).
§ 189-12 EAST TROY CODE § 189-12
1:142
§ 189-13. Keeping of livestock.
(17) Leopards (Panthera pardus).
(18) Lions (Panthera leo).
(19) Lynxes (Lynx).
(20) Monkeys, old world (Cercopithecidae).
(21) Ostriches (Struthio).
(22) Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions and
panthers.
(23) Rhinoceroses (Rhinocerotidae).
(24) Sharks (class Chondrichthyes).
(25) Snow leopards (Panthera uncia).
(26) Tigers (Panthera tigris).
(27)Wolves (Canis lupus).
(28) Poisonous insects.
D. Exceptions. The prohibitions of Subsection C above shall not apply
where the creatures are in the care, custody or control of a veterinarian
for treatment; agricultural fairs; shows or projects of the 4-H Clubs; a
display for judging purposes; an itinerant or transient carnival, circus
or other show; dog or cat shows or trials; public or private educational
institutions; licensed pet shops; or zoological gardens, if:
(1) Their location conforms to the provisions of Chapter 510, Zoning,
of this Code.
(2) All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors.
(3) Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent
their escape.
(4) No person lives or resides within 100 feet of the quarters in which
the animals are kept.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LIVESTOCK — Any wild or domestic animal normally used or raised on
a farm, including specifically, but not exclusively, horses, cattle, mules,
sheep, goats, swine, chickens, ducks, turkeys, mink and pigeons, but
does not include cats or dogs or small animals kept exclusively in the
home.
§ 189-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-13
1:143
NONAGRICULTURAL AREA — Any area not zoned in an agricultural
classification.
B. Restrictions. No person shall keep or allow the keeping, or lease
property for the keeping, of livestock within the Village in any
nonagricultural area.
C. Exception for chickens. The raising and keeping of chickens is
permitted where the principal structure is a detached single-family
residence on the following conditions: [Added 10-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-06]
(1) License.
(a) Prior to the keeping chickens, the owner or occupant must first
obtain a license issued by the Village and pay the license fee
which shall be set, from time to time, by motion and passage of
the Village Board of Trustees.
(b) If the residence is not owner-occupied, the tenant shall obtain
the owner's consent to the keeping of chickens on the property
and provide a copy to the Village upon application for a license.
(c) Prior to issuance of a license, the applicant shall provide proof
of livestock premises registration with the Wisconsin
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection.
(d) The license may be revoked if there are two or more violations
of this subsection within a twelve-month period.
(2) Number of chickens. No more than four chickens may be kept per
residential lot.
(3) Roosters. Keeping of roosters is prohibited.
(4) Sale. The sale of chickens, chicken meat, eggs or other chicken byproducts
is prohibited without approval of the Walworth County
Department of Health and Human Services and the Wisconsin
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection.80
(5) Chicken coop and run required.
(a) Chickens shall be provided with a chicken coop (i.e., a covered
roosting area) and an adjacent covered chicken run.
(b) The coop shall be a stand alone structure located in the rear
yard at least 25 feet from all property lines and at least 10 feet
from the principal structure.
(c) The coop shall not exceed 32 square feet in area nor 10 feet in
height.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 189-13 EAST TROY CODE § 189-13
1:144
§ 189-14. Neglected or abandoned animals.82
(d) The chicken run shall be located adjacent to the coop and shall
be at least 25 feet from all property lines.
(e) The chicken run shall not exceed 64 square feet in area, and
the fence surrounding it shall be between 48 and 96 inches in
height.
(f) Chickens shall not be permitted in any other structure on the
lot, including but not limited to garages, basements and attics.
(6) Accessory structure. The chicken coop and run shall not be
considered an accessory structure under Chapter 510, Zoning, of
this Code.
(7) Penalties. Violation of this subsection shall be subject to the
penalties found in § 1-4 of this Code.81
A. No person may abandon any animal.
B. Any law enforcement or animal control officer may remove, shelter and
care for an animal found to be cruelly exposed to the weather, starved
or denied adequate water, neglected, abandoned or otherwise treated
in a cruel manner and may deliver such animal to another person to be
sheltered, cared for and given medical attention, if necessary. In all
cases, the owner, if known, shall be immediately notified and such
officer or other person having possession of the animal shall have a lien
thereon for its care, keeping and medical attention and the expense of
notice.
C. If the owner or custodian is unknown and cannot, with reasonable
effort, be ascertained or does not, within five days after notice, redeem
the animal by paying the expenses incurred, it may be treated as a stray
and dealt with as such.
D. Whenever, in the opinion of any officer, an animal is hopelessly injured
or diseased so as to be beyond the probability of recovery, it shall be
lawful for such officer to kill such animal, and the owner thereof shall
not recover damages for the killing of such animal unless he/she shall
prove that such killing was unwarranted.
E. Section 173.10, Investigation of cruelty complaints, and § 173.24,
Reimbursement for expenses, of the Wisconsin Statutes are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.
81.Editor's Note: Original § 7-1-13, Sale of rabbits, chicks or artificially colored animals,
§ 7-1-14, Providing proper food and drink to confined animals, and § 7-1-15, Providing
proper shelter, which immediately followed this section, were repealed at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See §§ 951.10, 951.11, 951.13 and 951.14,
Wis. Stats., adopted by reference in § 366-1 of this Code.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 189-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-15
1:145
§ 189-15. Cruelty to animals and birds prohibited.83
No person except a law enforcement or animal control officer in the pursuit
of his/her duties shall, within the Village, shoot or kill or commit an act of
cruelty to any animal or bird or disturb any bird's nest or bird's eggs.
§ 189-16. Limitation on number of dogs.
§ 189-17. Trapping of animals.
A. Purpose. The keeping of a large number of dogs within the Village of
East Troy for a considerable period of time detracts from and, in many
instances, is detrimental to healthful and comfortable life in such areas.
The keeping of a large number of dogs is, therefore, declared a public
nuisance.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:84
RESIDENTIAL LOT — A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by
a dwelling, platted or unplatted, and under common ownership. For
the purpose of this section, any vacant parcel or parcels adjoining a
dwelling and under the same ownership shall constitute one lot.
C. Number limited.
(1) No family shall own, harbor or keep in its possession more than
three dogs in any residential unit without the prior approval of the
Village Board, except that a litter of pups or a portion of a litter may
be kept for not more than 10 weeks from birth. If more than one
family resides on a residential lot, then only three dogs shall be
allowed in each residential unit unless the prior approval is
obtained from the Village Board.
(2) The above requirement may be waived with the approval of the
Village Board when a kennel license has been issued by the Village
pursuant to § 189-3C. Such application for waiver shall first be
made to the Village Clerk. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
A. In the interest of public health and safety, it shall be unlawful for any
person within the Village of East Troy to set, place or tend any trap for
the purpose of trapping, killing, catching, wounding, worrying or
molesting any animal, except by use of live box-type traps only. Live
box-type traps shall be defined as those traps which capture and hold
an animal in an alive and unharmed condition. Live box traps shall not
be used to trap animals for inhumane, cruel or killing purposes.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). See also §§ 951.04, 951.06, 951.07 and 951.09, Wis. Stats., adopted by reference in
§ 366-1 of this Code.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 189-15 EAST TROY CODE § 189-17
1:146
§ 189-18. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 200
BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles — See
Ch. 410.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 458.
B. This section shall prohibit the use of all traps other than live traps as
described above, including but not limited to traps commonly known as
leg traps, pan-type traps or other traps designed to kill, wound or close
upon a portion of the body of an animal.
C. All such traps set, placed or tended shall comply with Ch. 29, Wis.
Stats., as it relates to trapping.
D. This section shall not apply to trapping on private property.
E. Nothing in this section shall prohibit or hinder the Village of East Troy
or its employees or agents from performing their official duties.85
A. Any person violating § 189-14, 189-15, 189-16 or 189-17 shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 and not more than $200. This
section shall also permit the Village Attorney to apply to a court of
competent jurisdiction for a temporary or permanent injunction
restraining any person from violating any aspect of this chapter.
B. Anyone who violates §§ 189-1, 189-2, 189-3, 189-4 and 189-5 of this
chapter or Ch. 174, Wis. Stats., shall be subject to a forfeiture of not
less than $25 and not more than $200 for the first offense and not less
than $100 and not more than $400 for any subsequent offenses. An
owner who refuses to comply with an order issued under § 189-5 to
deliver an animal to an officer, isolation facility or veterinarian, or who
does not comply with the conditions of an order that an animal be
quarantined, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.86
C. Any person who violates §§ 189-6 through 189-13 of this chapter shall
be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $25 and not more than $100
for the first violation and not less than $50 and not more than $200 for
subsequent violations. Each day of violation is a separate violation, and
a forfeiture may be assessed for each day the violation continues.
85.Editor's Note: Original § 7-1-20, Keeping of certain animals prohibited, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II). See § 189-12, Prohibited and protected animals, fowl, reptiles and
insects.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 189-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-18
1:147

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 200-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals and
having wheels, any two of which are not less than 14 inches in diameter.
BICYCLE LANE — That portion of a roadway set aside for exclusive use
of bicycles and so designated by appropriate signs and markings by the
responsible governing body.
BICYCLE WAY — Any path or sidewalk, or portion thereof, designated for
the use of bicycles by the responsible governing body.
BIKE ROUTE — Any bicycle lane, bicycle way or highway which has been
duly designated by the responsible governing body and identified by
appropriate signs and markings.
CARRIER — Any device attached to a bicycle designed for carrying articles.
PLAY VEHICLE — Any coaster, skateboard, roller skates, sled, toboggan,
unicycle or toy vehicle upon which a person may ride. "Play vehicle" does
not include in-line skates.87
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching
under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise
to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-1
1:149

ARTICLE II
In-Line Skates and Play Vehicles
§ 200-2. Regulation of skateboards, roller skates and in-line skates.
A. State laws applicable. Every person using in-line skates upon a public
roadway shall be subject to the provisions of all ordinances and state
laws applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except those provisions
with reference to equipment of vehicle and except those provisions
which by their nature would have no application.
B. Public sidewalks or walkways. Every person using in-line skates, roller
skates or skateboards upon a sidewalk or walkway shall yield the rightof-
way to any pedestrian and shall exercise due care when passing any
other person.
C. Riding on roadway.
(1) Every person using in-line skates on a two-way public street or
alley shall keep as close to the right-hand curb as possible and shall
proceed with traffic. Every person using in-line skates upon a oneway
public street or alley shall proceed in the direction of the oneway
traffic.
(2) Every person using in-line skates upon a roadway shall ride single
file on all public roadways which have center lines, or have lines
indicated by painting or other markings. On public roadways and
alleys not divided by painted or other marked center lines or lane
lines, in-line skaters may ride two abreast.
(3) Persons using in-line skates upon a public roadway shall not
impede the normal and reasonable movement of motor vehicle
traffic.
(4) No person riding upon any play vehicle, as defined in § 200-1,
including roller skates and skateboards, may attach the same or
himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway or go upon a
roadway except while crossing a roadway at a crosswalk.88
D. Clinging to moving vehicles prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person using in-line skates to cling to or attach to any bicycle or other
moving vehicle upon a public roadway.
E. Observance of traffic regulations. Every person using in-line skates
upon a public roadway shall stop for all stop signs and traffic signals.
F. Yielding to traffic. The operator of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way
to the user of in-line skates in the same manner as for bicyclists and
pedestrians under §§ 346.23, 346.24, 346.36 and 346.38, Wis. Stats.
When using in-line skates every person shall, upon entering a public
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 200-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-2
1:151
§ 200-3. Play vehicle penalties.
roadway, yield the right-of-way to motor vehicles, except that a person
using the in-line skates shall be subject to the same regulations as
bicyclists and pedestrians under §§ 346.23, 346.24, 346.37 and 346.38,
Wis. Stats.
G. Equipment regulations. Every person using in-line skates between 1/2
hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise shall be equipped with a
lamp firmly attached to the front of such person, exhibiting a white light
to the front, and with a reflector visible from the rear, visible at a
distance of 500 feet. The reflector shall not be less than three inches in
diameter. A lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light may also be used.
A. Any person 14 years of age and over who shall violate any provisions of
this article may be issued a citation and be subject to the penalties
provided by the deposit schedule together with the costs of
prosecution.89
B. Any person under 14 years of age who shall violate any provisions of
this article may receive an officer's report warning notice, along with
the following additional actions:
(1) First offense in one year: a warning letter sent to the parent or
guardian.
(2) Second or subsequent offense in the same year: the play vehicle
may be impounded by law enforcement authorities.
C. Any parent or guardian of any child who authorizes or knowingly
permits such child to violate any of the provisions of this article may be
subject to the provisions of §§ 346.77 and 346.82(1), Wis. Stats.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 200-2 EAST TROY CODE § 200-3
1:152
ARTICLE III
Bicycles
§ 200-4. Lighting and other equipment.
No person shall operate a bicycle upon a highway unless equipped as
required in § 347.489, Wis. Stats.
§ 200-5. Rules of the road.
The provisions of Chs. 346 and 347, Wis. Stats., and applicable Village
ordinances shall govern the operation of bicycles where appropriate. Every
person driving a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and
shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the
laws of the state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles, or by
the traffic ordinances of the Village applicable to the driver of the vehicle,
except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature
can have no application.
§ 200-6. General bicycle regulations.
A. Parental responsibility. No parent or guardian of any child shall
authorize or knowingly permit such child to violate any of the provisions
of §§ 200-2, 200-5 and this section.
B. Street operation.90
(1) Unless preparing to make a left turn, every person operating a
bicycle upon a roadway carrying two-way traffic shall ride as near
as possible to the right edge of the unobstructed traveled roadway.
On one-way roadways, the operator of the bicycle shall ride as near
as possible to the right edge or left edge of the unobstructed
traveled roadway. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway
shall exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle or one
proceeding in the same direction, allowing a minimum of three feet
between his bicycle and the vehicle.
(2) Every person, when operating a bicycle upon a roadway, shall ride
such bicycle in single file.
(3) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped. Infant seats are
permitted if securely attached to the frame at the top mount, and to
the axle and frame at the rear bottom mount, and if provided with
handholds, footrests, foot guards and safety belt. The use of a
backpack for carrying an infant is permitted. Persons are not
permitted to be located on a bicycle in front of the operator of the
bicycle.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-6
1:153
(4) No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the safe operation of the bicycle with at least
one hand on the handlebars at all times.
(5) No rider of a bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars,
or feet from the pedals, or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding on
any street.
(6) Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to
a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the
roadway.
(7) No person may operate a bicycle or moped upon a roadway where a
sign is erected indicating that bicycle riding is prohibited.
C. Bicycle parking. No bicycle shall be parked in front of or adjacent to any
commercial establishment, unless the bicycle is parked on the sidewalk
parallel to the street and as close as possible to the curb. No person
shall leave a bicycle at such a place or in such a way as to create a
hazard to pedestrians, automobile operators, or to anyone else.91
D. Bicycles not to be pulled by moving vehicles. No person riding upon a
bicycle shall cling or attach himself/herself or his/her bicycle to any
other moving vehicle upon a street or highway, nor shall the operator of
any such bicycle tow or draw any coaster wagon, sled, person on roller
skates, toy vehicles or any other similar vehicle on such highway.
E. Speed. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under existing conditions or in excess of any
posted speed limit.
F. Operation on sidewalks.
(1) No person over the age of 10 shall ride or propel any bicycle upon
any public sidewalk or thoroughfare of the Village set apart for
pedestrians, except bicycles having wheels sized 20 inches or
under. This exception shall not apply to twenty-inch or under
bicycles designed or modified to BMX specifications.
(2) No person shall ride or propel any bicycle upon any public street,
alley, boulevard or sidewalk of the Village in such manner as to
interfere with the rights of other persons using such street, alley,
boulevard or sidewalk.
G. Bicycle operation while hearing obstructed. No person may operate a
bicycle upon a highway while such operator is using any audio device
attached directly to the ear or ears of such operator that materially
impairs the ability of such operator to hear traffic signals or warnings.
91.Editor's Note: Original § 10-2-5(d), Required equipment, and (e), Display of license, which
immediately followed this subsection, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 200-6 EAST TROY CODE § 200-6
1:154
§ 200-7. Bicycle penalties.
H. Mopeds prohibited on bicycle ways. No person may ride a moped or
motor bicycle with the power unit in operation upon a bicycle way.
I. Riding bicycle on bicycle lane.92
(1) Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle lane shall:
(a) Exercise due care and give an audible signal when passing a
bicycle rider or a pedestrian proceeding in the same direction.
(b) Obey each traffic signal or sign facing a roadway which runs
parallel and adjacent to a bicycle lane.
(2) Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle lane open to twoway
traffic shall ride on the right side of the bicycle lane.
(3) Every operator of a bicycle entering a bicycle lane shall yield the
right-of-way to all bicycles and pedestrians in the bicycle lane.
J. Riding bicycle on bicycle way.
(1) Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle way shall:
(a) Exercise due care and give an audible signal when passing a
bicycle rider or a pedestrian proceeding in the same direction.
(b) Obey each traffic signal or sign facing a roadway which runs
parallel and adjacent to a bicycle way.
(2) Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle way open to twoway
traffic shall ride on the right side of the bicycle way.
(3) Every operator of a bicycle entering a bicycle way shall yield the
right-of-way to all bicycles and pedestrians in the bicycle way.93
A. Any person 16 years of age or older who shall violate any provisions of
this article may be issued a uniform traffic citation and be subject to the
penalties provided by the Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule.
B. Any person 14 years of age through 15 years of age who shall violate
any provisions of this article may be issued a citation and be subject to
the penalties provided by the deposit schedule together with the cost of
prosecution, and, in default of such payment, the court may suspend the
child's operating privilege, as defined in § 340.01, Wis. Stats., for not
less than 30 days nor more than 90 days.94
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
93.Editor's Note: Original § 10-2-6, Registration and licensing of bicycles, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 200-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-7
1:155
C. Any person under 14 years of age who shall violate any provisions of
this article may be issued a special bicycle violation warning notice.95
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 200-7 EAST TROY CODE § 200-7
1:156
Chapter 210
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways and culverts — See Ch. 244.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 375.
Sewers — See Ch. 400.
Water — See Ch. 475.
Erosion control and stormwater
management — See Ch. 483.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 486.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 495.
Zoning — See Ch. 510.
§ 210-1. Title, purpose and scope.
§ 210-2. Building permits and inspections.
A. Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Building Code of the Village of
East Troy" and will be referred to in this chapter as "this code" or "this
chapter."
B. Purpose. This chapter provides certain minimum standards, provisions
and requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction
and uses of materials in buildings and/or structures hereafter erected,
constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, converted to other
uses or demolished and regulates the equipment, maintenance, use and
occupancy of all such buildings and/or structures. Its purpose is to
protect and foster the health, safety and well-being of persons
occupying or using such buildings and the general public.
C. Scope. New buildings hereafter erected in or any building hereafter
moved within or into the Village shall conform to all the requirements of
this chapter except as they are herein specifically exempted from part
or all of its provisions. Any alteration, enlargement or demolition of an
existing building and any installation therein of electrical, gas, heating,
plumbing or ventilating equipment which affects the health or safety of
the users thereof, or any other persons, is a new building to the extent
of such change. Any existing building shall be considered a new
building for the purposes of this chapter whenever it is used for
dwelling, commercial or industrial purposes, unless it was being used
for such purpose at the time this chapter was enacted. The provisions of
this chapter supplement the laws of the State of Wisconsin pertaining to
construction and use and Chapter 510, Zoning, of this Code and
amendments thereto to the date this chapter was adopted and in no way
supersede or nullify such laws and said Chapter 510, Zoning.
A. Permit required.
§ 200-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:157
(1) Building permit required. No one- or two-family dwelling, public
building or place of employment of which initial construction shall
be commenced after the effective date of this chapter shall be built,
enlarged, altered or repaired (which shall include heating,
ventilation and air conditioning) unless a building permit for that
work shall first be obtained by the owner, or his/her agent, from the
Building Inspector. Application for a building permit shall be made
in writing upon that form designated as the Wisconsin Uniform
Dwelling Permit Application, furnished by the Department of Safety
and Professional Services, or municipal building permit, as the case
may be.96
(2) Additions; alterations; repairs. Additions, alterations or repairs to
existing one- and two-family dwellings shall be governed by the
provisions of the Wisconsin Uniform Building Code as adopted
herein.
(a) Alterations and repairs required. When any of the structural
members of any building or structure have deteriorated from
any cause whatsoever to less than their required strength, the
owner of such a building or structure shall cause such
structural members to be restored to their required strength,
failing in which the building or structure shall be considered a
menace to public safety and shall be vacated and thereafter no
further occupancy or use of the same shall be permitted until
the regulations of this chapter are complied with.
(b) Extent of deterioration. The amount and extent of deterioration
of any existing building or structure shall be determined by the
Building Inspector.
B. Application. Application for a building permit shall be made in writing
upon a form furnished by the Building Inspector or his/her designee and
shall state the name and address of the owner of the land and also the
owner of the building, if different, the legal description of the land upon
which the building is to be located, the name and address of the
designer, the use to which said building is to be put, and such other
information as the Building Inspector may require.
C. Site plan.
(1) Site plan approval. All applications for building permits for any
construction, reconstruction, expansion or conversion, except for
one- and two-family residences in residentially zoned districts, shall
require site plan approval by the Plan Commission in accordance
with the requirements of this section. The applicant shall submit a
site plan and sufficient plans and specifications of proposed
buildings, machinery and operations to enable the Plan
Commission or its expert consultants to determine whether the
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 210-2 EAST TROY CODE § 210-2
1:158
proposed application meets all the requirements applicable thereto
in this chapter.
(2) Administration. The Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector
shall make a preliminary review of the application and plans and
refer them, along with a report of his/her findings, to the Plan
Commission. The Plan Commission shall review the application and
may refer the application and plans to one or more expert
consultants selected by the Plan Commission to advise whether the
application and plans meet all the requirements applicable thereto
in this chapter. Within 30 days of its receipt of the application, the
Plan Commission shall authorize the Building Inspector to issue or
refuse a building permit.97
(3) Requirements. In acting on any site plan, the Plan Commission
shall consider the following:
(a) The appropriateness of the site plan and buildings in relation
to the physical character of the site and the usage of adjoining
land areas.
(b) The layout of the site with regard to entrances and exits to
public streets, the arrangement and improvement of interior
roadways, and the location, adequacy and improvement of
areas for parking and for loading and unloading and shall, in
this connection, satisfy itself that the traffic pattern generated
by the proposed construction or use shall be developed in a
manner consistent with the safety of residents and the
community, and the applicant shall so design the construction
or use as to minimize any traffic hazard created thereby.
(c) The adequacy of the proposed water supply, drainage facilities
and sanitary and waste disposal.
(d) The landscaping and appearance of the completed site. The
Village Board may require that those portions of all front, rear
and side yards not used for off-street parking shall be
attractively planted with trees, shrubs, plants or grass lawns
and that the site be effectively screened so as not to impair the
value of adjacent properties nor impair the intent or purposes
of this section.
(4) Effect on municipal services. Before granting any site approval, the
Village Board may, besides obtaining advice from consultants,
secure such advice as may be deemed necessary from the Building
Inspector or other municipal officials, with special attention to the
effect of such approval upon existing municipal services and
utilities. Should additional facilities be needed, the Plan
Commission shall not issue the final approval until the Village has
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 210-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:159
entered into an agreement with the applicant regarding the
development of such facilities.
(5) Appeals. Denials of building permits contingent upon site plan
approval may be appealed to the Board of Appeals by filing a notice
of appeal with the Village Clerk within 30 days of the denial.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
D. Dedicated street and approved subdivision required. No building
permit shall be issued unless the property on which the building is
proposed to be built abuts a street that has been dedicated for street
purposes. No building permit shall be issued until the subdivision and
required improvements are accepted by the Village Board.
E. Plans. With such application, there shall be submitted two complete
sets of plans and specifications, including a plot plan showing the
location and dimensions of all buildings and improvements on the lot,
both existing and proposed, dimensions of the lot, dimensions showing
all setbacks of all buildings on the lot, proposed grade of proposed
structure (to Village datum), grade of the lot and of the street abutting
the lot, grade and setback of adjacent buildings (if adjacent lot is
vacant, submit elevation of nearest buildings on same side of street),
type of monuments at each corner of lot, watercourses or existing
drainage ditches, easements or other restrictions affecting such
property, seal and signature of surveyor or a certificate signed by the
applicant and a construction erosion control plan setting forth proposed
information and procedures needed for control of soil erosion, surface
water runoff and sediment disposition at the building site. Plans,
specifications and plot plans shall be drawn to a minimum scale of 1/4
inch to one foot (fireplace details to 3/4 inch to one foot). One set of
plans shall be returned after approval as provided in this chapter. The
second set shall be filed in the office of the Building Inspector. Plans for
buildings involving the State Building Code shall bear the stamp of
approval of the State Department of Safety and Professional Services.
One plan shall be submitted which shall remain on file in the office of
the Building Inspector. All plans and specifications shall be signed by
the designer. Plans for all new one- and two-family dwellings shall
comply with the provisions of § SPS 320.09(4), Wis. Adm. Code.
F. Waiver of plans; minor repairs.
(1) Waiver. If the Building Inspector finds that the character of the
work is sufficiently described in the application, he/she may waive
the filing of plans for alterations, repairs or moving, provided that
the cost of such work does not exceed $2,000.
(2) Minor repairs. The Building Inspector may authorize minor repairs
or maintenance work on any structure or to heating, ventilating or
air-conditioning systems installed therein with a fair market value
of less than $500, as determined by the Building Inspector,
§ 210-2 EAST TROY CODE § 210-2
1:160
including market value of labor, which do not change the
occupancy area, exterior aesthetic appearance, structural
strength, fire protection, exits, light or ventilation of the building
or structure without issuance of a building permit.
G. Approval of plans.
(1) If the Building Inspector determines that the building will comply
in every respect with all ordinances and orders of the Village, and
all applicable laws and orders of the State of Wisconsin, he shall
issue a building permit which shall state the use to which said
building is to be put, which shall be kept and displayed at the site of
the proposed building. After being approved, the plans and
specifications shall not be altered in any respect which involves any
of the above-mentioned ordinances, laws or orders, or which
involves the safety of the building or the occupants, except with the
written consent of the Building Inspector.
(2) In case adequate plans are presented for part of the building only,
the Building Inspector, at his/her discretion, may issue a permit for
that part of the building before receiving the plans and
specifications for the entire building.
H. Inspection of work. The contractor shall notify the Building Inspector
when ready and the Building Inspector shall inspect all buildings upon
completion of the foundation forms or before the foundation is laid and
again when ready for lath and plaster, or before drywall or paneling is
applied. After completion, he/she shall make a final inspection of all
new buildings and alterations. Before final inspection, and as a
condition of the issuance of an occupancy permit, a registered land
surveyor shall inspect and submit an as-built survey showing the
location of all newly constructed buildings and their grades, as well as
certify to the Building Inspector that the as-built conditions
substantially conform to the plans and specifications previously
submitted to and approved by the Building Inspector. The Building
Inspector, in his/her sole discretion, shall have the authority to waive
minor discrepancies and/or waive the requirement for an as-built
survey when it is clear the improvements are located so as to comply
with zoning or any other such requirements. The bond paid by
contractor under § 210-2M shall not be released until the final
inspection is complete. The Building Inspector, in his/her sole
discretion, may grant occupancy where weather conditions do not
permit completion of the final grading. When the Building Inspector has
granted occupancy prior to the final inspection's completion, the bond
paid by contract under § 210-2M shall be held until the contractor
completes the final inspection. [Amended 8-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-12]
I. Permit lapses. A building permit shall lapse and be void unless building
operations are commenced within six months or if construction has not
been completed within one year from the date of issuance thereof.
§ 210-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:161
Permits may be renewed for one additional six-month term for just
cause unless it is new construction governed by the Uniform Dwelling
Code or Commercial Building Code, which supersede this section.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
J. Revocation of permits.
(1) The Building Inspector or the Village Board may revoke any
building, plumbing or electrical permit, occupancy permit, or
approval issued under the regulations of this chapter and may stop
construction or use of approved new materials, equipment,
methods of construction, devices or appliances for any of the
following reasons:
(a) Whenever the Building Inspector shall find at any time that
applicable ordinances, laws, orders, plans and specifications
are not being complied with and that the holder of the permit
refuses to conform after written warning has been issued to
him/her. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(b) Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes
dangerous to life or property.
(c) Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provisions
of the application for permit or of the permit.
(d) Whenever, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, there is
inadequate supervision provided on the job site.
(e) Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been
made in the application for permit, plans, drawings, data
specifications or certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance
of the permit or approval was based.
(f) Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of an
approval or occupancy permit given by the Building Inspector
for the use of all new materials, equipment, methods of
construction, devices or appliances. [Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02]
(2) The notice revoking a building, plumbing or electrical permit,
occupancy permit or approval shall be in writing and may be served
upon the applicant for the permit, owner of the premises and his/
her agent, if any, and on the person having charge of construction.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(3) A revocation placard shall also be posted upon the building,
structure, equipment or premises in question by the Building
Inspector.
(4) After the notice is served upon the persons as aforesaid and posted,
it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any
construction operation whatsoever on the premises, and the permit
§ 210-2 EAST TROY CODE § 210-2
1:162
which has been so revoked shall be null and void, and before
any construction or operation is again resumed, a new permit, as
required by this chapter, shall be procured and fees paid therefor,
and thereafter the resumption of any construction or operation
shall be in compliance with the regulations of this chapter.
However, such work as the Building Inspector may order as a
condition precedent to the reissuance of the building permit may
be performed, or such work as he/she may require for the
preservation of life and safety.
K. Report of violations. Village officers shall report at once to the Building
Inspector any building which is being carried on without a permit, as
required by this chapter.
L. Display of permit. Building permits shall be displayed in a conspicuous
place on the premises where the authorized building or work is in
progress, at all times during construction or work thereon.
M. Construction bonds. [Added 8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-11]
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Includes all portions of a highway dedicated
to the public, including paved/asphalted portions, drainage ways,
ditches, swales, culverts, curbs and gutters and other drainage
structures.
(2) Construction bond required. A construction cash bond of $1,500
shall be submitted to the Building Inspector prior to the issuance of
a building permit where:
(a) The proposed construction is to be located on a parcel of land
that has access to a Village road and the Building Inspector
determines that damage to the right-of-way is possible; and/or
(b) The proposed construction is subject to an inspection required
under § 210-2H.
(3) Condition of right-of-way to be documented. An applicant required
to submit a construction bond because the proposed construction is
to be located on a parcel of land that has access to a Village road
shall, at the time of submittal, provide photographs or video
documentation as to the condition of the right-of-way adjacent to
the parcel that has access to a Village road upon which the
construction will be taking place.
(4) Inspection and determination for release of bond. Upon written
notification that final grading has been completed by the property
owner or his/her designee, and after completion of a final
inspection under § 210-2H, the Building Inspector shall inspect the
right-of-way to ensure that no damage is present. If no damage is
present, the Building Inspector shall submit approval to the Village
§ 210-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:163
§ 210-3. State Uniform Dwelling Code.
Treasurer to release the funds to the original payer. The Building
Inspector may also partially refund the construction bond or
request additional monies be collected due to damage that has
occurred above and beyond the initial deposit to the right-of-way
or due to additional monies needed to address drainage issues
discovered during the inspection required under § 210-2H.
(5) Release to payer of bond. The construction bond will be released to
the original payer (homebuilder, contractor, homeowner, etc.). If
the construction bond was issued by someone other than the
property owner, a copy of the check will be sent to the property
address so that the property owner/resident is aware of the
construction bond refund. It shall be the Village policy to refund the
construction bond to the original payer in all cases, unless the
payer submits otherwise in writing to the Village Treasurer prior to
the release of the refund. In the instance where the original payer
is not available or cannot be found (deceased, bankrupt, or other
unknown reasons) and all reasonable efforts have been made to
refund the construction bond, the funds will be treated as
unclaimed monies under the Uniform Unclaimed Property Act.
(6) Increased amount of construction bond. Where, in the opinion of
the Building Inspector, after consulting with the Director of Public
Works, the amount of the construction bond needs to be increased
due to the nature of the intended construction, the amount of the
required bond shall be adjusted accordingly.
(7) Special charges. If the owner or payer of the bond fails to replenish
the required deposits or fails to reimburse the Village for costs the
Village has incurred, the owner hereby consents to the Village's
imposing a special charge upon the real property for any amounts
due to the Village under this subsection plus any costs the Village
has incurred in attempting to collect the amounts due. This special
charge shall become a lien upon the property. The owner hereby
waives any rights it may have to any notices or hearings with
respect to the special charge imposed under Wis. Stats. § 66.0627.
A. Adoption of code.
(1) The State Uniform Dwelling Code, Chapters SPS 320 to SPS 325 of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code, and subsequent revisions are
adopted for municipal enforcement. [Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02]
(2) Any act required to be performed or prohibited by an
Administrative Code provisions incorporated herein by reference is
required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments,
revisions or modifications of the Administrative Code provisions
incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this chapter to
§ 210-2 EAST TROY CODE § 210-3
1:164
secure uniform statewide regulation of one- and two-family
dwellings in this Village. A copy of these Administrative Code
provisions and any future amendments shall be kept on file in the
offices of the Building Inspector and Village Clerk unless available
on-line. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Existing buildings.
(1) The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code shall also apply to buildings
and conditions where:
(a) An existing building is to be occupied as a one- or two-family
dwelling, which building was not previously so occupied.
(b) An existing structure is altered or repaired, when the cost of
such alteration or repair during the life of the structure
exceeds 50% of the equalized value of the structure, said value
to be determined by the Village Assessor.
(2) Additions and alterations, regardless of cost, made to an existing
building, when deemed necessary in the opinion of the Building
Inspector, shall comply with the requirements of this chapter for
new buildings. The provisions of § 210-2 shall also apply.
(3) Roof coverings. Whenever more than 25% of the roof covering of a
building is replaced in any twelve-month period, all roof covering
shall be in conformity with applicable sections of this chapter.
(4) Additions and alterations. Any addition or alteration, regardless of
cost, made to a building shall be made in conformity with
applicable sections of this chapter.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated. All other terms are defined as those terms are
defined by the above-cited Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions.
ADDITION — New construction performed on a dwelling which
increases the outside dimensions of the dwelling.
ALTERATION — A substantial change or modification other than an
addition or minor repair to a dwelling or to systems involved within a
dwelling.
CERTIFIED INSPECTOR — In the context of this section, the terms
"certified inspector" and "Building Inspector" shall be deemed
synonymous and interchangeable and shall include the officer
designated by the Town of East Troy to enforce the provisions of this
chapter when the Village inspector is unable to act.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Safety and Professional Services.
§ 210-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-3
1:165
DWELLING —
MINOR REPAIR — Repair performed for maintenance or replacement
purposes on any existing one- or two-family dwelling which does not
affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or efficiency
of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection or exterior aesthetic
appearance and which does not increase a given occupancy and use. No
building permit is required for work to be performed which is deemed
minor repair.
ONE- OR TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building structure which
contains one or separate households intended to be used as a home,
residence or sleeping place by an individual, or by two or more
individuals maintaining a common household to the exclusion of all
others.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, firm or corporation.
UNIFORM DWELLING CODE — Those Administrative Code provisions
and any future amendments, revisions or modifications thereto
contained in the following chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code:98
Any building, the initial construction of which is commenced on or
after the effective date of this chapter, which contains one or two
dwelling units; or
(1)
An existing structure, or that part of an existing structure, which is
used or intended to be used as a one- or two-family dwelling.
(2)
(1) Chapter SPS 320, Administration and Enforcement.
(2) Chapter SPS 321, Construction Standards.
(3) Chapter SPS 322, Energy Conservation.
(4) Chapter SPS 323, Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning.
(5) Chapter SPS 324, Electrical Standards.
(6) Chapter SPS 325, Plumbing.
D. Method of enforcement.
(1) Certified inspector to enforce. The Building Inspector and his/her
delegated representatives are hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all of the provisions of the Uniform
Dwelling Code. The Building Inspector shall be certified for
inspection purposes by the Department in each of the categories
specified under § SPS 305.63, Wis. Adm. Code.99
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 210-3 EAST TROY CODE § 210-3
1:166
§ 210-4. Construction standards; additional codes adopted.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(2) Subordinates. The Building Inspector may appoint, as necessary,
subordinates as authorized by the Village Board.
(3) Duties. The Building Inspector shall administer and enforce all
provisions of this chapter and the Uniform Dwelling Code.
(4) Inspection powers. The Building Inspector or an authorized
certified agent may, at all reasonable hours, enter upon any public
or private premises for inspection purposes and may require the
production of the permit for any building, plumbing, electrical or
heating work. No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit
access to any such premises to the Building Inspector or his/her
agent while in performance of his/her duties.
(5) Records. The Building Inspector shall perform all administrative
tasks required by the Department under the Uniform Dwelling
Code. In addition, the Building Inspector shall keep a record of all
applications for building permits in a book for such purpose and
shall regularly number each permit in the order of its issue. Also, a
record showing the number, description and size of all buildings
erected indicating the kind of materials used and the cost of each
building and aggregate cost of all one- and two-family dwellings
shall be kept.100
A. Commercial Building Code. Chapter SPS 360, Erosion Control,
Sediment Control and Storm Water, and Chapters SPS 361 to SPS 366
(Wisconsin Commercial Building Code) of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter with respect
to those classes of buildings to which this Building Code specifically
applies. Any future amendments, revisions and modifications of said
Chapters SPS 360 to SPS 366 incorporated herein are intended to be
made a part of this chapter.
B. State Plumbing Code adopted. The provisions and regulations of Ch.
145, Wis. Stats., and Chapters SPS 381 through SPS 387 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code are hereby made a part of this chapter
by reference and shall extend over and govern the installation of all
plumbing installed, altered or repaired in the Village. Any future
amendments, revisions and modifications of said Wisconsin Statutes
and Administrative Code provisions incorporated herein are intended to
be made part of this chapter.
C. State Electrical Code adopted. Subject to the exceptions set forth in this
chapter, the Electrical Code, Volume 1, and Rules of Electrical Code,
Volume 2, of the Wisconsin Administrative Code are hereby adopted by
100. Editor's Note: Original § 15-1-3(e), Enforcement contract, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 210-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:167
§ 210-5. Electrical permits and inspections.
reference and made a part of this section and shall apply to all
buildings, except those covered in § 210-3 above. See Chapters SPS 316
and PSC 114 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
D. Wisconsin Uniform Building Code. The current edition of the Wisconsin
Uniform Building Code, as amended, prepared by the Building
Inspectors Association of Southeastern Wisconsin, a copy of which is on
file in the office of the Village Clerk and Building Inspector unless
available on-line, is hereby adopted in its entirety and incorporated
herein by reference and shall be referred to as the "Uniform Building
Code." It is the intent of the Village that the provisions of the Uniform
Building Code shall apply to all additions covered by the provisions of
the State Uniform Dwelling Code adopted in § 210-3 hereof. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
E. Modular homes.
(1) Independent inspection. Manufacturers of modular homes, as that
term is defined by § 101.71(6), Wis. Stats., shall contract with an
independent inspection agency to conduct in-plant inspections and
certify compliance with this chapter. The certification of
compliance shall be signed by a registered engineer or architect of
the State of Wisconsin. All tests and inspection records shall be
accessible to the Village Building Inspector at all times during
fabrication and erection of the building.
(2) Fees. The manufacturer shall reimburse the independent agency in
accordance with the terms of the contract between them. In lieu of
the Village's standard permit, a fee set by the Village Board, to
defray the Village's cost of jurisdiction exercised hereunder, shall
be paid to the Building Inspector at or prior to the time a building
permit is applied for. No building permit shall be issued unless the
above-specified fee has been paid.
F. Buildings constructed prior to 1914. Chapters SPS 375 to SPS 379 of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code, copies of which are on file in the
office of the Village Clerk unless available on-line, are adopted in their
entirety and incorporated in this section by reference. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
G. Explosives. Chapter SPS 307 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, a
copy of which is on file in the office of the Village Clerk unless available
on-line, is adopted in its entirety and incorporated in this section by
reference. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
H. Fire prevention. Chapter SPS 314 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Village Clerk unless
available on-line, is adopted in its entirety and incorporated in this
section by reference. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
§ 210-4 EAST TROY CODE § 210-5
1:168
A. Electrical permits.101
(1) Required. No work contemplated by this chapter shall be started
until a permit therefor has been obtained from the Building
Inspector or his/her authorized agent, provided that:
(a) No permit shall be required for minor repair work such as
repairing drop cords, flush and snap switches, replacing fuses,
or changing lamp sockets.
(b) Any person, firm or corporation manufacturing or repairing
electrical apparatus and equipment and employing a
competent electrician shall not be required to have a permit for
his/her testing equipment.
(2) Application. The application shall be in writing, upon forms which
the Building Inspector shall provide, and shall include the name of
the owner and a description of the nature of the work to be done,
along with such other pertinent information as the Building
Inspector may require, and shall state that the property owner and
the applicant will be bound by and subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
(3) Issuance, term, suspension and revocation. When the Building
Inspector is satisfied that the work proposed by the applicant can
be done in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and after
the appropriate fees have been paid to him/her, he/she shall issue
the permit. Such permit shall be good for the continuous
performance of the work named thereon. A permit shall
automatically expire when work ceases for a period of 60 days
without good and reasonable cause for the same and shall
automatically expire on completion of the work for which it was
issued, provided that the Building Inspector may, upon notice,
suspend or revoke such permit for violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
(4) Restrictions on issuance.
(a) No permit shall be issued to any person who is in violation of
this chapter until such violation has been corrected.
(b) No permit shall be issued to any person against whom an order
issued by the Building Inspector is pending, provided that this
restriction may be waived by the Building Inspector.
(5) Temporary wiring. No temporary electrical wiring or other
equipment shall be installed or altered without first securing a
permit therefor from the Building Inspector. The application for
such permit shall state clearly the work planned, alterations to be
101. Editor's Note: Original § 15-1-5(a), State regulations adopted, which appeared at the
beginning of this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II). See §§ 210-3 and 210-4.
§ 210-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-5
1:169
made and equipment and material to be used, and all later
deviations from such plan must be submitted to and approved by
the Building Inspector.
(6) Emergency work. In emergency work, the person, firm or
corporation doing or causing such work to be done shall report the
same to the Building Inspector immediately after beginning work,
and such work shall be done in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(7) Inspection. Upon the completion of the wiring on any building, and
before any wiring is to be hidden from view, it shall be the duty of
the person, firm or corporation doing the same to notify the
Building Inspector in writing, on forms furnished by him/her, and
he/she shall inspect the installation within 24 hours of the time
such notice is received. If, upon inspection, it is found that the
installation is fully in compliance with this chapter and does not
constitute a hazard to life or property, he/she shall approve the
same and authorize concealment of the wiring or authorize
connection for electrical service. If the installation is incomplete or
not strictly in accordance with this chapter, he/she shall issue
orders to the person, firm or corporation installing the same to
remove all hazards and make the necessary changes or additions
within seven days. No person, firm or corporation shall conceal any
electrical work before inspection or fail to comply with any order of
the Building Inspector.
B. Electricians to be licensed. All electrical work shall be done only by an
electrician licensed by the state for such work, provided that a property
owner may make repairs or installations in a single-family building
owned and occupied by him/her at least 51% of the year, if a permit
therefor is issued and the work is done in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.102
C. Certificates of inspection and meter certificate. Current shall not be
turned on for any electrical wiring until a certificate of inspection has
been issued by the Building Inspector to the utility furnishing the same.
The closing of meter loops or other temporary connections will not be
permitted by the Building Inspector until inspection has been made and
a certificate of inspection issued. Where it is necessary for more prompt
action to be taken than the regular routine will allow, it will be
necessary for the permittee or his/her agent to come to the office of the
Building Inspector personally and obtain the necessary certificate and
deliver the same, in person, to the appropriate department of the
Wisconsin Electric Power Company. No certificates of inspection shall
be issued unless the electric light, power or heating installation and all
other electrical apparatus connected with it are in strict conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
102. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 210-5 EAST TROY CODE § 210-5
1:170
§ 210-6. Plumbing permits and inspections.
D. Appeals for failure to issue, suspension and revocation. Any person
directly interested who is aggrieved by the decision of the Building
Inspector to refuse to issue a permit, or to suspend or revoke such
permit, or to order work stopped, or to refuse to issue a certificate of
inspection, may obtain review of such determination under Chapter 6,
Administrative Review, of this Code.103
A. Plumbing defined. In this chapter, "plumbing" means and includes:104
(1) All piping, fixtures, appliances, equipment, devices and
appurtenances in connection with the water supply, water
distribution and drainage systems, including hot water storage
tanks, water softeners and water heaters connected with such
water and drainage systems, and the installation thereof.
(2) The construction, connection or installation of any drain or waste
piping system from the outside or proposed outside foundation
walls of any building to the mains or other sewerage system
terminal within bounds of or beneath an area subject to easement
for highway purposes, including private domestic sewage
treatment and disposal systems, and the alteration of any such
systems, drains or waste piping.
(3) The water service piping from the outside or proposed outside
foundation walls of any building to the main or other water utility
service terminal within bounds of or beneath an area subject to
easement for highway purposes and its connections.
(4) The water pressure systems other than municipal systems as
provided in Ch. 281, Wis. Stats.
(5) A plumbing and drainage system so designed and vent piping so
installed as to keep the air within the system in free circulation and
movement; to prevent with a margin of safety unequal air pressures
of such force as might blow, siphon or affect trap seals or retard the
discharge from plumbing fixtures or permit sewer air to escape into
the building; to prohibit cross-connection, contamination or
pollution of the potable water supply and distribution systems; and
to provide an adequate supply of water to properly serve, cleanse
and operate all fixtures, equipment, appurtenances and appliances
served by the plumbing system.
B. Plumbing permits.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
104. Editor's Note: Original § 15-1-6(a), State regulations adopted, which appeared at the
beginning of this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II). See §§ 210-3 and 210-4.
§ 210-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-6
1:171
(1) Required. No work contemplated by this chapter shall be started
until a permit therefor has been obtained from the Building
Inspector or his/her authorized agent, provided that no permit shall
be required for minor repairs to faucets or the removal of
stoppages in soil and waste pipes.
(2) Application. The application shall be in writing upon forms which
the Building Inspector shall provide and shall include the name of
the owner and the description of the property on which the work is
to be done, along with such pertinent information as the Building
Inspector may require, and shall state that the property owner and
the applicant will be bound by and subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
(3) Issuance, term, suspension and revocation. When the Building
Inspector is satisfied that the work proposed by the applicant can
be done in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and after
the appropriate fees have been paid to him/her, he/she shall issue
the permit. Such permit shall be good for the continuous
performance of the work named thereon. A permit shall
automatically expire when work ceases for a period of 60 days
without good and reasonable cause for the same and shall
automatically expire on completion of the work for which it was
issued, provided that the Building Inspector may, upon notice,
suspend or revoke such permit for violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
(4) Restrictions on issuance.
(a) No plumbing permit shall be issued to any person who is in
violation of this chapter until such violation has been
corrected.
(b) No plumbing permit shall be issued to any person against
whom an order issued by the Building Inspector is pending,
provided that this restriction may be waived by the Building
Inspector.
(5) Appeals for failure to issue, suspension and revocation. Any person
directly interested who is aggrieved by the decision of the Building
Inspector to refuse to issue a permit or to suspend or revoke such
permit, or to order work stopped, may obtain review of such
determination under Chapter 6, Administrative Review, of this
Code.105
C. Plumbers to be licensed. All plumbing work shall be done only by a
plumber licensed by the state for such work, provided that a property
owner may make repairs or installations in a single-family building
owned and occupied by him/her at least 51% of the year, if a permit
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 210-6 EAST TROY CODE § 210-6
1:172
§ 210-7. New methods and materials.
§ 210-8. Unsafe buildings.
Whenever the Building Inspector or Village Board finds any building or part
thereof within the Village to be, in his or its judgment, so old, dilapidated
or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit
for human occupancy or use, and so that it would be unreasonable to repair
the same, he or it shall order the owner to raze and remove such building
or part thereof or, if it can be made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe
and sanitary, or to raze and remove at the owner's option. Such order and
proceedings shall be as provided in § 66.0413, Wis. Stats.
therefor is issued and the work is done in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Registration of plumbers.
(1) To be on file. All master plumbers engaged in the business of
plumbing in the Village and all journeymen plumbers and
apprentice plumbers working at the plumbing trade in the Village
shall register with the Building Inspector who shall keep such
registration on file in his/her office.
(2) Information to be supplied. Such registration shall consist of the
full name and address, license number and current receipt number
of each master or journeyman licensee. For an apprentice, the year
of apprenticeship and the shop to which he/she is indentured shall
be indicated.
(3) Registration requirements limited. The purpose of this subsection
is solely to provide for the administration of state licensing
requirements in this chapter.
A. All materials, methods of construction and devices designated for use in
buildings or structures covered by this chapter, and not specifically
mentioned in or permitted by this chapter, shall not be so used until
approved in writing by the State Department of Safety and Professional
Services for use in buildings or structures covered by the Wisconsin
State Building Code, except sanitary appliances, which shall be
approved in accordance with the State Plumbing Code.
B. Such materials, methods of construction and devices, when approved,
must be installed or used in strict compliance with the manufacturer's
specifications and any rules or conditions of use established by the
State Department of Safety and Professional Services. The data, test
and other evidence necessary to prove the merits of such material,
method of construction or device shall be determined by the State
Department of Safety and Professional Services.
§ 210-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-9
1:173
§ 210-9. Disclaimer on inspections.
The purpose of the inspections under this chapter is to improve the quality
of housing in the Village of East Troy. The inspections and the reports and
findings issued after the inspections are not intended as, nor are they to be
construed as, a guarantee. In order to so advise owners and other interested
persons, the following disclaimer shall be applicable to all inspections
under this chapter: "These findings of inspection contained herein are
intended to report conditions of noncompliance with code standards that
are readily apparent at the time of inspection. The inspection does not
involve a detailed examination of the mechanical systems or the closed
structural and nonstructural elements of the building and premises. No
warranty of the operation, use or durability of equipment and materials not
specifically cited herein is expressed or implied."106
§ 210-10. Razing buildings.
§ 210-11. Basements; excavations.
A. No building within the Village of East Troy shall be razed without a
permit from the Building Inspector. A snow fence or other approved
barricade shall be provided as soon as any portion of the building is
removed and shall remain during razing operations. After all razing
operations have been completed, the foundation shall be removed and
filled to the adjacent grade, the property raked clean, and all debris
hauled away. Razing permits shall lapse and be void unless the work
authorized thereby is commenced within six months from the date
thereof or completed within 30 days from the date of commencement of
said work. Any unfinished portion of work remaining beyond the
required 30 days must have special approval from the Building
Inspector.107
B. All debris must be hauled away at the end of each week for the work
that was done on that week. Combustible material shall not be used for
backfill but shall be hauled away. There shall not be any burning of
materials on the site of the razed building. If any razing or removal
operation under this section results in, or would likely result in, an
excessive amount of dust particles in the air creating a nuisance in the
vicinity thereof, the permittee shall take all necessary steps, by use of
water spraying or other appropriate means, to eliminate such nuisance.
The permittee shall take all necessary steps, prior to the razing of a
building, through the employment of a qualified person in the field of
pest control or by other appropriate means, to treat the building so as
to prevent the spread and migration of rodents and insects therefrom
during and after the razing operations.
106. Editor's Note: Original § 15-1-10, Area requirements, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
See Ch. 510, Zoning.
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 210-9 EAST TROY CODE § 210-11
1:174
§ 210-12. Discharge of clear waters.
A. Basement subflooring. First floor subflooring shall be completed within
60 days after the basement is excavated.
B. Fencing of excavations. The owner of any premises on which there
exists an opening or excavation which is located in close proximity to a
public sidewalk or street right-of-way so as to constitute a hazard to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall erect a fence, wall or railing at least
four feet high between such opening or excavation and the public rightof-
way.
C. Closing of abandoned excavations. Any excavation for building
purposes or any uncovered foundation which shall remain open for
more than three months shall be deemed abandoned and a nuisance,
and the Building Inspector shall order that unless the erection of the
building or structure on the excavation or foundation shall commence
or continue forthwith, suitable safeguards shall be provided to prevent
accidental injury to children or other frequenters or that the excavation
or foundation be filled to grade. Such order shall be served upon the
owner of record or the owner's agent, where an agent is in charge of the
premises, and upon the holder of an encumbrance of record in the
manner provided for service of a summons in the Circuit Court. If the
owner or the holder of an encumbrance of record cannot be found, the
order may be served by posting it on the premises and publication in
the official newspaper for two consecutive publications at least 10 days
before the time for compliance stated in the order commences to run.
Such time shall be not less than 14 nor more than 20 days after service.
If the owner of the land fails to comply with the order within the time
required, the Building Inspector shall cause the excavation or
foundation to be filled to grade. The cost of such abatement shall be
charged against the real estate and entered on the next succeeding tax
roll as a special charge and shall bear interest at a rate established by
the Village Board from the date of the report by the Building Inspector
on the cost thereof pursuant to the provisions of § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
A. Discharge. No person shall cause, allow or permit any roof drain,
surface drain, subsoil drain, drain from any mechanical device, gutter,
ditch, pipe, conduit, sump pump or any other object or thing used for
the purposes of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining
or discharging clear water from any part of any private premises owned
or occupied by said person to discharge into a sanitary sewer.
B. Nuisance. The discharge into a sanitary sewer from any roof drain,
surface drain, subsoil drain, drain from any mechanical device, gutter,
ditch, pipe, conduit, sump pump or any other object or thing used for
the purposes of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining
or discharging clear water from any part of any private premises is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a hazard to the health,
safety and well-being of the residents of the Village and to the
protection of the property.
§ 210-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-12
1:175
§ 210-13. Duplex and multiple unit service connections.
§ 210-14. Moving buildings.
C. Groundwater. Where deemed necessary by the Building Inspector,
every house shall have a sump pump installed for the purpose of
discharging clear waters from foundation drains and ground infiltration
and where the building is not serviced by a storm sewer either shall
discharge into an underground conduit leading to a drainage ditch,
gutter, or dry well or shall discharge onto the ground surface in such a
manner as will not constitute a nuisance as defined herein.
D. Stormwater. All roof drains, surface drains, drains from any mechanical
device, gutters, pipes, conduits or any other objects or things used for
the purpose of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining
or discharging stormwaters shall be discharged either to a storm sewer,
a dry well, an underground conduit leading to a drainage ditch or onto
the ground surface in such other manner as will not constitute a
nuisance as defined herein.
E. Storm sewer lateral. Where municipal storm sewers are provided and it
is deemed necessary by the property owner and/or the Village to
discharge clear waters from a parcel of land, a storm sewer lateral shall
be installed and connected to the storm sewer main at the expense of
the owner.
F. Conducting tests. If the Building Inspector or his/her designated agent
suspects an illegal clear water discharge as defined by this chapter, or
by any other applicable provision of the Wisconsin Administrative Code
as it may from time to time be amended, he/she may, upon reasonable
notice and at reasonable times, enter the private premises where such
illegal clear water discharge is suspected and conduct appropriate tests
to determine whether such suspected illegal clear water discharge
actually exists.
A. A duplex structure shall be allowed a common water service to the curb
stop, but each unit of said duplex shall have a separate outside curb
stop for the purpose of shutting water off in one unit without disturbing
the second unit.
B. Structures over two units, if metered separately, shall also have
individual outside curb stops for the purpose of shutting water off in
one unit without disturbing other units.
C. A common sewer service can be used for duplex and multiple unit
structures from the sewer main to the structure.
A. General requirements.
(1) No person shall move any building or structure upon any of the
public ways of the Village without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the Building Inspector and upon the payment of the required
§ 210-12 EAST TROY CODE § 210-14
1:176
fee. Every such permit issued by the Building Inspector for the
moving of a building shall designate the route to be taken and
the conditions to be complied with and shall limit the time during
which said moving operations shall be continued.
(2) A report shall be made by the Village employees with regard to
possible damage to trees. The estimated cost of trimming, removal
and replacement of public trees, as determined by the Village, shall
be paid to the Village prior to issuance of the moving permit. A
videotape of the route will be taken by the Village to compare any
damage caused by the move. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
(3) Issuance of a moving permit shall further be conditioned on
approval of the moving route by the Village Board.
B. Continuous movement. The movement of buildings shall be a
continuous operation during all the hours of the day and at night, until
such movement is fully completed. All such operations shall be
performed with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares. No
building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street crossing
or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire
hydrant or any other public facility. Lights shall be kept in conspicuous
places at each end of the building during the night.
C. Street repair. Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall,
within one day after said building reaches its destination, report that
fact to the Building Inspector, who shall inspect the streets, highways
and curbs and gutters over which said building has been moved and
ascertain their condition. If the removal of said building has caused any
damage to any street or highway, the person to whom the permit was
issued shall forthwith place them in as good repair as they were before
the permit was granted. On the failure of said permittee to do so within
10 days thereafter to the satisfaction of the Village Board, the Village
shall repair the damage done to such streets and hold the person
obtaining such permit and the sureties on his/her bond responsible for
the payment of the same.
D. Conformance with code. No permit shall be issued to move a building
within or into the Village and to establish it upon a location within said
Village until the Building Inspector has made an investigation of such
building at the location from which it is to be moved and is satisfied
from such investigation that said building is in a sound and stable
condition and of such construction that it will meet the requirements of
this Building Code in all respects. A complete plan of all further repairs,
improvements and remodeling with reference to such building shall be
submitted to the Building Inspector, and he/she shall make a finding of
fact to the effect that all such repairs, improvements and remodeling
are in conformity with the requirements of this Building Code and that,
when the same are completed, the building as such will so comply with
said Building Code. In the event a building is to be moved from the
§ 210-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-14
1:177
§ 210-15. Establishment of water service.
Village to some point outside the boundaries thereof, the provisions
with respect to the furnishing of plans and specifications for proposed
alterations to such building may be disregarded.
E. Bond.
(1) Before a permit is issued to move any building over any public way
in the Village, the party applying therefor shall give a bond to the
Village of East Troy in a sum to be fixed by the Building Inspector
and which shall not be less than $10,000, said bond to be executed
by a corporate surety or two personal sureties to be approved by
the Village Board or designated agent, conditioned upon, among
other things, the indemnification to the Village for any costs or
expenses incurred by it in connection with any claims for damages
to any persons or property and the payment of any judgment
together with the costs and expenses incurred by the Village in
connection therewith arising out of the removal of the building for
which the permit is issued.
(2) Unless the Building Inspector, upon investigation, shall find it to be
a fact that the excavation exposed by the removal of such building
from its foundation shall not be so close to a public thoroughfare as
to permit the accidental falling therein of travelers or the location,
nature and physical characteristics of the premises and the
exposed excavation such as to make intrusion upon the premises
and the falling into such excavation of children under 12 years of
age unlikely, the bond required by Subsection E(1) shall be further
conditioned upon the permittee erecting adequate barriers and,
within 48 hours, filling in such excavation or adopting and
employing such other means, devices or methods approved by the
Building Inspector and reasonably adopted or calculated to prevent
the occurrences set forth herein.
F. Insurance. The Building Inspector shall require, in addition to said bond
above indicated, public liability insurance covering injury to one person
in the sum of not less than $100,000, and for one accident in a sum not
less than $200,000, together with property damage insurance in a sum
not less than $50,000, or such other coverage as deemed necessary.
A. Application for water service for all new construction and substantial
building renovation or remodeling shall be made, in writing, on a form
furnished by the Village of East Troy. The application will contain a legal
description of the property to be served, name of the owner, the exact
use to be made of the service, and the size of the supply pipe and meter
desired. (Note particularly any special refrigeration and/or airconditioning
water-consuming appliances.)
B. Service will be furnished only if:
§ 210-14 EAST TROY CODE § 210-15
1:178
§ 210-16. Fees. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
All fees for building permits and inspections shall be set, from time to time,
by the Village Board.
(1) The premises has a frontage on a properly platted street or public
strip in which a cast-iron or other long-life water main has been
laid, or where the property owner has agreed to and complied with
the provisions of the Village of East Troy's filed main extension
rule;
(2) The property owner has installed or agrees to install a service pipe
from the curbline to the point of use, and laid not less than six feet
or as deep as practical below the surface of an established or
proposed grade, and according to the Village of East Troy's
specification; and
(3) The premises has adequate piping beyond the metering point.
(a) The owner or owners of multiunit buildings (duplexes,
townhouses, strip malls and other like structures) designed
with separate entrance and living, work or commercial area on
the ground floor will have an individual service to each living,
work or commercial unit. In all cases, each living, work or
commercial unit will be equipped with a curb stop and curb
box adjacent to a public sidewalk, along with individual meter
and remote reader. Each living, work or commercial unit will
be considered a separate water customer.
(b) Multiunit buildings (apartment houses, high rises, etc.) shall be
supplied from a single large service with each unit separately
plumbed and individually metered with a remote register. All
meters shall be contained in a separate locked room or area
accessible to Village personnel. The room or area will be
limited to Village personnel and the owner to ensure the
integrity of the meter readings. The Village and owner will be
the only persons with a key to the room or area mentioned
above.
C. No division of the water service of any lot or parcel of land shall be
made for the extension and independent meterage of the supply to an
adjoining lot or parcel of land. No division of a water supply service
shall be made at the curb for separate supplies therefrom for two or
more separate premises having frontage on any street or public service
strip, whether owned by the same or different parties.
D. The Village is hereby empowered to withhold approval of any
application wherein full information of the purpose of such supply is not
clearly indicated and set forth by the applicant property owner.
§ 210-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-17
1:179
§ 210-17. Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter, or of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code adopted by reference, is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions shall not be affected.
§ 210-18. Violations and penalties.
A. Any building or structure hereafter erected, enlarged, altered or
repaired or any use hereafter established in violation of the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed an unlawful building, structure or use.
Any such violation may be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of
this Code. In any such action, the fact that a permit was issued shall not
constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty
on the part of the Building Inspector or other Village officials constitute
a defense. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter may also be
enforced by injunction order at the suit of the owner or owners of any
real estate within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Any violation
requiring action to enjoin will promptly be reported by the Building
Inspector to the Village Board and Village Attorney, who shall bring an
action to enjoin the erection, enlargement, alteration, repair or moving
of such building or structure or the establishment of such use of
buildings in violation of this chapter, or to cause such building,
structure or use to be removed. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 2-6-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
B. Notice of violation.
(1) If an inspection reveals a noncompliance with this chapter or the
Uniform Dwelling Code, the Building Inspector shall notify the
applicant and the owner, in writing, of the violation to be corrected.
All cited violations shall be corrected within 30 days after written
notification unless an extension of time is granted pursuant to
§ SPS 320.21(3), Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) If, after written notification, the violation is not corrected within 30
days, a stop-work order may be served on the owner or his/her
representative and a copy thereof shall be posted at the
construction site. Such stop-work order shall not be removed
except by written notice of the Building Inspector after satisfactory
evidence has been supplied that the cited violation has been
corrected.
(3) Each day each violation continues after the thirty-day written
notice period has run shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing
in this chapter shall preclude the Village from maintaining any
appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision
of this chapter or the Uniform Dwelling Code.
§ 210-17 EAST TROY CODE § 210-18
1:180
Chapter 217
BUSINESS REGULATION
C. If any construction or work governed by the provisions of this chapter
or the Uniform Dwelling Code is commenced prior to the issuance of a
permit, double fees shall be charged.
D. Any person feeling aggrieved by an order or a determination of the
Building Inspector may appeal from such order or determination to the
Board of Appeals. Those procedures customarily used to effectuate an
appeal to the Board of Appeals shall apply.
E. Except as may otherwise be provided by statute or ordinance, no officer,
agent or employee of the Village of East Troy charged with enforcement
of this chapter shall render himself/herself personally liable for any
damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties under this
chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the
Village as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his/her duties under this chapter shall be defended by the legal
representative of the Village until the final determination of the
proceedings therein.
§ 210-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-18
1:181

ARTICLE I
Offensive Industry
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 8, Ch. 5, of the 2000
Code]
§ 217-1. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to regulate the nauseous, offensive or
unwholesome business that is carried on within four miles of the Village
limits, as is hereinafter designated. The intent of this article is to permit
the Village of East Troy to grow and develop in a manner that is consistent
with the best interests of the Village and to permit the Village of East
Troy to better exercise its extraterritorial zoning powers and create a longterm
master land use plan which will not be unduly affected by offensive
industry regulated hereinafter. The following are examples of the industries
determined to be offensive and requiring approval. The list is not all
inclusive, but these are examples: manufacture of cement, lime, gypsum,
plaster of paris, acid, explosives, fertilizers or glue, crematories, rendering
plants, refineries, tanneries or incinerators, stockyards or slaughterhouses,
junkyards or salvage yards, drop forges or foundries, storage of explosives
except as incidental to a permitted use, storage of gasoline or petroleum in
excess of 50,000 gallons, quarrying and extraction of materials.
§ 217-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable in this article:
AFFECTED AREA — All areas within 1/2 mile of the jurisdictional limits
of the Village of East Troy shall be deemed an affected area. In addition,
all areas within 1/4 mile of the right-of-way of any county highway, state
highway or interstate highway within four miles of the boundaries of the
Village of East Troy shall be deemed an affected area and within the area
regulated by this article.
OFFENSIVE INDUSTRY — Offensive industry falling under the jurisdiction
of this article shall be defined as any industry or business that conducts
or is likely to conduct a nauseous, offensive or unwholesome business that
is likely to cause illness or pain or adversely affect persons with ordinary
sensibilities or adversely affect the person and property of ordinary persons
within the Village by reason of noise, dust, environmental pollution (air and
water), odor, lateral support, vermin, unsightliness, vapor, gases, odorous
substances (visible or invisible), safety, or any other condition that has a
negative impact upon ordinary persons or their property. Such industries
are hereby declared to be public nuisances since they could, unless
regulated, interfere substantially with comfortable enjoyment of life, health,
safety to another or others. Agricultural uses violating this article shall only
be regulated hereunder if the use is a threat to public health and safety,
pursuant to § 823.08, Wis. Stats. In addition, the same shall specifically
include any area where solid waste is stored, deposited, disposed or
recycled; also including areas where refuse, rubbish, ashes or garbage may
be dumped or accumulated, as set forth under § 66.0415, Wis. Stats.
§ 217-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 217-3
1:183
§ 217-3. Permit required.
§ 217-4. Permit application. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
An applicant shall comply with the provisions of this article by obtaining and
by submitting to the Village Clerk an application, signed by the applicant.
The application shall contain the following information:
§ 217-5. Financial requirements.
A. No person shall locate, operate or place any offensive industry in the
affected area unless a permit for the same is obtained from the Village
Board.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following shall be prohibited:
(1) Solid or hazardous waste landfills or landfill expansion within 1/2
mile of the Village limits or within 1,200 feet of any county, state or
interstate highway within the affected areas.
(2) Other industries which engage in activities which are prohibited by
the Village of East Troy Code of Ordinances.
A. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. Location, current owners and legal description of the industry's facility.
C. Statement of the nature of the proposed industrial operation, including
a description of the machinery to be used, the employment of safety
devices to protect the public from dangers inherent to the proposed
use, method of concealing unsightly deposits, if any, and any other
pertinent data which the Village deems material.
D. The names and address of all owners of property within 1,000 feet of
the property boundaries of the industry's facility.
A. With the application, the applicant shall submit the following:
(1) A fee set by the Village Board shall accompany the application to
defray the costs of review, investigation, negotiation and other
costs associated with the issuance of the permit. The applicant
shall also be responsible for the payment of all legal and
engineering expenses which may be incurred by the Village and
which are associated with the procedures described in this
article.108
(2) A performance bond, surety insurance or other financial
guarantees of an amount not less than $1,000, in a form acceptable
to the Village Attorney.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 217-3 EAST TROY CODE § 217-5
1:184
§ 217-6. Public hearing. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
Upon receipt of an application as provided in § 217-4, the Village Board
shall inspect the premises for which a permit is requested and shall set
a date for a public hearing upon such application, which date shall not
be more than 90 days after receipt of the application by the Village Clerk.
Notice of the hearing shall be given as a Class 1 notice, as described in
§ 985.07, Wis. Stats. Such public hearing shall be merely advisory in regard
to affecting any action which may be taken by the Village Board upon such
application.
§ 217-7. Determination by Village Board.
Within five days after the public hearing, the Village Board shall make a
determination as to whether the operation of the proposed used described
in the application will be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of
the public of the Village of East Troy. Such determination shall be made
on the basis of the information contained in the application, together with
the evidence presented at the public hearing, and a personal inspection of
the premises by the members of the Village Board. The Village Board may
condition the issuance of a permit on an agreement with the applicant to
perform those conditions which, in the opinion of the Village Board, will
protect the interests of the Village, including but not limited to restoring
the premises in accordance with any representations contained in the
application. The Village Board shall thereupon grant or deny the permit in
accordance with such determination.
§ 217-8. Term of permit.
B. If, at any time, the applicant fails to meet the financial requirements as
above stated, the permit may be rescinded after notice to the applicant
and a hearing on the applicant's compliance.
A. Such permit shall expire on June 30 of every year and shall not be
assignable. Such permit shall also terminate:
(1) Upon change of ownership of the land affected by such permit, or
upon the change of ownership of the firm, company, corporation or
municipality operating the permitted business.
(2) In the event the use specified in the permit is not carried out in
accordance with the representations contained in the application,
or in the event such use is changed to another use enumerated
herein.
B. In the event of the occurrence of the events enumerated in Subsection
A(1) or (2) above, another permit shall be applied for and obtained by
the proposed operator as a condition precedent to the continued
operation of the permitted business or the resumption of the
discontinued business.
§ 217-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 217-8
1:185
§ 217-9. Revocation of permit.109
Any change in the operation specified in the application as approved by the
Village Board in granting the original permit, or violation of this article,
shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit.
§ 217-10. Revocation hearing.110
Any proceeding to revoke a permit shall be instituted by the Village Board
by the mailing (certified mail, return receipt requested) of a notice of
hearing on revocation to the applicant. Such notice shall be mailed at least
10 days prior to the date of the hearing. At such hearing, the applicant
may appear personally and by his attorney and present his defense to the
proposed revocation. The Village Board shall have five days after such
hearing to make a determination of whether grounds exist. If the Board
finds that any conditions specified in this article as grounds for revocation
of a permit have been violated, the Village Board shall revoke such permit
and notify the permittee by certified mail addressed to the permittee at the
address shown in the application. The permittee shall thereafter cease and
desist forthwith from the operation of the permitted premises.
§ 217-11. Denial of permit.
In the event a permit is denied for operation of any business enumerated
herein with respect to any particular parcel of realty, no application for the
same business on the same parcel of land, or any part thereof, may be filed
within one year from the date of denial. In the event, however, that a new
application shall reveal a material difference in any of the items specified
in § 217-4 or 217-5 hereof, the Village Board may, upon a finding that the
new application does include such material difference, proceed to hear and
determine such new application within said one-year period.
§ 217-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or municipality who or which violates,
disobeys, neglects, omits or refuses to comply with or who or which resists
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
C. In the event of application for a permit pursuant to Subsection B hereof
or in the event of an application for the annual renewal of an existing
permit, the Village Board may consider the same without the necessity
of holding a public hearing.
D. Any permit issued pursuant to Subsection B hereof shall be deemed an
original permit, and the permitted operator shall be bound by the terms
thereof.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 217-8 EAST TROY CODE § 217-12
1:186
a forfeiture as prescribed in § 1-4 together with the costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment in the county jail for a
term of not more than 30 days, or until such judgment is paid in the case of
an individual, and every day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition to the remedies set forth herein, the Village of East Troy may
institute a suit to enjoin such violation or intended violations.
§ 217-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 217-12
1:187
Chapter 230
CIGARETTES
§ 230-1. License required.
No person, firm or corporation in the Village of East Troy shall, in any
manner, directly or indirectly, upon any premises, or by any device, sell,
exchange, barter, dispose of or give away, or keep for sale, any cigarette,
cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers, or any substitute therefor, without
first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided.
§ 230-2. Application for license. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
Every person, firm or corporation desiring a license under this chapter shall
file with the Village Clerk a written application therefor, stating the name
of the person and the place for which such license is desired. Each license
shall be filed by the Village Clerk and shall name the licensee and the place
wherein he/she is authorized to conduct such business, and the same shall
not be delivered until the applicant shall pay the application fee set by the
Village Board to the Village.
§ 230-3. Issuance and term of license. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
Licenses for the sale, exchange, barter, disposition of, or giving away or
keeping for sale of cigarettes, cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers, or
any substitute therefor, shall be issued by the Village Clerk. Each license
shall be issued on the first day of July in each year, or thereafter whenever
applied for, and shall continue in force from date of issuance until the
succeeding June 30, unless sooner revoked for any violation of this chapter.
Chapter 244
DRIVEWAYS AND CULVERTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 423. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 495.
§ 244-1. Purpose.
For the safety of the general public, the Village shall determine the location,
size, construction and number of access points to public roadways within
the Village limits. It is the Village's intent to provide safe access to
properties abutting public roadways suitable for the property to be
§ 217-12 EAST TROY CODE § 244-1
1:188
developed to its highest and best use, provided that access is not deficient
or dangerous to the general public.
§ 244-2. Driveway permit.
A. Permit required to construct, reconstruct, alter or enlarge. No person,
firm or corporation shall construct, reconstruct, alter or enlarge any
private driveway within the limits of the dedicated portion of any public
street under the control and jurisdiction of the Village of East Troy
without first obtaining a driveway permit therefor as provided by this
chapter. A driveway permit is not required when a new driveway is to be
constructed in conjunction with the construction of a new principal
structure; the driveway is included in the building permit process in
such cases.111
B. Application. Application for such permit shall be made to the Village
Director of Public Works on a form provided by the Village and shall be
accompanied by a drawing accurately depicting the portion of the
proposed private driveway to be constructed, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged lying within the dedicated portion of the public street, the
dimensions thereof and a statement of the materials proposed to be
used. Upon receipt of the application and the fee according to the fee
schedule, if required, unless the proposed private driveway is a part of
construction for a building or other structure for which a building
permit has been applied for, in which case no additional fee is required,
the Village Director of Public Works shall approve such application if
the proposed driveway complies with the terms and conditions of this
chapter and any other applicable Village ordinance.112
C. Application provisions. All driveway permit applications shall contain
the applicant's statement that:
(1) The applicant represents all parties in interest, and that such
proposed driveway is for the bona fide purpose of securing access
to his/her property and not for the purpose of parking or servicing
vehicles, advertising, storage or merchandising of goods within the
dedicated portion of the Village street, or for any other purpose.
(2) The Village, notwithstanding the construction of such driveway,
reserves the right to make any changes, additions, repairs or
relocations within the dedicated portion of the Village street, at any
time, including relocation, reconstruction, widening and
maintaining the street, without compensating the owner of such
private driveway for the damage or destruction of such private
roadway.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 244-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-2
1:189
§ 244-3. Location, design and construction.
The location, design and construction of driveways shall be in accordance
with the following:
(3) The permittee, or his/her successors or assigns, agrees to
indemnify and hold harmless the Village of East Troy, its officials,
officers, agents or employees against any claim or any cause of
action for personal injury or property damage sustained by reason
of the exercise of such permit.
(4) The Village does not assume any responsibility for the removal or
clearance of snow, ice or sleet, or the opening of any windrows of
such material upon such portion of such driveway within the
dedicated portion of the Village street.
D. Appeal from permit refusal. Any person feeling himself/herself
aggrieved by the refusal of the Village Director of Public Works to issue
a permit for a private driveway may appeal such refusal to the Village
Board within 30 days after such refusal to issue such permit is made.113
A. General design. Private driveways shall be of such width and so located
that all of such driveways and their appurtenances are within the limits
of the frontage abutting the street of the property served. Driveways
shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from any street
intersection area and shall not encroach upon or occupy areas of the
street right-of-way required for effective traffic control or for street
signs or signals. A driveway shall be so located and constructed that
vehicles approaching or using it shall have adequate sight distance
along the street. Driveway approaches shall be at least 10 feet apart,
except by special permission from the Village Board, and driveways
shall, in all cases, be placed wherever possible so as not to interfere
with utilities in place.
B. Number. The number of driveways to serve an individual property
fronting on a street shall be one, except where deemed necessary and
feasible by the Village Board for reasonable and adequate service to the
property, considering the safety, convenience and utility of the streets.
C. Island area. The island area in the street right-of-way between
successive driveways or adjoining a driveway, and between the highway
shoulder and right-of-way, shall constitute a restricted area and may be
filled in and graded only as provided in Subsection F.
D. Drainage. The surface of the driveway connecting with rural-type street
cross sections shall slope downward and away from the highway
shoulder a sufficient distance to preclude ordinary surface water
drainage flowing onto the street roadbed.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 244-2 EAST TROY CODE § 244-3
1:190
E. Reconstruction of sidewalks and curb and gutter. When the
construction of a driveway requires the removal of a curb or gutter, the
new connections shall be of equivalent acceptable concrete material,
and curb returns shall be provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike
manner. The driveway surface shall be connected with the highway
pavement and the sidewalk, if any, with rebar for pinning material in a
neat, workmanlike manner. The driveway construction shall include the
replacement of such sidewalk areas which are inadequate or which are,
or may be, damaged by means of vehicle travel across the sidewalk.
Driveway should be made of concrete.114
F. Restricted areas. The restricted area between successive driveways
may be filled in and graded only when the following requirements are
complied with:
(1) The filling or draining shall be to grades approved by the Village
Board and, except where highway drainage is by means of curb and
gutter, water drainage of the area shall be directed away from the
street roadbed in a suitable manner.115
(2) Culvert extensions under the restricted area shall be of the same
size as the culvert under the driveway and constructed of metal or
concrete. Intermediate manholes adequate for cleanout purposes
may be required where the total culvert length is excessive.116
(3) Where no street side ditch separates the restricted area from the
street roadbed, permanent provision may be required to separate
the area from the street roadbed to prevent its use for driveway or
parking purposes, by construction of a border, curb, rail or posts,
as may be required by the Village Board.
G. Relocation of utilities. Any costs of relocating public utilities shall be
the responsibility of the property owner, with approval of the Village
Board and Director of Public Works necessary before any utility may be
relocated and the driveway installed.117
H. Construction across sidewalks. All driveway entrances and approaches
which are constructed across sidewalks shall be of concrete
constructed in accordance with the requirements for sidewalk
construction in § 423-5 of this Code, insofar as such requirements are
applicable, including thickness requirements.
I. Variances. Any of the above requirements may be varied by the Village
Board in such instances where the peculiar nature of the property or
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 244-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-3
1:191
§ 244-4. Commercial and industrial driveways.
The following regulations are applicable to driveways serving commercial
or industrial establishments:
§ 244-5. Residential driveways.
The following regulations are applicable to driveways serving residential
property:
§ 244-6. Prohibited driveways.
the design of the street may make rigid adherence to the above
requirements impossible or impractical.
A. Width of drive. No part of a private driveway located within the
dedicated area of a public street shall, except as hereinafter provided
for, have a width greater than 30 feet measured at right angles to the
center line of said driveway, except as increased by permissible radii. In
instances where the nature of the commercial or industrial activity or
the physical characteristics of the land would require a driveway of
greater width than herein specified, the Village Board, in its discretion,
may permit a driveway of additional width.
B. Angular placement of driveway. The angle between the center line of
the driveway and the curbline shall not be less than 45°.
C. Island areas. Where the public sidewalk is adjacent to the curb, an
island of a minimum length of six feet measured along the curbline shall
be left intact for the length of this island. Where the public sidewalk is
remote from the curb, an island of a minimum length of 10 feet
measured along the right-of-way line shall be maintained along each
entrance to the Village street. All flares shall be tangent to the curbline.
A curb length of not less than three feet shall be left undisturbed
adjacent to each property line to serve as an island area in the event an
adjoining property owner applies for a driveway permit to serve his
property.
A. Width of driveways. Openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall be
at least 10 feet wide at the property line for residential properties but
shall not exceed 24 feet at the property line and 30 feet at the curb
opening.
B. Angular placement. The center line of the drive may be parallel to the
property line of the lot where access is required or at right angles to the
curbline.
C. Hard surfacing. All residential driveways constructed or reconstructed
after the adoption of this chapter shall be constructed of asphalt,
concrete or brick.
§ 244-3 EAST TROY CODE § 244-6
1:192
§ 244-7. Culverts.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall place, construct, or locate, or cause
to be placed, constructed or located, any obstruction or structure
within the limits of any public road, highway or street in the Village of
East Troy, except as permitted by this chapter. As used herein, the word
"structure" includes a private driveway, a portion of which extends into
any public road, highway or street, and which is in nonconformance
with this chapter.
B. No driveway shall be closer than 10 feet to the extended street line at
an intersection. At street intersections, a driveway shall not provide
direct ingress or egress to or from the street intersection area and shall
not occupy areas of the roadway deemed necessary by the Village for
effective traffic control or for highway signs or signals.
C. The grade of that portion of any private driveway or pedestrian path
located within the limits of any public road, highway or street shall be
such as shall meet the grade of the existing public roadway at its edge
and not cause an obstruction to the maintenance or clearing of such
public roadway.
D. No driveway apron shall extend out into the street further than the
facing of the curb, and under no circumstances shall such driveway
apron extend into any gutter area. All driveway entrances and
approaches shall be constructed so as not to interfere with the drainage
of streets, side ditches or roadside areas or with any existing structure
on the right-of-way.
E. No portion of any curb, parapet or retaining wall, rising above the
grade of the driveway, erected by the owner of the premises involved,
shall extend beyond the culvert spanning the watercourse located in
such public way.
A. Size. Culverts shall be installed prior to construction work being
commenced on the property served. No pipe smaller than 12 inches in
diameter (or equivalent elliptical or arch pipe) will be allowed. Larger
diameter may be required based on location within the basin. All
culverts shall be constructed of galvanized steel or reinforced concrete
and shall be made of new manufacture, unless specifically excepted by
the Director of Public Works or the Village Engineer.118
B. Gauge.
(1) The minimum wall thickness for the galvanized steel pipe culverts
shall be in accordance with the following:
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-7
1:193
Pipe Diameter
(inches) Gauge
15 to 24 16
30 to 36 14
42 to 54 12
60 to 72 10
78 to 84 8
(2) The class of reinforced concrete pipe shall be in accordance with
the following:119
Height of Cover
(feet) Class of Pipe
0 to 2 IV
2 to 3 III
3 to 6 III
C. Drainage. The culverts shall be placed in the ditch line at elevations
that will assure proper drainage.
D. End walls. Culverts shall be provided with a concrete or metal apron
end wall, as directed by the Village Engineer or Director of Public
Works.120
E. Backfill material. Material used for backfill shall be of quality
acceptable to the Village Engineer or Director of Public Works and shall
be free from frozen lumps, wood or other extraneous or perishable
materials. The minimum cover, measured from the top of the pipe to the
top of the subgrade, shall be six inches.
F. Erosion control. Erosion control measures shall be implemented as
necessary to control erosion or as directed by the Village Engineer or
Director of Public Works.
G. Distance. The distance between culverts under successive driveways
shall not be less than 10 feet, except as such restricted area is
permitted to be filled pursuant to § 244-3F.
H. Cost. The property owner shall install the culvert and be responsible for
the cost thereof. The property owner shall keep his culverts
unobstructed and clean.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 244-7 EAST TROY CODE § 244-7
1:194
Chapter 263
FAIR HOUSING
§ 263-1. Policy.121
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village of East Troy to assure
equal opportunity to all persons to live in adequate housing facilities
regardless of sex, race, color, sexual orientation, disability, religion, national
origin, marital status, family status, status as a victim of domestic abuse,
sexual assault or stalking, lawful source of income, age or ancestry and, to
that end, to prohibit discrimination in housing by any persons.
§ 263-2. Statutory provisions adopted.
§ 263-3. Complaint procedure. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
The Village Clerk shall maintain forms for complaints to file under § 106.50,
Wis. Stats., and shall assist any person alleging a violation thereof in the
Village of East Troy to file a complaint thereunder with the Wisconsin
Department of Workforce Development for enforcement of § 106.50, Wis.
Stats.
I. Appeal. Persons may request a variance from the culvert requirements
of this section by filing a written appeals request with the Village
Director of Public Works, who shall place the matter as an agenda item
for the Village Board's next meeting. The Village Board may only waive
the requirement for a culvert upon a finding that unique physical
characteristics of the location in question render a culvert unnecessary.
The Village Engineer or Director of Public Works may be asked to
render an opinion on the request.
A. Adopted by reference. The statutory provisions of § 106.50, Wis. Stats.,
and subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
B. Implementation. The officials and employees of the Village of East Troy
shall assist in the orderly prevention and removal of all discrimination
in housing within the Village of East Troy by implementing the authority
and enforcement procedures set forth in § 106.50, Wis. Stats.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 244-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-3
1:195
Chapter 270
FIRES AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 210.
Fireworks — See Ch. 273.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 285.
Nuisances — See Ch. 354.
§ 270-1. Impeding fire equipment.
No person shall impede the progress of a fire engine, fire truck or other
fire apparatus of the East Troy Area Fire Department along the streets or
alleys of such Village, at the time of a fire or when the Fire Department of
the Village is using such streets or alleys in response to a fire alarm or for
practice.
§ 270-2. Police power of Fire Department; inspections.
A. Police authority at fires.
(1) The Chief and assistants or officers in command at any fire are
hereby vested with full and complete police authority at fires. Any
officer of the Department may cause the arrest of any person failing
to give the right-of-way to the Fire Department in responding to a
fire.
(2) The Fire Chief may prescribe certain limits in the vicinity of any fire
within which no persons, excepting firefighters and police officers,
and those admitted by order of any officer of the Department, shall
be permitted to come.122
(3) The Chief shall have the power to cause the removal of any
property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation
of such property from fire, or to prevent the spreading of fire or to
protect the adjoining property, and during the progress of any fire
he/she shall have the power to cause the removal of all wires or
other facilities and the turning off of all electricity or other services
where the same impedes the work of the Department during the
progress of a fire.
B. Fire inspection duties.
(1) The Fire Chief, or his/her designee, shall be the Fire Inspector of
the Village of East Troy and shall have the power to appoint one or
more Deputy Fire Inspectors and shall perform all duties required
of the Fire Inspector by the laws of the state and rules of the
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 263-3 EAST TROY CODE § 270-2
1:196
§ 270-3. Damaging hose or apparatus; obstruction of hydrants;
driving or parking near fire.
Department of Safety and Professional Services, particularly
§ 101.14, Wis. Stats.
(2) While acting as Fire Inspector pursuant to § 101.14(2), Wis. Stats.,
the Fire Chief, or any officer of the Fire Department designated by
the Fire Chief, shall have the right and authority to enter into any
building or upon any premises in the Village of East Troy, at all
reasonable hours, for the purpose of making inspections or
investigations which, under the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances, he/she may deem necessary. Should the Fire Inspector
find that any provisions of this Code relating to fire hazards and
prevention of fires are being violated, or that a fire hazard exists
which should be eliminated, it shall be his/her duty to give such
directions for the abatement of such conditions as he/she shall
deem necessary and, if such directions are not complied with, to
report such noncompliance to the Village Board for further action.
(3) The Chief of the Fire Department is required, by himself/herself or
by officers or members of the Fire Department designated by him/
her as Fire Inspectors, to inspect all buildings, premises and public
thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the
purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions
liable to cause fire, or any violations of any law or ordinance
relating to the fire hazard or to the prevention of fires. Such
inspections shall be made at least once in six months in all of the
territory served by the Fire Department, and not less than once in
three months in such territory as the Village Board has designated
or hereafter designates as within the Village, or as a congested
district subject to conflagration, and more often as the Chief of the
Fire Department orders. Each six-month period shall begin on
January 1 and July 1, and each three-month period on January 1,
April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year.
(4) Written reports of inspections shall be made and kept on file in the
office of the Chief of the Fire Department, in the manner and form
required by the Department of Safety and Professional Services.123
(5) Failure to comply with the notice or order to correct a fire code
violation within the time frame specified by the Fire Inspector shall
result in the property owner being issued a municipal citation by
the Police Department pursuant to § 1-4 of this Code.
A. Driving over fire hose. No person shall willfully injure, in any manner,
any hose, hydrant or fire apparatus belonging to the East Troy Fire
Department, and no vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 270-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-3
1:197
§ 270-4. Right of entry; destruction of property.
§ 270-5. Duty of bystanders to assist.
Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject to the orders
of the Fire Chief or officer in command and may be required to render
assistance in fighting the fire or in removing or guarding property. Such
officer shall have the power to cause the arrest of any person or persons
refusing to obey said orders.
§ 270-6. Vehicles to yield right-of-way.
Whenever there shall be a fire or fire alarm, or the Fire Department shall
be out for practice, every person driving or riding in a motorized or other
vehicle shall move and remain to the side of the street until the fire engine
and fire truck and other fire apparatus shall have passed.
§ 270-7. Interference with use of hydrants.
No person shall occupy any portion of such streets or alleys with a
motorized or other vehicle between such fire engine or fire truck or other
of the Fire Department when laid down on any street, private driveway
or other place, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the
consent of the Fire Department official in command.
B. Parking vehicles near hydrants. It shall be unlawful for any person to
park any vehicle or leave any object within 10 feet of any fire hydrant,
at any time.
C. No parking near fire. It shall be unlawful for any person, in case of fire,
to drive or park any vehicle within one block from the place of fire,
without the consent and authority of the Fire Chief or any police officer.
A. Entering adjacent property. It shall be lawful for any firefighter, while
acting under the direction of the Fire Chief or any other officer in
command, to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of a
building or other property then on fire for the purpose of extinguishing
such fire, and in case any person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any
firefighter in the discharge of his/her duty, as is hereinbefore provided,
the person so offending shall be deemed guilty of resisting firefighters
in the discharge of their duty.124
B. Destruction of property to prevent the spread of fire. During the
progress of any fire, the Fire Chief or his/her assistant shall have the
power to order the removal or destruction of any property necessary to
prevent the further spread of fire, provided that it is inevitable that,
unless such property is removed, other property is in danger of being
destroyed by fire.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 270-3 EAST TROY CODE § 270-7
1:198
fire apparatus and any hydrant to which a fire hose may be or about to be
attached.
§ 270-8. Open burning. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-05]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BONFIRE — An outdoor fire with a diameter of 40 inches or greater
intended for recreation or celebration, not to exceed five feet in
diameter or a burn material height of two feet, and flames shall not
exceed five feet in height.
CAMPFIRE — An outdoor fire with a diameter of less than 40 inches
intended for recreation or cooking, not including a fire intended for
disposal of waste wood or refuse.
CLEAN WOOD — Natural wood which has not been painted, varnished
or coated with a similar material, has not been pressure treated with
preservatives and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or
other composite wood products.
CONTROLLED BURN — A prescribed burn in which the purpose is
forest management or prairie restoration. The intent of a controlled
burn is to reduce excessive amounts of brush, shrubs and trees to
encourage new growth.
OPEN AIR BURNING — A fire in which the materials are burned in the
open or within a contained device such as a fireplace or fire pit.
OUTDOOR FIREPLACE or OUTDOOR FIRE PIT — A portable,
manufactured, or permanent fire pit, chiminea, patio fireplace, burn
barrel, or other container made of copper, steel, clay, cast iron,
aluminum, brick, stone or other material intended to contain a fire
within its fire bowl.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and
brush, including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six
inches in diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs
with intact root balls or ornamental Christmas trees.
B. Burning prohibited. No person, firm or corporation shall build any
outdoor fire except as set forth below for the burning of clean wood and
yard waste. This prohibition on burning includes, but is not limited to,
burning of construction waste and debris at construction sites, treated
lumber, tires, shingles or tar paper.
C. Exceptions.
(1) Burning of yard waste. Burning of yard waste shall be allowed
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Burning of yard waste
can be contained in a fire pit or fireplace or be open air burning.
(2) Controlled burning for environmental purposes. Controlled burning
of grass or similar vegetation for environmental management
§ 270-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-8
1:199
purposes may be permitted with prior notification to the Police
Department and adherence to the following:
(a) Notification must be made in writing or verbal approval given
by the Police Department. Notification must include date(s),
expected time to commence and conclude, contact person's
name, phone number and address of burn.
(b) Controlled burning for environmental purposes is only good on
the approved date(s) provided within the notification.
(c) Notification must be made by the landowner.
(d) Burning area shall not be located within 50 feet from any
structure.
(3) Recreational fires. Recreational fires shall be completely
extinguished upon completion of the activity.
(a) Outdoor cooking. Cooking over a fire contained in a device or
structure designed for such use is permissible.
(b) Grills. For other than one-family and two-family dwellings, no
hibachi, gas-fired grill, charcoal grill or similar devices used
for cooking, heating, or any other purpose shall be used or
kindled on any balcony or under any overhanging portion of a
building. Grilling on ground level is permissible, provided that
the grill is at least 10 feet away from any structure. Electrical
ranges, grills or similar electrical apparatus shall be permitted.
(c) Outdoor fire pits, outdoor fireplaces, campfires, and bonfires.
These devices shall comply with the requirements of NFPA 1
and the following requirements:
[1] Portable fire pits and outdoor fireplaces. Portable fire pits
shall not be used or kindled on any balcony or under any
overhanging portion or within 10 feet of any structure.
Portable fire pits must be placed on a noncombustible
surface. Portable fire pits shall be listed by a nationally
recognized testing organization or acceptable to the Fire
Chief or designee of the Fire Chief. Only clean, dry wood
can be used. Flammable or combustible liquids shall not be
used to ignite the fire.125
[2] Bonfires may be permitted with prior notification to the
Police Department and adherence to the following:
[a] Notification must be made in writing or verbal
approval given by the Police Department. Notification
must include date(s), expected time to commence and
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 270-8 EAST TROY CODE § 270-8
1:200
conclude, contact person's name, phone number and
address of burn.
[b] A bonfire is permitted only on the approved date(s)
provided within the notification.
[c] Notification must be made by the landowner.
[d] Burning area shall not be located within 25 feet of a
structure or combustible material unless contained in
an approved manner.
[e] Only clean, dry wood can be burned. Flammable or
combustible liquids shall not be used to ignite the fire.
[f] Noise shall not solely be considered a nuisance at any
time during the bonfire.
D. Exception regulations.
(1) Burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a
competent person of at least 18 years of age until the fire is
extinguished and is cold. The person shall have readily available for
use such fire extinguishing equipment as may be necessary for the
total control of the fire.
(2) Smoke shall be limited and shall not become a nuisance to
neighbors or impede public roadways.
(3) All burning with the exception of Subsection C(3)(b), Grills, shall
only be ignited when wind speeds do not exceed nine miles per
hour.
(4) No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or
sidewalk.
(5) No burning may be conducted on days when the Department of
Natural Resources has declared an ozone action day applicable to
the Village.
(6) When weather conditions warrant, the Fire Chief or the
Department of Natural Resources may declare a ban on all burning.
(7) A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be
responsible for all fire suppression costs and any other liability
resulting from damage caused by the fire.
E. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(1) The Fire Chief, the Police Department and the Building Inspector
are authorized to enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 270-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-8
1:201
§ 270-9. Mitigation rates for emergency and nonemergency
services. [Added 7-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-05]
§ 270-10. Adoption of state codes.128
The following orders, rules and regulations of the Department of Safety
and Professional Services and the Department of Agriculture, Trade and
Consumer Protection, all of which are set forth in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code as from time to time amended, are incorporated herein
by reference and adopted as part of this chapter:
(2) Any person who shall violate any provision of this section, or any
regulation, rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in this Municipal Code.126
(3) Violation of this section shall also constitute a public nuisance
which may be enjoined in a civil action in addition to prosecution
therefor.
A. Mitigation rates.
(1) There shall be a charge for the delivery of emergency and
nonemergency services by the Fire Department for personnel,
supplies and equipment to the scene for the following incidents:
(a) Fuel leaks of improperly maintained vehicles.
(b) Hazardous materials spills and leaks.
(c) Unattended fires and uncontrolled open burning.
(d) Specialized rescue: confined space, high or low angle, etc.
(e) False alarms (fourth or more within one-year period).127
(f) Motor vehicle accidents.
(2) The mitigation rates shall be based on actual costs of the services
and that which is usual, customary and reasonable, which may
include any services, personnel, supplies, and equipment. The East
Troy Emergency Services District shall be authorized to bill and
collect such costs on behalf of the Village of East Troy in
accordance with the East Troy Emergency Service Mitigation Rate
Schedule.
B. Payment. A claim shall be filed with the responsible party through his or
her insurance carrier. In some circumstances, the responsible party will
be billed directly.
126. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, § 1-4.
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 270-8 EAST TROY CODE § 270-10
1:202
Ch. ATCP 93, Flammable, Combustible and Hazardous Liquids
Ch. SPS 307, Explosives and Fireworks
Ch. SPS 314, Fire Prevention
Ch. SPS 332, Public Employee Safety and Health
Ch. SPS 340, Gas Systems
Ch. SPS 343, Anhydrous Ammonia
Chs. SPS 361 to SPS 366, Commercial Building Code
Wisconsin Electrical Code
Chapter 273
FIREWORKS
§ 273-1. Definition. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
In this chapter, the term "fireworks" shall be defined as provided in
§ 167.10(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 273-2. Sale. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 11-4-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-13]
No person may sell, or possess with intent to sell, fireworks, except:
§ 273-3. Use and possession.
A. To a person holding a permit under § 273-3C;
B. To a municipality; or
C. For a purpose specified under § 273-3B(2) through (6).
A. Permits required.
(1) Use permit required. No person may use fireworks without a user's
permit approved by the Village Board. Use permits may be issued
to a person listed under Subsection C(1) through (5) or Subsection
C(6) if the display is open to the general public. No person may use
fireworks or a device listed in § 167.10(1)(e) to (g) or (i) to (n), Wis.
Stats., while attending a fireworks display for which a use permit
has been issued. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(2) No person without a use permit may possess fireworks within the
Village. [Amended 11-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-13]
B. Permit exceptions. Subsection A above does not apply to:
(1) The Village, except that Village fire and law enforcement officials
shall be notified of the proposed use of fireworks at least two days
in advance.
§ 270-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-3
1:203
(2) The possession or use of explosives in accordance with rules or
general orders of the Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services.
(3) The disposal of hazardous substances in accordance with rules
adopted by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(4) The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in any
manufacturing process.
(5) The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in
connection with classes conducted by educational institutions.
(6) A possessor or manufacturer of explosives in possession of a license
or permit under 18 U.S.C. §§ 841 to 848 if the possession of the
fireworks is authorized under the license or permit.
(7) The possession of fireworks in the Village while transporting the
fireworks to a city, town or village where the possession of the
fireworks is authorized by permit or ordinance. Subsection A
applies to a person transporting fireworks under this subsection if,
in the course of transporting the fireworks through the Village, the
person remains in the Village for a period of at least 12 hours.
[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
C. Who may obtain a use permit. A use permit under this section may be
issued only to the following: [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
(1) A public authority.
(2) A fair association.
(3) An amusement park.
(4) A park board.
(5) A civic organization.
(6) Any individual or group of individuals.
(7) An agricultural producer for the protection of crops from predatory
birds or animals.
D. Crop protection signs. A person issued a permit for crop protection
shall erect appropriate warning signs disclosing the use of fireworks for
crop protection.
E. Bond. A permit under this section may require an indemnity bond with
good and sufficient sureties, or policy of liability insurance, for the
payment of all claims that may arise by reason of injuries to person or
property from the handling, use or discharge of fireworks under the
permit. The bond or policy shall be taken in the name of the Village, and
any person injured thereby may bring an action on the bond or policy in
§ 273-3 EAST TROY CODE § 273-3
1:204
§ 273-4. Storage and handling.
the person's own name to recover the damage the person has sustained,
but the aggregate liability of the surety or insurer to all persons shall
not exceed the amount of the bond or policy. The bond or policy,
together with a copy of the permit, shall be filed in the office of
the Village Clerk. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
F. Required information for a use permit. A use permit under this section
shall specify all of the following: [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
(1) The name and address of the permit holder.
(2) The date on and after which fireworks may be purchased.
(3) The kind and quantity of fireworks which may be purchased.
(4) The date and location of permitted use.
(5) Other special conditions prescribed by ordinance.
G. Copy of use permit. A copy of a use permit under this section shall be
given to the Fire Chief and Chief of Police at least two days before the
date of authorized use. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
H. Minors prohibited. A permit under this section may not be issued to a
minor.
A. Fire extinguishers required. No wholesaler, dealer or jobber may store
or handle fireworks on the premises unless the premises is equipped
with fire extinguishers approved by the Fire Chief.
B. Smoking prohibited. No person may smoke where fireworks are stored
or handled.
C. Fire Chief to be notified. A person who stores or handles fireworks shall
notify the Fire Chief of the location of the fireworks.
D. (Reserved)129
E. Restriction on storage. No person may store fireworks within 500 feet
of a public assemblage or place where gasoline or volatile liquid is sold
in quantities exceeding one gallon, unless they are stored for fewer
than 30 days. If they are stored for fewer than 30 days, the separation
distance shall be not less than 50 feet. [Amended 6-13-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-03]
129. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, Storage distance, as amended, was repealed
11-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-13.
§ 273-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-5
1:205
§ 273-5. Parental liability.
A parent or legal guardian of a minor who consents to the use of fireworks
by the minor is liable for damages caused by the minor's use of the
fireworks.
§ 273-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
Violation of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture not exceeding
$1,000.
Chapter 285
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 270.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 289.
Nuisances — See Ch. 354.
Waste management — See Ch. 470.
§ 285-1. Hazardous materials and infectious agents.
A. Applicability.
(1) All persons, firms or organizations using, researching, producing or
storing hazardous materials and/or infectious agents shall notify
Emergency Services and the Department of Public Works.130
(2) Written notification shall be provided to the Fire Department as
prescribed in this section.131
(3) The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons, firms or
organizations using, researching, producing or storing hazardous
materials and/or infectious agents on and after the effective date of
this section.
B. Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this section:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Those materials that can cause death or
disabling injury from brief exposure, those materials that could cause
a lost time injury from exposure, and those materials that could cause
temporary disability or injury without permanent effects which are
used, researched, produced or stored within or on premises, except
those household consumer products used at the point of consumption
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
131. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 273-5 EAST TROY CODE § 285-1
1:206
and not used for commercial or experimental purposes. This definition
of "hazardous materials" shall include radioactive materials.
INFECTIOUS AGENT — A bacterial, mycoplasma, fungal, parasitic or
viral agent known to cause illness in humans which is used, researched,
produced or stored within or on premises.
C. Information required.
(1) Any person, firm or organization using, researching, producing
and/or storing any hazardous materials shall provide, in writing, to
the Fire Department the following information:
(a) Address/location where hazardous materials are used,
researched, stored or produced.
(b) The trade name of the hazardous material.
(c) The chemical name and any commonly used synonym for the
hazardous material and the chemical name and any commonly
used synonym for its major components.
(d) The exact locations on the premises where materials are used,
researched, stored and/or produced.
(e) Amounts of hazardous materials on premises per exact
location.
(f) The boiling point, vapor pressure, vapor density, solubility in
water, specific gravity, percentage volatile by volume,
evaporation rate for liquids and appearance and odor of the
hazardous material.
(g) The flash point and flammable limits of the hazardous
material.132
(h) Any permissible exposure level, threshold limit value or other
established limit value for exposure to a hazardous material.
(i) The stability of the hazardous material.133
(j) Recommended fire extinguishing media, special fire-fighting
procedures and fire and explosion hazard information for the
hazardous material.
(k) Any effect of overexposure to the hazardous material,
emergency and first aid procedures and telephone numbers to
call in an emergency.
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 285-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-1
1:207
§ 285-2. Recovery of costs.
(l) Any condition or material which is incompatible with the
hazardous material and must be avoided.
(m) Any personal protective equipment to be worn or used and
special precautions to be taken when handling or coming into
contact with the hazardous materials.
(n) Procedures for handling or coming into contact with the
hazardous materials.
(2) Any person, firm or organization using, researching, producing
and/or storing an infectious agent and/or carrier of an infectious
agent shall provide, in writing, to the Fire Department the
following:
(a) The name and any commonly used synonym of the infectious
agent.
(b) Address/location where infectious agents are used,
researched, stored and/or produced.
(c) The exact locations where infectious agents are used,
researched, stored and/or produced.
(d) Amount of infectious agent on premises per exact location.
(e) Any methods or route of transmission of the infectious agents.
(f) Any symptoms or effect of infection, emergency and first aid
procedure and a telephone number to be called in an
emergency.
(g) Any personal protective equipment to be worn or used and
special precautions to be taken when handling or coming in
contact with the infectious agent.
(h) Procedure for handling, cleanup and disposal of infectious
agents leaked or spilled.
D. Reimbursement for cleanup of spills. Any person who possesses or
controls a hazardous material or infectious agent which was discharged
or causes the discharge of a hazardous material or infectious agent
shall reimburse the Village for actual and necessary expenses incurred
by the Village or its agent to contain, remove or dispose of the
hazardous material or infectious agent or take any other appropriate
action which is deemed appropriate under the circumstances.134
A. Every person, firm or corporation using, storing, handling or
transporting flammable or combustible liquids, chemicals, gases or
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 285-1 EAST TROY CODE § 285-2
1:208
§ 285-3. Cleanup of spilled or accidentally discharged wastes.
other hazardous materials shall comply with the requirements of Ch.
ATCP 93, Wis. Adm. Code, as the same is now in force and may
hereafter, from time to time, be amended.
B. Every person, firm or corporation using, storing, handling or
transporting (whether by rail or on the highways) flammable or
combustible liquids, chemicals, gases or other hazardous materials
shall be liable to the Village for the actual cost of labor and materials
associated with the use of any specialized extinguishing agent,
chemical, neutralizer or similar material or equipment employed to
extinguish, confine or clean up any such hazardous material which is
involved in any accidental spill or in threat of any fire or accidental
spill.135
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
(1) Ensure safe and effective hazardous materials and hazardous waste
management; and
(2) Establish a program of regulation over the storage, transportation,
treatment and disposal of hazardous materials and waste in the
Village of East Troy.
B. Findings. The Village finds that:
(1) Increasing production and consumption rates, continuing
technological development and energy requirements have led to
the generation and use of greater quantities of hazardous materials
and associated hazardous waste;
(2) The problems of disposing of hazardous waste are increasing as a
result of air and water pollution controls and a shortage of
available landfill sites;
(3) While it is technologically and financially feasible for hazardous
waste generators to dispose of their waste in a manner which has a
less adverse impact on the environment than current practices,
such knowledge is not being utilized to the extent possible;
(4) Even though the Village is not heavily industrialized, there are
significant daily hazardous waste disposal problems; and
(5) The public health and safety and the environment are threatened
where hazardous materials and wastes are not managed in an
environmentally sound manner.
C. Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this section:
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 285-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-3
1:209
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of the Department of
Public Works of the Village of East Troy, or designated officer.
DISPOSAL — The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of any hazardous material or waste into or on any
land or water, so that this hazardous waste or any constituent thereof
may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwater.
GENERATION — The act or process of producing hazardous waste.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any element, compound or combination
thereof which is flammable, corrosive, etc., and which, because of
handling, storage, processing or packaging, may have detrimental
effects on operating and emergency personnel, the public, equipment
and/or the environment.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste or combination of wastes of liquid,
gaseous or semisolid form which, because of its quantities,
concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may
cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, or
pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed
of, or otherwise managed. Such wastes include, but are not limited
to, those which are toxic, carcinogenic, flammable, irritants, or strong
sensitizers or which generate pressure though decomposition, heat or
other means, as well as containers and receptacles previously used in
the transportation, storage, use or application of substances described
as hazardous waste.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation (including a
government corporation), trust, association, firm, joint-stock company,
organization, commission, the Village or federal government or other
entity.
STORAGE — Containment in such manner as not to constitute disposal.
TRANSPORT — The movement from the point of production, generation
or use to any intermediate site and finally to the point of ultimate
storage or disposal.
TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process, including
neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical or biological
character or composition of hazardous waste, so as to neutralize or
render it nonhazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery or
storage, or reduced in volume.
TREATMENT FACILITY — A location for treatment, including an
incinerator or a facility where generation has occurred.
D. Prohibited discharge. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, leak, leach or spill upon any public street, alley or public
property, or onto the ground, surface waters, subsurface waters,
aquifers or on any private property, except those areas specifically
§ 285-3 EAST TROY CODE § 285-3
1:210
§ 285-4. Storage of polluting substances.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to store any
potentially polluting substances, unless such substances are stored in such
manner as to securely prevent them from escaping onto the ground surface
and/or into any street, sewer, ditch or drainageway, lake or stream within
the Village of East Troy.
Chapter 289
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials and pollution — See Ch.
285.
Nuisances — See Ch. 354.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 375.
Waste management — See Ch. 470.
licensed for waste disposal or landfill activities within the Village, any
hazardous material as defined in Subsection C of this section.
E. Containment, cleanup and restoration. Any person in violation of this
section must, upon direction of the Director of Public Works, begin
immediate actions to contain, clean up and remove to an approved
repository the offending material(s) and restore the site to its original
condition. Should any person fail to engage or complete the
requirements of this section, the Director of Public Works may order the
required actions to be taken by public or private resources, with all
costs incurred by the Village to be reimbursed by the person violating
this section.
F. Access. Access to any site, public or private, where a prohibited
discharge is indicated or suspected shall be provided to the Director of
Public Works for purposes of evaluating the threat to the public and
monitoring containment, cleanup and restoration.
G. Public protection. Should any prohibited discharge occur that
reasonably causes a threat to the life, safety or health of the public, the
senior fire officer on the scene may order an evacuation of the area or
take other appropriate protective steps for a period of time, as deemed
necessary for the safety of the public.
H. Enforcement. The Director of Public Works shall have authority to issue
citations or complaints under this section.
I. Civil liability. In addition to the penalties provided for in § 1-4 of this
Code, any person, firm or corporation in violation of this section shall be
liable to the Village for any expenses incurred by the Village, or loss or
damage sustained by the Village by reason of such violation, and to any
individual whose person or property was damaged by such violation.
§ 285-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-4
1:211
§ 289-1. Rules and regulations.136
The Village Board may make reasonable and general rules for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and for the prevention of the
creation of health nuisances and the protection of the public health and
welfare and may, where appropriate, require the issuance of licenses and
permits. All such regulations shall have the same effect as ordinances, and
any person violating any of such regulations and any lawful order of the
Board shall be subject to the general penalty provided for in § 1-4 of this
Code.137
§ 289-2. Deposit of deleterious substances prohibited.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any public street or
on any public ground, or on any private property not his own, any refuse,
garbage, litter, waste material or liquid, or any other objectionable material
or liquid. When any such material is placed on the person's own private
property, it shall be properly enclosed and covered so as to prevent the
same from becoming a public nuisance.
§ 289-3. Destruction of noxious weeds.
A. The Village Clerk shall annually, on or before May 15, publish as
required by state law a notice that every person is required by law to
destroy all noxious weeds on lands in the Village which he/she owns,
occupies or controls. A joint notice with other towns or municipalities
may be utilized. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. If the owner or occupant shall neglect to destroy any weeds as required
by such notice, then the Weed Commissioner of the Village shall give
five days' written notice, by mail, to the owner or occupant of any lands
upon which the weeds shall be growing to the effect that said Weed
Commissioner, after the expiration of the five-day period, will proceed
to destroy or cause to be destroyed all such weeds growing upon said
lands and that the cost thereof will be assessed as a tax upon the lands
upon which such weeds are located under the provisions of § 66.0407,
Wis. Stats. In case the owner or occupant shall further neglect to
comply within such five-day notice, then the Weed Commissioner shall
destroy such weeds or cause them to be destroyed in the manner
deemed to be the most economical method, and the expense thereof,
including the cost of billing and other necessary administrative
expenses, shall be charged against such lots and be collected as a
special tax thereon.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
137. Editor's Note: Original § 8-1-2, Health nuisances, abatement of, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II). See Ch. 354, Nuisances.
§ 285-4 EAST TROY CODE § 289-3
1:212
§ 289-4. Natural lawns.
C. As provided for in § 66.0407, Wis. Stats., the Village shall require that
all noxious weeds shall be destroyed prior to the time in which such
plants would mature to the bloom or flower state. The growth of noxious
weeds in excess of eight inches in height from the ground surface shall
be prohibited within the Village corporate limits. Noxious weeds shall
include any weed, grass or similar plant growth which, if allowed to
pollinate, would cause or produce hay fever in human beings or would
cause a skin rash through contact with the skin.
(1) Noxious weeds, as defined in this section and in § 289-5, shall
include but not be limited to the following:
Cirsium arvense (Canada thistle)
Ambrosia artemisiifolia (common ragweed)
Ambrosia trifida (great ragweed)
Euphorbia esula (leafy spurge)
Convolvulus arvensis (creeping jenny) (field bind weed)
Tragopogon dubius (goat's beard)
Rhus radicans (poison ivy)
Cirsium vulgaris (bull thistle)
Pastinaca sativa (wild parsnip)
Arctium minus (burdock)
Xanthium strumarium (cocklebur)
Amaranthus retroflexus (pigweed)
Chenopodium album (common lambsquarter)
Rumex crispus (curled dock)
Cannabis sativa (hemp)
Plantago lanceolata (English plantain)
(2) Noxious grasses, as defined in this section and in § 289-5, shall
include but not be limited to the following:
Agrostis alba (red top)
Sorghum halepense (johnson)
Setaria (foxtail)
(3) Noxious weeds are also the following plants and other rank growth:
Ragweed
Thistles
Smartweed
Dandelions (over eight inches in height)
§ 289-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-4
1:213
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
NATURAL LAWN — Includes common species of grass and wildflowers
native to North America which are designed and purposely cultivated
to exceed eight inches in height from the ground. Specifically excluded
in natural lawns are the noxious grasses and weeds identified in § 289-3
of this chapter
NATURAL LAWN MANAGEMENT PLAN — A written plan relating to
the management and maintenance of a lawn which contains a legal
description of lawn upon which the planted grass will exceed eight
inches in length, a statement of intent and purpose for the lawn, a
detailed description of the vegetational types, plants and plant
succession involved, and the specific management and maintenance
techniques to be employed.
NEIGHBORING PROPERTY OWNERS — All those property owners who
are located within 300 feet of the proposed natural lawn site.
PROPERTY OWNER — Includes the legal title holder and/or the
beneficial owner of any such lot according to most current Village
records.
B. Natural lawns restricted. The growth of a natural lawn in excess of
eight inches in height from the ground surface shall be prohibited
within the Village corporate limits unless a natural lawn management
plan is approved and a permit is issued by the Village as set forth in this
section. Natural lawns shall not contain litter or debris and shall not
harbor undesirable wildlife.
C. Natural lawn management plan.
(1) Property owners who wish to plant and cultivate a natural lawn
must submit their written plan and related information on the form
provided by the Village. Natural lawn management plans shall only
indicate the planting and cultivating of natural lawns on property
legally owned by the property owner. Applicants are strictly
prohibited from developing a natural lawn on any Village-owned
property, including street rights-of-way. This shall include, at a
minimum, property located between the sidewalk and the street, or
a strip not less than 10 feet adjacent to the street where there is no
sidewalk, whether the area is under public or private ownership. In
addition, natural lawns shall not be permitted within 10 feet of the
abutting property owner's property, unless waived in writing by the
abutting property owner on the side so affected. Such waiver is to
be affixed to the natural lawn management plan.
(2) Any subsequent property owner who abuts an approved natural
lawn may revoke the waiver, thereby requiring the owner of the
natural lawn to remove the natural lawn that is located in the tenfoot
section abutting the neighboring property owner. Such
revocation shall be put in writing and presented to the
§ 289-4 EAST TROY CODE § 289-4
1:214
Village Clerk by the subsequent abutting property owner. Upon
receiving the written request to revoke the original waiver, the
Village shall contact the owner of the approved natural lawn and
direct the owner to remove the natural lawn located in the tenfoot
section abutting the neighboring property owner. The Village
Board shall revise the approved natural lawn management plan
accordingly. The owner of the approved natural lawn shall be
required to remove the ten-foot section abutting the neighboring
property owner within 20 days of receipt of the written notification
from the Village, provided that the notification is received
sometime between May 1 and November 1. Property owners who
receive notification from the Village between November 1 and April
30 shall be required to remove the ten-foot section abutting the
neighboring property owner no later than May 20 following receipt
of the notification. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
D. Application process. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(1) Property owners interested in applying for permission to establish
a natural lawn shall obtain and complete an application form
available from the Village Clerk. The completed application shall
include a natural lawn management plan. Upon submitting a
completed application, a nonrefundable filing fee set by the Village
Board will be assessed by the Village. Upon receiving payment,
copies of the completed application shall be mailed by the Village to
each of the owners of record, as listed in the office of the Village
Assessor, who are owners of the property situated wholly or in part
within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property for which the
application is made. If, within 15 calendar days of mailing the
copies of the complete application to the neighboring property
owners, the Village receives written objections from 51% or more
of the neighboring property owners, the Village Clerk shall
immediately deny the application.
(2) If the property owner's application is in full compliance with the
natural lawn management plan requirements and less than 51% of
the neighboring property owners provide written objections, the
Village Clerk may issue permission to install a natural lawn.
Permits are valid for two years.
E. Application for appeal. The property owner may appeal the
Village Clerk's decision to deny the natural lawn permit request to the
Village Board at an open meeting. All applications for appeal shall be
submitted within 15 calendar days of the notice of denial of the natural
lawn permit. The decision rendered by the Village Board shall be final
and binding. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
F. Safety precautions for natural grass areas.
§ 289-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-4
1:215
(1) When, in the opinion of the Fire Inspector of the Fire Department
serving the Village of East Troy, the presence of a natural lawn may
constitute a fire or safety hazard due to weather and/or other
conditions, the Fire Inspector may order the cutting of natural
lawns to a safe condition. As a condition of receiving approval of
the natural lawn permit, the property owner shall be required to
cut the natural lawn within three days upon receiving written
direction from the Fire Inspector.
(2) Natural lawns shall not be removed through the process of burning,
unless stated and approved as one of the management and
maintenance techniques in the natural lawn management plan. The
Fire Inspector shall review all requests to burn natural lawns and
shall determine if circumstances are correct and all applicable
requirements have been fulfilled to ensure public safety. Burning of
natural lawns shall be strictly prohibited unless a written permit to
burn is issued by the Fire Inspector. The Fire Inspector shall
establish a written list of requirements for considering each
request to burn natural lawns, thereby ensuring the public safety.
In addition, the property owner requesting permission to burn the
natural lawn shall produce evidence of property damage and
liability insurance identifying the Village as a party insured. A
minimum amount of acceptable insurance shall be $300,000.
G. Revocation of an approved natural lawn permit. The Village Clerk, upon
the recommendation of the Weed Commissioner, shall have authority to
revoke an approved natural lawn permit if the owner fails to maintain
the natural lawn or comply with the provisions set forth in this section.
Notice of intent to revoke an approved natural lawn permit shall be
appealable to the Village Board. All applications for appeal shall be
submitted within 15 calendar days of receipt of the written notice of
intent to revoke the approved natural lawn permit. Failure to file an
application for appeal within 15 calendar days shall result in the
revoking of the natural lawn permit. All written applications for appeal
filed within the required 15 calendar days shall be reviewed by the
Village Board in an open meeting. The decision rendered by the Village
Board shall be final and binding. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
H. Public nuisance defined; abatement after notice.
(1) The growth of a natural lawn, as defined in this section, shall be
considered a public nuisance unless a natural lawn management
plan has been filed and approved and a permit is issued by the
Village, as set for in this section. Violators shall be served with a
notice of public nuisance by certified mail to the last known mailing
address of the property owner.
(2) If the person so served with a notice of public nuisance violation
does not abate the nuisance within 10 days, the enforcement officer
may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the
§ 289-4 EAST TROY CODE § 289-4
1:216
§ 289-5. Regulation of length of lawn and grasses.
expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged to
and paid by such property owner. Notice of the bill for abatement
of the public nuisance shall be mailed to the owner of the premises
and shall be payable within 10 calendar days from receipt thereof.
Within 60 days after such costs and expenses are incurred and
remain unpaid, the Village Clerk shall enter those charges onto the
tax roll as a special tax, as provided by state statute. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(3) The failure of the Village Clerk to record such claim or to mail such
notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not
affect the right to place the Village expense on the tax rolls for
unpaid bills for abating the public nuisance, as provided for in this
section. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
I. Penalty.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation who or which does not abate the
nuisance within the required time period, or who or which
otherwise violates the provisions of this section, shall be subject to
the general penalty found in § 1-4 of this Code.
(2) In addition to any penalties herein provided, the Village may issue
stop-work orders upon owners of lots where work is unfinished
under a previously issued building permit for any violation of this
section.
A. Purpose. This section is adopted due to the unique nature of the
problems associated with lawns, grasses and noxious weeds being
allowed to grow to excessive length in the Village of East Troy.
B. Public nuisance declared. The Village Board finds that lawns, grasses
and noxious weeds on nonagricultural lots or parcels of land, as
classified under Chapter 510, Zoning, of this Code, within the Village of
East Troy which exceed eight inches in length adversely affect the
public health and safety of the public in that they tend to emit pollen
and other discomforting bits of plants, constitute a fire hazard and a
safety hazard in that debris can be hidden in the grass, interfere with
the public convenience and adversely affect property values of other
land within the Village. For that reason, any nonagricultural lawn, grass
or weed on a lot or other parcel of land which exceeds eight inches in
length is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, except for property
located in a designated floodplain area and/or wetland area, or where
the lawn, grass or weed is part of a natural lawn approved pursuant to
§ 289-4 above.
C. Nuisances prohibited. No person, firm or corporation shall permit any
public nuisance as defined in Subsection B above to remain on any
premises owned or controlled by him/her within the Village.
§ 289-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-5
1:217
D. Inspection. The Weed Commissioner or his/her designee shall inspect or
cause to be inspected all premises and places within the Village to
determine whether any public nuisance as defined in Subsection B
above exists.
E. Abatement of nuisance. If the Weed Commissioner shall determine with
reasonable certainty that any public nuisance as defined in Subsection
B above exists, he/she shall immediately cause written notice to be
served or mailed that the Village proposes to have the lot grass or lawn
cut so as to conform to this section and § 289-4.
F. Due process hearing. If the owner believes that his/her grasses or
weeds are not a nuisance, he/she may request a hearing before the
Village Board. The request for said hearing must be made in writing to
the Village Clerk's office within the five days set forth in the Weed
Commissioner's notice. Upon application for the hearing, the property
owner must deposit a bond of $25. If a decision is rendered in the
property owner's favor, the bond of $25 will be returned to the property
owner. If the property owner fails to appear for the hearing, or if the
decision is rendered against the property owner, the deposit shall be
forfeited and applied to the cost of Village personnel abating the
nuisance, if necessary. When a hearing is requested by the owner of the
property, a hearing by the Village Board shall be held within seven days
from the date of the owner's request. The property in question will not
be mowed by the Village until such time as the hearing is held by the
Board. At the hearing, the owner may appear in person or by his/her
attorney, may present witnesses in his/her own behalf, and may crossexamine
witnesses presented by the Village, as well as subpoena
witnesses for his/her own case. At the close of the hearing, the Village
Board shall make its determination in writing, specifying its findings,
facts and conclusions. If the Village Board determines that a public
nuisance does exist, the Board shall order the Weed Commissioner to
mow the property in question, unless the property has been mowed by
the owner within 48 hours of the Village Board's decision. If the owner
does not abate the nuisance within the described 48 hours, the Weed
Commissioner shall cause the same nuisance to be abated and cost in
excess of the forfeited bond assessed accordingly [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
G. Village's option to abate nuisance. In any case where the owner,
occupant or person in charge of the property shall fail to cut his/her
lawn, grass or weeds, as set forth above, then and in that event the
Village may elect to cut said lawn, grass or weeds as follows:
(1) The written notice required in Subsection E shall inform said
person that in the event of his/her failure to abate the nuisance
within the prescribed time, the Village shall abate the same and the
cost thereof shall be assessed to the property owner as a special
charge.
§ 289-5 EAST TROY CODE § 289-5
1:218
§ 289-6. Compulsory connection to Village sewer and water system.
§ 289-7. Sewage disposal.139
(2) The Village shall cut or cause to be cut all grass and weeds from the
subject's property and shall charge the expenses of so doing at a
rate as established by resolution by the Village Board. The charges
shall be set forth in a statement to the Village Clerk who, in turn,
shall mail the same to the owner, occupant or person in charge of
the subject premises. If said statement is not paid in full within 30
days thereafter, the Village Clerk shall enter the charges in the tax
roll as a special tax against said lot or parcel of land, and the same
shall be collected in all respects like other taxes upon real estate,
or as provided under § 66.0907(3)(f), Wis. Stats. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
A. Whenever public sewer or water service has become available to any
building used for human habitation or human occupancy, the Village
Board shall notify in writing the owner, agent or occupant thereof to
connect such facilities thereto. If such persons to whom the notice has
been given shall fail to comply for more than 10 days after notice, the
Village Board shall cause the necessary connections to be made and the
expenses thereof to be assessed as a special tax against the property,
pursuant to § 281.45, Wis. Stats.138
B. The Village Board may extend the time for connection hereunder or
may grant other temporary relief where strict enforcement would work
an unnecessary hardship without corresponding public or private
benefit.
C. This section is enacted pursuant to § 281.45, Wis. Stats.
A. Inspector. The Village Board appoints the Director of Public Works as
superintendent of the sewage works and as inspector to act under the
direction of the Village Board and to have control of the supervision and
inspection of drainage, drain laying and sewer connections, and to
enforce all the laws and ordinances and rules in relation thereto.
B. Connection; compliance with state statutes.
(1) Requirement.
(a) The owners of all houses, buildings, or other structures used
for or usable for human habitation, or for the conduct of any
trade, business or industry, located within the Village sanitary
sewer service area and abutting on any street, alley or right-ofway
in which there is located a sanitary sewer are required at
the owner's expense to connect to the Village sanitary sewer, in
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
139. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 400, Sewers.
§ 289-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-7
1:219
accordance with this section, within one year after the sanitary
sewer is accessible thereto.
(b) The Village Building Inspector shall provide official notification
to such owner or his agent by registered mail addressed to the
last known address of the owner or his agent of the
requirement to make connection to the Village sanitary sewer
system. The notice shall direct the owner or his agent to
connect the building to such main in the manner prescribed by
the Building Inspector and to install such facilities as may be
reasonably necessary to permit passage of sewage incidental
to such human habitation into the sewer system to prevent
creation of a health nuisance.
(c) The Village shall provide official notification to such owners of
the requirement to make connection to the sanitary sewer. If
the owner fails to have the connection made, after expiration of
the time provided by the notice, the Village may bring an action
against the owner for violation of this section or may cause
connection to be made by a licensed plumber under the
direction of the Village and charge the cost of such connection
as a special tax against the property.
(d) The owner or his agent may, within 30 days after completion of
the work, file a written option with the Village Treasurer
stating that he cannot pay the cost of connection in one lump
sum and electing that such sum be levied in five equal annual
installments, with interest at the rate of the Village's current
cost of borrowing plus 2% per annum from the date of
completion of the work, to be placed on the tax roll. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(e) By adoption of this section, the Village determines and ordains
that the requirement to connect to the Village sanitary sewer
system is necessary for the preservation of public health,
comfort and safety.
(f) Where the Village sanitary sewer system is not available, and
will not be available in a reasonable time, a private system may
be used until such time that the sanitary sewer system
becomes available.
(2) Exceptions to mandatory compliance.
(a) Upon application to the Village Clerk, exception from
mandatory compliance may be permitted based upon the
following criteria: [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
[1] The property which is otherwise subject to mandatory
compliance is at least five acres in area;
§ 289-7 EAST TROY CODE § 289-7
1:220
[2] The structure to be served is a single family residence; and
[3] The building site of the residence is at least 400 feet from
the public sewer supply.
(b) If the property which is otherwise subject to mandatory
compliance meets the criteria enumerated in Subsection
B(2)(a), the Village may grant permission for the installation of
a private sewage disposal system for a period of 10 years
following the installation of the private sewage disposal
system, unless the property is transferred, conveyed and/or
sold during this period or the private sewage disposal system
requires reconstruction during this period. At the end of the
ten-year period, the Village may require that the residence be
connected to the public sewage disposal system if the property
is then served by such a system.
(c) All private sewage disposal systems permitted under this
section shall be used and installed in accordance with
requirements of this subsection.
C. Connection permit required. No connection shall be made to any of the
sewers of the Village, from any building, premises, excavation, place or
property, by any drain, tap or sewer intended or designed to be, or
capable of, discharging any matter, whether fluid or solid, into the
sewers of the Village, unless a permit has first been obtained therefor
from the Inspector.
D. Application for permit. The applicant for a sewage connection permit or
private sewage disposal system shall file a written application for such
permit with the Inspector for his/her approval. Before the Inspector
issues such permit or approves the application so filed with him/her, he/
she will collect a fee set by the Village Board from the applicant to cover
inspection costs and he/she shall inspect the premises covered by the
application.140
E. Owner to pay costs. All costs and expenses incident to the installation
and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The
owner shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
F. Deleterious substances.
(1) For purposes of this section, "deleterious substance" means any
material likely to cause any obstruction or explosion within the
sewer system or treatment plant which will prohibit or impair the
effective treatment of sewage at said plant or which, in any way,
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 289-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-7
1:221
substantially annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, health,
repose or safety of the public.
(2) The deposit or discharge of a deleterious substance to any public
sewer constitutes a public nuisance. The sewage works
superintendent shall perform the duties of the inspecting officer.
(3) No person shall deposit or permit to be deposited in any sewer or
drain any of the following described waters or wastes:
(a) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 120°
F.141
(b) Any water or waste which may contain more than 100
milligrams per liter of fat, oil or grease.
(c) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(d) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other
solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to
the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works.
(e) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(f) Any waters having a pH lower than 5 1/2 or higher than nine or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of
the sewage works.
(g) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous
substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant.
(4) Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, in
addition to the penalty provided for in § 1-4 of this Code, be liable
to the Village for the cost of removing such obstruction or repairing
any injury or damage to the sewer system or treatment plant.
G. Private disposal; compliance with regulations.
(1) Where a public sanitary sewer is certified by the Village Board as
not available to serve any house, building or property, the building
sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system
complying with the provisions set forth by the State Department of
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 289-7 EAST TROY CODE § 289-7
1:222
Chapter 305
INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND FERMENTED MALT
BEVERAGES
Safety and Professional Services and any rules, regulations and
orders of the Village Board.142
(2) Permit required. No private sewage disposal system shall be
installed on any premises connected to a public sewer unless a
permit has first been issued therefor by the Inspector. When the
Village Board has approved plans and specifications for the
construction of extensions to the existing public sewer system, no
permit may be issued for any privy, vault, septic tank and cesspool
intended or used as a means of private sewage disposal.
(3) Maintenance. The owner shall operate and maintain the private
sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner, at all times, at no
expense to the Village
(4) Prohibited near municipal wells. Except for the repair or
replacement of a seepage bed, septic tank, dry well or any private
sewage system of any kind existing at the time of passage of this
section, no person shall construct or cause to be constructed a
seepage bed for sewage disposal, a septic tank, dry well or any
private sewage system of any kind within 1,000 feet of any Village
municipal water utility well, unless otherwise approved by the
State Department of Natural Resources and the approving
authority.
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 289-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-7
1:223

ARTICLE I
Licenses and Permits
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 7, Ch. 2, of the 2000
Code]
§ 305-1. State statutes adopted.
The provisions of Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes relating to the
sale of intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages, except provisions
therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to
be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference
is required or prohibited by this article. Any future amendments, revisions
or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be
made a part of this article in order to secure uniform statewide regulation
of alcohol beverage control.
§ 305-2. Definitions. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
As used in this article, the terms "alcohol beverages," "intoxicating liquor,"
"principal business," "legal drinking age," "premises," "sell," "sold," "sale,"
"restaurant," "club," "retailer," "person," "fermented malt beverages" and
"wholesaler" shall have the meaning given them by Chapter 125, Wisconsin
Statutes.
§ 305-3. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall vend, sell, deal or traffic in, or have
in his possession with intent to vend, sell, deal or traffic in, or, for the
purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverage in any quantity whatsoever, or cause the same
to be done, without having procured a license as provided in this article,
nor without complying with all the provisions of this article, and all statutes
and regulations applicable thereto, except as provided by §§ 125.26, 125.27,
125.28 and 125.51, Wis. Stats.
§ 305-4. Classes of licenses.
A. Retail "Class A" intoxicating liquor license. A retail "Class A"
intoxicating liquor license, when issued by the Village Clerk under the
authority of the Village Board, shall permit its holder to sell, deal and
traffic in intoxicating liquors only in original packages or containers
and to be consumed off the premises so licensed. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Retail "Class B" intoxicating liquor license. A retail "Class B"
intoxicating liquor license, when issued by the Village Clerk-Treasurer
under authority of the Village Board, shall permit its holder to sell, deal
and traffic in intoxicating liquors to be consumed by the glass only on
the premises so licensed and in the original package or container, in any
§ 305-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-4
1:225
quantity, to be consumed off the premises. [Amended 9-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-14]
C. Reserve "Class B" licenses. A reserve "Class B" license means a license
that is not granted or issued by the Village on December 1, 1997 (seven
issued at a population of 3,147), and that is counted under
§ 125.51(4)(br), Wis. Stats., which, if granted or issued, authorizes the
sale of intoxicating liquor to be consumed by the glass only on the
premises where sold, and also authorizes the sale of intoxicating liquor
in the original package or container in any quantity, to be consumed off
premises. [Amended 9-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-14]
D. Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. A Class "A"
fermented malt beverage retailer's license, when issued by the
Village Clerk under the authority of the Village Board, shall entitle the
holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt
beverages only for consumption away from the premises where sold
and in the original packages, containers or bottles. Such license may be
issued after July 1. The license shall expire on the following June 30.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
E. Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license.
(1) License. A Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license,
when issued by the Village Clerk under the authority of the Village
Board, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for
sale fermented malt beverages to be consumed either upon the
premises where sold or away from such premises. The holder may
also sell beverages containing less than 0.5% of alcohol by volume
without obtaining a special license to sell such beverages. Such
license may be issued after July 1. The license shall expire on the
following June 30. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(2) Application. Class "B" licenses may be issued to any person
qualified under § 125.04(5), Wis. Stats. Such licenses may not be
issued to any person acting as agent for or in the employ of another,
except that this restriction does not apply to a hotel or restaurant
which is not a part of or located on the premises of any mercantile
establishment, or a bona fide club, society or lodge that has been in
existence for at least six months before the date of application. A
Class "B" license for a hotel, restaurant, club, society or lodge may
be issued in the name of an officer who shall be personally
responsible for compliance with this article.143
F. Temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage license.
(1) License. As provided in § 125.26(1) and (6), Wis. Stats., temporary
Class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses may be issued to bona
fide clubs, to county or local fair associations or agricultural
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 305-4 EAST TROY CODE § 305-4
1:226
societies, to churches, lodges or societies that have been in
existence for at least six months before the date of application,
and to posts of veterans' organizations authorizing the sale of
fermented malt beverages at a particular picnic or similar
gathering, at a meeting of the post, or during a fair conducted
by the fair association or agricultural society. A license issued to
a county or district fair licenses the entire fairgrounds where the
fair is being conducted and all persons engaging in retail sales of
fermented malt beverages from leased stands on the fairgrounds.
The county or district fair to which the license is issued may lease
stands on the fairgrounds to persons who may engage in retail
sales of fermented malt beverages from the stands while the fair
is being held. Such license is valid for dates as approved by the
Village Board.
(2) Application. Application for such license shall be signed by the
president or corresponding officer of the society or association
making such application and shall be filed with the
Village Clerk together with the appropriate license fee for each day
for which the license is sought. Any person fronting for any group
other than the one applied for shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a forfeiture of $200 and will be ineligible to apply for a
temporary Class "B" license for one year. The license shall specify
the hours and dates of license validity. The application shall be filed
a minimum of 15 days prior to the meeting of the Village Board at
which the application will be considered. If the application is for a
license to be used in a Village park, the applicant shall specify the
main point of sale facility. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
G. Temporary "Class B" wine license. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
(1) License. Notwithstanding § 125.68(3), Wis. Stats., temporary
"Class B" licenses may be issued to bona fide clubs, to county or
local fair associations or agricultural societies, to churches, lodges
or societies that have been in existence for at least six months
before the date of application and to posts of veterans'
organizations authorizing the sale of wine, in an original package,
container or bottle, or by the glass if the wine is dispensed directly
from an original package, container or bottle at a particular picnic
or similar gathering, at a meeting of the post, or during a fair
conducted by the fair association or agricultural society. No fee
may be charged to a person who, at the same time, applies for a
temporary Class "B" beer license under § 125.26(6), Wis. Stats., for
the same event. A license issued to a county or district fair licenses
the entire fairgrounds where the fair is being conducted and all
persons engaging in retail sales of wine from leased stands on the
fairgrounds. The county or district fair to which the license is
issued may lease stands on the fairgrounds to persons who may
§ 305-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-4
1:227
§ 305-5. License fees. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
10-3-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-12; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
There shall be the following classes of licenses which, when issued by
the Village Clerk under the authority of the Village Board, after payment
of the license fee and publication costs hereinafter specified, shall permit
the holder to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquors or fermented malt
beverages, as provided in § 305-4 of this article and Chapter 125 of the
Wisconsin Statutes:
engage in retail sales of wine from the stands while the fair is being
held.
(2) Application. Application for such license shall be signed by the
president or corresponding officer of the society or association
making such application and shall be filed with the
Village Clerk together with the appropriate license fee for each day
for which the license is sought. Any person fronting for any group
other than the one applied for shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a forfeiture of $200 and will be ineligible to apply for a
temporary "Class B" wine license for one year. The license shall
specify the hours and dates of license validity. The application shall
be filed a minimum of 15 days prior to the meeting of the Village
Board at which the application will be considered. If the application
is for a license to be used in a Village park, the applicant shall
specify the main point of sale facility. [Amended 12-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
H. Retail "Class C" license.
(1) In this subsection "barroom" means a room that is primarily used
for the sale or consumption of alcohol beverages.
(2) A "Class C" license authorizes the retail sale of wine by the glass or
in an opened original container for consumption on the premises
where sold.
(3) A "Class C" license may be issued to a person qualified under
§ 125.04(5), Wis. Stats., for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol
beverages accounts for less than 50% of gross receipts and which
does not have a barroom. A "Class C" license may not be issued to a
foreign corporation or a person acting as agent for, or in the employ
of, another.
(4) A "Class C" license shall particularly describe the premises for
which it is issued.
A. Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. The annual fee for
this license shall be set by the Village Board. The fee for a license for
less than 12 months shall be prorated according to the number of
months or fraction thereof for which the license is issued.
§ 305-4 EAST TROY CODE § 305-5
1:228
B. Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. The annual fee for
this license shall be set by the Village Board. This license may be issued
at any time for six months in any calendar year, for which 50% of the
applicable license fee shall be paid, but such license shall not be
renewable during the calendar year in which issued. The fee for a
license for less than 12 months shall be prorated according to the
number of months or fraction thereof for which the license is issued.
C. Temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage license. The fee for this
license shall be set by the Village Board.
D. Temporary "Class B" wine license. The fee for this license shall be set by
the Village Board. There shall be no fee if the temporary wine license is
obtained along with a temporary fermented malt beverage license.
E. Retail "Class A" intoxicating liquor license. The annual fee for this
license shall be set by the Village Board.
F. Retail "Class B" intoxicating liquor license. The annual fee for this
license shall be set by the Village Board. This license may be issued at
any time for six months in any calendar year, for which 50% of the
applicable license fee shall be paid, but such license shall not be
renewable during the calendar year in which issued.
G. Reserve "Class B" intoxicating liquor license. The fee for an initial
issuance of a reserve "Class B" license shall be set by the Village Board,
except that the fee for the initial issuance of a reserve "Class B" license
to a bona fide club or lodge situated and incorporated in the state for at
least six years is the fee established in Subsection F of this section for
such a club or lodge. The annual fee for renewal of a reserve "Class B"
license is the fee established in Subsection F.
(1) The Village of East Troy hereby finds that the fee of $10,000
mandated by the laws of the State of Wisconsin exceeds the actual
cost of licensing the activity, thereby generating additional revenue
for the Village, and it is in the interests of the public welfare to use
this additional revenue to increase the property tax base, improve
the interior or exterior of the licensed premises, provide
employment opportunities, attract tourists and generally enhance
the economic and cultural climate of the community by providing
additional economic incentives for new businesses with liquor
licenses.
H. "Class B" intoxicating liquor license for full-service restaurants and
hotels. The initial annual fee for a "Class B" license for a full service
restaurant that has a seating capacity of 300 or more persons, or a hotel
that has 50 or more rooms of sleeping accommodations and that has
either an attached restaurant with a seating capacity of 150 or more
persons or a banquet room which will accommodate 400 or more
persons, shall be set by the Village Board. Thereafter, the annual
renewal fee shall be set by the Village Board.
§ 305-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-5
1:229
§ 305-6. Application for license; quotas.
I. "Class C" wine license. The annual fee for this license shall be set by the
Village Board. The fee for less than 12 months shall be prorated.
A. Contents. Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on the form
prescribed by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue and shall be sworn
to by the applicant as provided by §§ 887.01 to 887.03, Wis. Stats., and
shall be filed with the Village Clerk not less than 15 days prior to the
granting of such license. The premises shall be physically described, to
include every room and storage space to be covered by the license,
including all rooms not separated by a solid wall or joined by
connecting entrances. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Corporations. Such application shall be filed and sworn to by the
applicant, if an individual, or by the president and secretary if a
corporation.
C. Publication. The Village Clerk shall publish each application for a Class
"A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B" or "Class C" license. There is no
publication requirement for temporary Class "B" picnic wine licenses
under § 125.26(6), Wis. Stats., or temporary "Class B" picnic wine
licenses under § 125.51(10), Wis. Stats. The application shall be
published once in the official Village newspaper, and the costs of
publication shall be paid by the applicant at the same time the
application is filed, as determined under § 985.08, Wis. Stats.
D. Amending application. Whenever anything occurs to change any fact
set out in the application of any licensee, such licensee shall file with
the issuing authority a notice, in writing, of such change within 10 days
after the occurrence thereof. An amended application form also serves
as notice. Amendments shall be forwarded to the Village Board for
approval by the Village Clerk prior receiving an amended license. If
amending the described premises, the licensee shall not operate within
the new described area prior to receiving the amended license.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
E. Quota of "Class A" liquor licenses.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following words shall
have the following meanings:
LICENSE — Retail "Class A" liquor license.
POPULATION — The number of inhabitants as determined by the
last decennial federal census.
QUOTA — The number of licenses which the Village may grant.
(2) Designated. The quota of licenses for the Village shall be one
license for each 500 population.
§ 305-5 EAST TROY CODE § 305-6
1:230
§ 305-7. Qualifications of applicants and premises.
(3) Annexation. Annexation of territory containing licensed premises
increases the quota, if necessary, to the relicensing of all existing
licensed premises in the municipality after such annexation.
F. Quota of Class "A" beer licenses.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following words shall
have the following meanings:
LICENSE — Retail Class "A" beer license.
POPULATION — The number of inhabitants as determined by the
most current decennial federal census or state population estimate.
QUOTA — The number of licenses which the Village may grant.
(2) Designated. The quota of licenses for the Village shall be one
license for each 500 population.
(3) Annexation. Annexation of territory containing licensed premises
increases the quota, if necessary, to the relicensing of all existing
licensed premises in the municipality after such annexation.
A. Residency requirements. A retail Class "A" or Class "B" fermented malt
beverage or "Class A" or "Class B" intoxicating liquor license shall be
granted only to persons who are citizens of the United States and who
have been residents of the State of Wisconsin continuously for at least
90 days prior to the date of the application.
B. Applicant to have malt beverage license. No retail "Class B"
intoxicating liquor license shall be issued to any person who does not
have, or to whom is not issued, a Class "B" retailer's license to sell
fermented malt beverages.
C. Right to premises. No applicant will be considered unless he has the
right to possession of the premises described in the application for the
license period, by lease or by deed.
D. Age of applicant. Licenses related to alcohol beverages shall only be
granted to persons who have attained the legal drinking age.
E. Corporate restrictions.
(1) No license or permit may be issued to any corporation unless the
corporation meets the qualifications under § 125.04(5)(a)1 and 4
and (b), Wis. Stats., unless the agent of the corporation appointed
under § 125.04(6), Wis. Stats., and the officers and directors of the
corporation meet the qualifications of § 125.04(5)(a)1 and 3 and
(b), and unless the agent of the corporation appointed under
§ 125.04(6) meets the qualification under § 125.04(5)(a)2. The
requirement that the corporation meet the qualifications under
§ 125.04(5)(a)1 and (b) does not apply if the corporation has
§ 305-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-7
1:231
terminated its relationship with all of the individuals whose actions
directly contributed to the conviction.
(2) Each corporate applicant shall file with its application for such
license a statement by its officers showing the names and
addresses of the persons who are stockholders, together with the
amount of stock held by such person or persons. It shall be the duty
of each corporate applicant and licensee to file with the
Village Clerk a statement of transfers of stock within 48 hours after
such transfer of stock. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
(3) Any license issued to a corporation may be revoked in the manner
and under the procedure established in § 125.12, Wis. Stats., when
more than 50% of the stock interest, legal or beneficial, in such
corporation is held by any person or persons not eligible for a
license under this article or under state law.
F. Sales tax qualification. All applicants for retail licenses shall provide
proof, as required by § 77.61(11), Wis. Stats., that they are in good
standing for sales tax purposes (i.e., hold a seller's permit) before they
may be issued a license.
G. Connecting premises. Except in the case of hotels, no person may hold
both a "Class A" license and either a "Class B" license or permit, a Class
"B" license or permit, or a "Class C" license for the same premises, or
for connecting premises. Except for hotels, if either type of license or
permit is issued for the same or connecting premises already covered
by the other type of license or permit, the license or permit last issued
is void. If both licenses or permits are issued simultaneously, both are
void.
H. Limitations on other business; Class "B" premises. No Class "B" license
or permit may be granted for any premises where any other business is
conducted in connection with the premises, except that this restriction
does not apply if the premises for which the Class "B" license or permit
is issued is connected to premises where other business is conducted by
a secondary doorway that serves as a safety exit and is not the primary
entrance to the Class "B" premises. No other business may be
conducted on premises operating under a Class "B" license or permit.
These restrictions do not apply to any of the following: [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(1) A hotel.
(2) A restaurant, whether or not it is a part of or located in any
mercantile establishment.
(3) A combination grocery store and tavern.
(4) A combination sporting goods store and tavern in towns, villages
and fourth-class cities.
§ 305-7 EAST TROY CODE § 305-7
1:232
§ 305-8. Investigation. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
The Village Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police and Building Inspector
of each new application, and these officials shall inspect or cause to be
inspected each application and the premises, together with such other
investigation as shall be necessary to determine whether the applicant and
the premises sought to be licensed comply with the regulations, ordinances
and laws applicable thereto, including those governing sanitation in
restaurants, and whether the applicant is a proper recipient of a license.
These officials shall furnish to the Village Clerk, in writing, the information
derived from such investigation, accompanied by a recommendation as to
whether a license should be granted or refused, prior to issuance. No
license shall be renewed without a reinspection of the premises and report,
as originally required.
§ 305-9. Considerations for approval of license.
(5) A combination novelty store and tavern.
(6) A bowling alley or recreation premises.
(7) A club, society or lodge that has been in existence for six months or
more prior to the date of filing application for the Class "B" license
or permit.
A. No license shall be granted for operation on any premises or with any
equipment for which taxes, assessments, forfeitures or other financial
claims of the Village are delinquent and unpaid.
B. No license shall be issued unless the premises conforms to the sanitary,
safety and health requirements of the State Building Code and the
regulations of the State Department of Health Services applicable to
restaurants. The premises must be properly lighted and ventilated,
must be equipped with separate sanitary toilet and lavatory facilities
equipped with running water for each sex and must conform to all
ordinances of the Village. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
C. Consideration for the granting or denial of a license will be based on:
(1) Arrest and conviction record of the applicant, subject to the
limitations imposed by §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, Wis.
Stats.;
(2) The financial responsibility of the applicant;
(3) The appropriateness of the location and the premises where the
licensed business is to be conducted; and
(4) Generally, the applicant's fitness for the trust to be reposed.
§ 305-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-9
1:233
§ 305-10. Grant or denial of license.
§ 305-11. Transfer and lapse of license. [Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
D. An application may be denied based upon the applicant's arrest and
conviction record, if the applicant has been convicted of a felony (unless
duly pardoned) or if the applicant has habitually been a law offender.
For purposes of this licensing procedure, "habitually been a law
offender" is generally considered to be an arrest or conviction of at
least two offenses which are substantially related to the licensed
activity within the five years immediately preceding the license
application. Because a license is a privilege, the issuance of which is a
right granted solely to the Village Board, the Village Board reserves the
right to consider the severity and the facts and circumstances of the
offense when making the determination to grant, deny or not renew a
license. Further, the Board, at its discretion, may, based upon an arrest
or conviction record of two or more offenses which are substantially
related to the licensed activity within the five years immediately
preceding, act to suspend such license for a period of one year or more.
A. Opportunity shall be given by the governing body to any person to be
heard for or against the granting of any license. Upon the approval of
the applicant by the Village Board and compliance with § 305-8, the
Village Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license, upon payment by the
applicant of the license fee to the Village. The full license fee shall be
charged for the whole year or a prorated fee for a fraction of any year
based upon months remaining in the license year. [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. If the Village Board denies the license, the applicant shall be notified in
writing, by registered mail or personal service, of the reasons for the
denial. The notice shall also inform the applicant of the opportunity to
appear before the Village Board and to provide evidence as to why the
denial should be reversed. In addition, the notice shall inform the
applicant that the reconsideration of the application shall be held in
closed session, pursuant to § 19.85(1)(b), Wis. Stats., unless the
applicant requests reconsideration be held in open session and the
Village Board consents to the request. Such written notice shall be
mailed or served upon the applicant at least 10 days prior to the Village
Board meeting at which the application is to be reconsidered.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 125.04(12), Wis. Stats., a license
shall be transferable from one premises to another, if such transfer is
first approved by the Village Board. An application for transfer shall be
made on a state form furnished by the Village Clerk. Proceedings for
such transfer shall be had in the same form and manner as the original
application. The fee for such transfer is set by the Village Board.
Whenever a license is transferred, the Village Clerk shall forthwith
notify the Wisconsin Department of Revenue of such transfer. In the
§ 305-9 EAST TROY CODE § 305-11
1:234
§ 305-12. Numbering of license. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date of
issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee. The Village Clerk shall
affix the Corporate Seal to the license.
§ 305-13. Posting licenses; defacement.
§ 305-14. Conditions of license.
All retail Class "A," Class "B," "Class A" and "Class B" licenses granted
hereunder shall be granted subject to the following conditions, and all other
conditions of this article, and subject to all other ordinances and regulations
of the Village applicable thereto:
event of the sale of a business or business premises of the licensee,
the purchaser of such business or business premises must apply to the
Village for reissuance of said license, and the Village, as the licensing
authority, shall in no way be bound to reissue said license to said
subsequent purchaser
B. Whenever the agent of a corporate holder of a license is, for any reason,
replaced, the licensee shall give the Village Clerk written notice of said
replacement, the reasons therefor and the new appointment. Until the
next regular meeting or special meeting of the Village Board, the
successor agent shall have the authority to perform the functions and
be charged with the duties of the original agent. However, said license
shall cease to be in effect upon receipt by the Village Clerk of notice of
disapproval of the successor agent by the Wisconsin Department of
Revenue or other peace officer of the municipality in which the license
was issued. The corporation's license shall not be in force after receipt
of such notice, or after a regular or special meeting of the Village
Board, until the successor agent or another qualified agent is appointed
and approved by the Village.
A. Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article
shall immediately post such license and keep the same posted while in
force in a conspicuous place in the room or place where said beverages
are drawn or removed for service or sale.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to post such license, or to be
permitted to post it, upon premises other than those mentioned in the
application or knowingly to deface or destroy such license.
A. Consent to entry. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents
to the entry of police or other duly authorized representatives of the
Village at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search,
and consents to the removal from said premises of all things and
articles there had in violation of Village ordinances or state laws, and
§ 305-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-14
1:235
consents to the introduction of such things and articles in evidence in
any prosecution that may be brought for such offenses.
B. Employment of minors. Except as provided in §§ 125.32(2) and
125.68(2), Wis. Stats., no retail "Class B" or Class "B" licensee shall
employ any underage person, as defined in the Wisconsin Statutes, but
this shall not apply to hotels and restaurants. Family members may
work on the licensed premises but are not permitted to sell or dispense
alcohol beverages. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
C. Disorderly conduct prohibited. Each licensed premises shall, at all
times, be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or
indecent conduct shall be allowed, at any time, on any licensed
premises.
D. Licensed operator on premises. There shall be upon premises operated
under a "Class B," Class "B" or "Class C" license, at all times, the
licensee, members of the licensee's immediately family who have
attained the legal drinking age and/or some person who shall have an
operator's license and who shall be responsible for the acts of all
persons serving as waiters, or in any other manner, any fermented malt
beverages to customers. No person other than the licensee shall serve
fermented malt beverages in any place operated under a "Class B,"
Class "B" or "Class C" license unless he possesses an operator's license
or there is a person with an operator's license upon said premises at the
time of such service.
E. Health and sanitation regulations. The rules and regulations of the
State Department of Health Services governing sanitation in
restaurants shall apply to all "Class B" liquor or "Class C" licenses
issued under this article. No "Class B" or "Class C" license shall be
issued unless the premises to be licensed conforms to such rules and
regulations. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
F. Restrictions near schools and churches. No retail Class "A," Class "B,"
"Class A" or "Class B" license shall be issued for premises, the main
entrance of which is less than 300 feet from the main entrance of any
established public school, parochial school, hospital or church. Such
distance shall be measured by the shortest route along the highway
from the closest point of the main entrance of such school, church or
hospital to the main entrance to such premises. This subsection shall
not apply to premises licensed as such on June 30, 1947, nor shall it
apply to any premises licensed as such prior to the occupation of real
property within 300 feet thereof by any school building, hospital
building or church building.
G. Clubs. No club shall sell or give away any intoxicating liquors except to
bona fide members and guests invited by members.
H. Gambling prohibited. Except as authorized by state law, no gambling or
game of chance of any sort shall be permitted, in any form, upon any
§ 305-14 EAST TROY CODE § 305-14
1:236
§ 305-15. Closing hours. [Amended 12-19-2011145]
Closing hours shall be established in conformance with §§ 125.32(3) and
125.68(4), Wis. Stats., and further restricted as follows:
premises licensed under this article or the laws of the State of
Wisconsin.
I. Credit prohibited. No retail Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B" or
"Class C" liquor, wine or fermented malt beverage licensee shall sell or
offer for sale any alcohol beverages to any person or person by
extending credit, except hotel credit extended to a resident guest or a
club to a bona fide member. It shall be unlawful for such licensee or
permittee to sell alcohol beverages to any person on a passbook or store
order or to receive from any person any goods, wares, merchandise or
other articles in exchange for alcohol beverages.
J. Licensee or permittee responsible for acts of help. A violation of this
article by a duly authorized agent or employee of a licensee or
permittee under this article shall constitute a violation by the licensee
or permittee. Whenever any licensee or permittee under this article
shall violate any portion of this article, proceedings for the suspension
or revocation of the license or permit of the holder thereof may be
instituted in the manner prescribed in this article.144
K. Outdoor service areas. The holders of retail Class "B" and/or "Class B"
licenses may, upon application to the Village Board, be entitled to serve
or sell such beverages on outdoor decks or areas, provided that said
areas are authorized by the Wisconsin Statutes and are included in the
premises description in the license application; said decks or areas
have been inspected and approved for safety, noise control and
compliance with this subsection by the Village Clerk or his/her
designee; and the holder has agreed to comply with such other
restrictions which the Village Board may deem necessary to protect the
health, welfare and safety of the Village. [Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
A. Class "B," "Class B" and "Class C" licenses.
(1) No premises for which a retail "Class B" liquor, Class "B" fermented
malt beverage, or "Class C" wine license has been issued shall be
permitted to remain open for the sale of liquor or fermented malt
beverages, or for any other purpose, between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and 2:30 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. There shall be no closing hours on
January 1.
144. Editor's Note: Original § 7-2-14(k), Improper exhibitions, and (l), Obstruction within
premises prohibited, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02.
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 305-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-15
1:237
§ 305-16. Temporary fermented malt beverage or wine licenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization on a temporary basis to
sell or offer to sell any alcohol beverage upon any Village-owned property
or privately owned property within the Village of East Troy, except through
the issuance of a temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage license or
temporary "Class B" wine license issued by the Village Board, in accordance
with Wisconsin Statutes, and as set forth in this section. A temporary Class
"B" fermented malt beverage license or temporary "Class B" wine license
authorizing the sale and consumption of beer and/or wine on Village-owned
property or privately owned property may be authorized by the Village
Board, provided that the following requirements are met:
(2) Hotels and restaurants, the principal business of which is the
furnishing of food or lodging to patrons, bowling alleys, indoor
horseshoe-pitching facilities, curling clubs, golf courses and golf
clubhouses may remain open for the conduct of their regular
business but shall not sell liquor or malt beverages during the
closing hours specified in Subsection A(1) above.
B. Carry-out hours. Between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., no person may sell,
remove, carry out or permit to be removed or carried out from any
premises having a "Class A" or Class "A" license fermented malt
beverages or intoxicating liquor in original unopened packages,
containers or bottles or for consumption away from the premises.
A. Compliance with eligibility standards. The organization shall meet the
eligibility requirements of a bona fide club, association, lodge or society
as set forth in § 125.26(6), Wis. Stats., and shall fully comply with the
requirements of this section and Article II of this chapter. Members of
an organization which is issued a temporary license and who are issued
operators' licenses for the event may be required to attend a pre-event
informational meeting to learn what rules and regulations apply and
what the responsibilities of the bartenders and organization will be.
B. Posting of signs. All organizations issued a temporary license shall post
in a conspicuous location, at the main point of sale and at all remote
points of sale, a sufficient number of signs stating that no fermented
malt beverage shall be served to any underage person without proper
identification.
C. Fencing.
(1) Organizations shall install a double fence around the main point of
sale to control ingress and egress and continually station a licensed
operator, security guard or other competent person at the entrance
for the purpose of checking age identifications. Where possible,
there shall be only one point of ingress and egress. The double
fence shall be a minimum of four feet high and a minimum of six
feet between fences.
§ 305-15 EAST TROY CODE § 305-16
1:238
§ 305-17. Suspension or revocation of license; abandonment of
business.
(2) For indoor events, the structure used shall have suitable exits and
open spaces to accommodate anticipated attendance. It should
contain adequate sanitary facilities to accommodate the size of the
group.146
D. Licensed operator requirement; underage persons.
(1) A licensed operator or law enforcement officer shall be stationed at
all points of sales at all times. The carry out of intoxicating
beverages is prohibited.
(2) No person other than the licensee or agent may serve fermented
malt beverages in any place operated under a Class "B" picnic
license or permit, unless he has an operator's license or is at least
18 years of age and is under the immediate supervision of the
licensee or agent or a person holding an operator's license who is
on the premises at the time of the service. No underage person or
persons shall be permitted to loiter in the area of any sales of
intoxicating beverages.
E. Waiver. The Village Board may waive or modify the requirements of this
section due to the physical characteristics of the licensed site.
F. Insurance. The applicant for a temporary fermented malt beverage or
wine license may be required to indemnify, defend and hold the Village
and its employees and agents harmless against all claims, liability, loss,
damage or expense incurred by the Village on account of any injury to
or death of any person or any damage to property caused by or
resulting from the activities for which the permit is granted. As
evidence of the applicant's ability to perform the conditions of the
license, the applicant may be required to furnish a certificate of
comprehensive general liability insurance to the Village of East Troy.
The applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond prior to
being granted the license.147
G. Permit required for special event or activity. Any licenses obtained
under this section in conjunction with a special community event must
also comply with the permit requirements in Chapter 416, Special
Community Events.148
A. Procedure. Whenever the holder of any license under this article
violates any portion of this article or Article II of this chapter,
146. Editor's Note: Original § 7-2-16(d), Underage persons prohibited, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 305-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-17
1:239
§ 305-18. Non-alcohol events for underage persons on licensed
premises.
The presence of underage persons on a licensed premises as provided under
§ 125.07(3)(a)10, Wis. Stats., shall be subject to the following:
proceedings for the revocation of such license may be instituted in the
manner and under the procedure established by this section.
B. Abandonment of business. Any licensee holding a license to sell alcohol
beverages who abandons such business shall forfeit any right or
preference he/she may have to the holding of or renewal of such
license. Abandonment shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of any
alcohol beverage license. The closing of the licensed premises for at
least six months shall be prima facie evidence of the abandonment,
unless extended by the Village Board. All persons issued a license to sell
alcohol beverages in the Village for which a quota exists limiting the
number of such licenses that may be issued by the Village shall cause
such business described in such license to be operated on the premises
described in such license for at least 150 days during the term of such
license, unless such license is issued for a term of less than 180 days, in
which event this subsection shall not apply.
C. License revocation or suspension. License revocation or suspension
procedures shall be as prescribed by Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
A. The licensee or agent of a corporate licensee shall notify the Police
Department at least 48 hours in advance of the date of any event at
which underage persons will be present on the licensed premises. Each
such non-alcohol event notice shall specify the date(s) on which the
event is to occur and the time(s) of commencement. All notices shall be
filed with the Police Department during normal working hours (8:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday) and shall be given on forms
prescribed by the Village. After a non-alcohol event notice has been
given, the licensee may cancel an event(s) only by giving like notice to
the Police Department in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection. Regardless of the date given, all notices shall expire and be
deemed canceled no later than the date of expiration or revocation of
the applicable retail "Class B" or Class "B" license.
B. During the period of any non-alcohol event, a notice card prescribed by
the Police Department shall be posted at all public entrances to the
licensed premises, notifying the general public that no alcohol
beverages may be consumed, sold or given away on or carried into the
licensed premises during the event. Such notice cards shall be made
available by the Village to a requesting licensee.
C. Once a non-alcohol event has commenced, no alcohol beverages may be
consumed, sold or given away on or carried into the licensed premises
until the next day following the closing hours of the licensed premises.
§ 305-17 EAST TROY CODE § 305-18
1:240
§ 305-19. Nude dancing in licensed establishments.
D. During the period of any non-alcohol event, all alcohol beverages shall
be stored in a locked portion of the licensed premises, in a secure place
out of the sight and physical reach of any patron present, and shall be
under the direct and immediate control and supervision of the licensee
or a licensed bartender in the employ of the licensee. All beer taps and
automatic dispensers of alcohol beverages (speed guns) shall be either
disconnected, disabled or made inoperable.
A. Authority.
(1) The Village Board of the Village of East Troy has explicit authority
under § 125.10(1), Wis. Stats., to adopt regulations governing the
sale of alcohol beverages which are in addition to those set forth in
Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
(2) The Village Board has the authority under its general police powers
set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes to act for the good order of the
municipality and for the health, safety and welfare of the public and
may carry out its powers by regulation and suppression.
(3) The Village Board recognizes it lacks authority to regulate
obscenity in light of § 66.0107(3), Wis. Stats., and does not intend
by adopting this section to regulate obscenity, since nudity in and of
itself is not obscene. It declares its intent to enact an ordinance
addressing the secondary effects of live, totally nude, nonobscene,
erotic dancing in bars and taverns.
(4) Bars and taverns featuring live, totally nude, nonobscene, erotic
dancing have in other communities tended to further the increase
of criminal and other offensive activity, to disrupt the peace and
order of the communities, to depreciate the value of real property,
to harm the economic welfare of the communities, and to
negatively affect the quality of life of the communities, and such
secondary effects are detrimental to the public health, safety and
general welfare of citizens.
(5) The Village Board recognizes the U.S. Supreme Court has held that
nude dancing is expressive conduct within the outer perimeters of
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and
therefore entitled to some limited protection under the First
Amendment, and the governing body further recognizes that
freedom of speech is among our most precious and highly
protected rights and wishes to act consistently with full protection
of those rights.
(6) However, the Village Board is aware, based on the experiences of
other communities, that bars and taverns in which live, totally
nude, nonobscene, erotic dancing occurs may and do generate
secondary effects which the governing body believes are
§ 305-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-19
1:241
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the Village of East Troy.
(7) Among these secondary effects are:
(a) The potential increase in prostitution and other sex-related
offenses, as well as other crimes and offenses;
(b) The potential depreciation of property values in neighborhoods
where bars and taverns featuring nude dancing exist;
(c) Health risks associated with the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases; and
(d) The potential for infiltration by organized crime for the
purpose of unlawful conduct.
(8) The Village Board desires to minimize, prevent and control these
adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village of East Troy; protect the
citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve
the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods;
and deter the spread of urban blight.
(9) The Village Board has determined that enactment of an ordinance
prohibiting live, totally nude, nonobscene, erotic dancing in bars
and taverns licensed to serve alcohol beverages promotes the goal
of minimizing, preventing and controlling the negative secondary
effects associated with such activity.
B. Nude dancing in licensed establishments prohibited. It is unlawful for
any person to perform or engage in or for any licensee or manager or
agent of the licensee to permit any person, employee, entertainer or
patron to perform or engage in any live act, demonstration, dance or
exhibition on the premises of a licensed establishment which:
(1) Shows his/her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or
cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering;
(2) Shows any portion of the female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or
(3) Shows the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
C. Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to the following
licensed establishments: theaters, performing arts centers, civic
centers and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music and
dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular
basis and in which the predominant business or attraction is not the
offering to customers of entertainment which is intended to provide
sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and where
the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on, or the
§ 305-19 EAST TROY CODE § 305-19
1:242
§ 305-20. Operator's license.
advertising or promotion of, employees engaging in nude, erotic
dancing.
D. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment licensed by the
Village Board of the Village of East Troy to sell alcohol beverages
pursuant to Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
LICENSEE — The holder of a retail "Class A," "Class B," Class "B," Class
"A" or "Class C" license granted by the Village Board of the Village of
East Troy pursuant to Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
E. Penalties. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which violates
any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture
pursuant to § 1-4 of this Code. A separate offense and violation shall be
deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or
continues. In addition, violation of this section constitutes sufficient
grounds for suspending, revoking or nonrenewing an alcohol beverage
license under § 125.12, Wis. Stats.
A. Application for license.149
(1) The Village Board may issue an operator's license, which license
shall be granted only upon application, in writing, on forms to be
obtained from the Village Clerk only to persons 18 years of age or
older. An operator's license shall be operative only within the limits
of the Village. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(2) All applications are subject to an investigation by the Police
Department and/or other appropriate authority to determine
whether the applicant and/or premises to be licensed complies with
all regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. The
investigating authority shall conduct an investigation of the
applicant, including but not limited to requesting information from
the state, surrounding municipalities and/or any community where
the applicant has previously resided concerning the applicant's
arrest and conviction record. Based upon such investigation, the
investigating authority shall recommend, in writing, to the Village
Board approval or denial of the application. If the investigating
authority recommends denial, the investigating authority shall
provide, in writing, the reasons for such recommendation.
B. Duration. Licenses issued under the provisions of this section shall be
valid for a period of two years and shall expire on the 30th day of June.
C. Operator's license fee; provisional or temporary licenses.
149. Editor's Note: Original § 7-2-30, Operator's license required, which immediately preceded
this subsection, was repealed 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02.
§ 305-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-20
1:243
(1) Fee. The fee for an operator's license shall be set by the Village
Board for a two-year term or part thereof. The fees for a provisional
operator's license and a temporary operator's license shall be set
by the Village Board. There shall be an additional nonrefundable
investigative fee set by the Village Board added to the fee for all
three licenses to cover the State of Wisconsin charges. Any person
applying for an operator's license within a one-year period after
having been denied an operator's license shall forfeit all fees if the
operator's license is denied again. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-01; 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(2) Provisional license. The Village Clerk may issue a provisional
operator's license in accordance with § 125.17(5), Wis. Stats. The
provisional operator's license shall expire 60 days after its issuance
or when an operator's license is issued to the holder, whichever is
sooner. The Chief of Police shall submit to the Village Clerk a report
regarding the applicant's conviction history, if any. The applicant
for such provisional license must present evidence to
the Clerk establishing that the applicant is enrolled in a
responsible beverage server training course established pursuant
to § 125.17(6), Wis. Stats. The Village Clerk may, upon receiving an
application for a provisional license, issue such a license without
requiring the successful completion of the approved training
course as described herein. However, such provisional license shall
be used only for the purpose of allowing such applicant the
privilege of being licensed as a beverage operator pending his/her
successful completion of the approved training course and the
Village approval process to allow for the applicant to obtain a
regular operator's license. A provisional license may not be issued
to any person who has been denied an operator's license by the
Village Board, who has had his/her operator's license revoked or
suspended within the preceding 12 months, or who previously held
a provisional operator's license and who failed to complete the
responsible beverage server training course. The
Village Clerk shall provide an appropriate application form to be
completed in full by the applicant. The Village Clerk may revoke
the provisional license issued if he/she discovers that the holder of
the license made a false statement on the application. A provisional
license shall not be renewed. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(3) Temporary license.
(a) The Village Clerk may issue a temporary operator's license,
provided that: [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
[1] This license may be issued only to operators employed by,
or donating their services to, nonprofit corporations.
[2] No person may hold more than one license of this kind per
year.
§ 305-20 EAST TROY CODE § 305-20
1:244
(b) The license is valid for any period from one day to 14 days, and
the period for which it is valid shall be stated on the license.
D. Issuance or denial of operator's license.
(1) After the Village Board approves the granting of an operator's
license, the Village Clerk shall issue the license. Such licenses shall
be issued and numbered in the order they are granted and shall
give the applicant's name, address and the date of the expiration of
such license. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(2) Denial and reconsideration. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
(a) If the application is denied by the Village Board, the
Village Clerk shall, in writing, inform the applicant of the
denial, the reasons therefor, and of the opportunity to request
a reconsideration of the application by the Village Board in a
closed session. Such notice must be sent by registered mail to,
or served upon, the applicant at least 10 days prior to the
Board's reconsideration of the matter. At such reconsideration
hearing, the applicant may present evidence and testimony as
to why the license should be granted.
(b) If, upon reconsideration, the Board again denies the
application, the Village Clerk shall notify the applicant, in
writing, of the reasons therefor. An applicant who is denied any
license upon reconsideration of the matter may apply to the
Circuit Court, pursuant to § 125.12(2)(d), Wis. Stats., for
review.
(3) Considerations for granting license.
(a) Consideration for the granting or denial of a license will be
based on:
[1] Arrest and conviction record of the applicant, subject to
the limitations imposed by §§ 111.321, 111.322 and
111.335, Wis. Stats.;
[2] The financial responsibility of the applicant;
[3] The appropriateness of the location and the premises
where the licensed business is to be conducted; and
[4] Generally, the applicant's fitness for the trust to be
reposed.
(b) If a licensee is convicted of an offense substantially related to
the licensed activity, the Village Board may act to revoke or
suspend the license.
§ 305-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-20
1:245
(4) An application may be denied based upon the applicant's arrest and
conviction record if the applicant has been convicted of a felony
(unless duly pardoned) or if the applicant has habitually been a law
offender. For purposes of this licensing procedure, "habitually been
a law offender" is generally considered to be an arrest or conviction
of at least two offenses which are substantially related to the
licensed activity within the five years immediately preceding the
license application. Because a license is a privilege, the issuance of
which is a right granted solely to the Village Board, the Village
Board reserves the right to consider the severity and facts and
circumstances of the offense when making the determination to
grant, deny or not renew a license. Further, the Village Board, at its
discretion, may, based upon an arrest or conviction record of two or
more offenses which are substantially related to the licensed
activity within the five years immediately preceding, act to suspend
such license for a period of one year or more.
E. Training course.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection F(2) below, the Village Board may
not issue an operator's license unless the applicant has successfully
completed the training course as described in § 125.17(6), Wis.
Stats., unless the applicant fulfills one of the following
requirements:150
(a) The person is renewing an operator's license.
(b) Within the past two years, the person held a Class "A," Class
"B," "Class A," "Class B" or "Class C" license or permit, or a
manager's or operator's license.
(c) Within the past two years, the person has completed such a
training course.
(2) The Village Board may issue a provisional operator's license to a
person who is enrolled in a training course under Subsection E(1)
above and shall revoke that license if the applicant fails
successfully to complete the course in which he/she enrolls.
(3) The Village Board may not require that applicants for an operator's
license undergo training in addition to that under Subsection E(1)
but may require applicants to purchase, at cost, materials that deal
with relevant local subjects not covered in the course under
Subsection E(1).
F. Display of license. Each license issued under the provisions of this
section shall be posted on the premises whenever the operator
dispenses beverages or be in his possession or the licensee shall carry a
license card.151
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 305-20 EAST TROY CODE § 305-20
1:246
§ 305-21. Violations and penalties.
G. Revocation of operator's license. Violation of any of the terms or
provisions of the state law or of this article relating to operators'
licenses by any person holding such operator's license shall be cause
for revocation of the license.
A. Forfeitures for violations of §§ 125.07(1) to (4) and 125.09(2), Wis.
Stats., adopted by reference in § 305-1 of this article, shall conform to
the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for violations of the
comparable state statute, including any variations or increases for
subsequent offenses.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, except as
otherwise provided in Subsection A herein, or who shall conduct any
activity or make any sale for which a license is required without a
license, shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in § 1-4 of this Code.
C. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing
court to exercise additional authorities granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes.
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 305-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-21
1:247

ARTICLE II
Alcohol Beverages in Public Areas
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as § 11-4-1 of the 2000 Code]
§ 305-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOL BEVERAGE — Includes all ardent, spirituous, distilled or vinous
liquors, liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented or
not, and by whatever name called, as well as all liquors and liquids made
by the alcohol fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley malt
and hops, with or without unmalted grains or decorticated or degerminated
grains or sugar, which contain 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume and
which are fit for use for beverage purposes.
PUBLIC AREA — Any location within the Village which is open to access
to persons not requiring specific permission of the owner to be at such
location, including all parking lots serving commercial establishments.
UNDERAGE PERSON — Any person under the legal drinking age, as
defined by the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 305-23. Prohibited acts.
§ 305-24. Exceptions.
A. Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or give
away, or offer to sell, serve or give away, any alcohol beverage upon any
public street, sidewalk, alley, public parking lot, highway, park,
municipal building, cemetery or drives or other public area within the
Village of East Troy, or on private property without the owner's consent,
except at licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to
consume or have in his/her possession any open container containing
an alcohol beverage upon any public street, public sidewalk, public way,
public alley, park, municipal building, or public parking lot within the
Village, except at licensed premises.
B. Private property held out for public use. It shall be unlawful for any
person to consume any alcohol beverages upon any private property
held open for public use within the Village, unless the property is
specifically named as being part of a licensed premises.
C. Leaving licensed premises with open container.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any licensee, permittee or operator to
permit any patron to leave the licensed premises with an open
container containing any alcohol beverage.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any patron to leave a licensed premises with
an open container containing any alcohol beverage.
§ 305-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-24
1:249
A. The provisions of this article may be waived by the Village Board for
duly authorized events.
B. This article shall not apply to any organization which has been issued a
temporary fermented malt beverage and/or temporary wine license for
a designated area and event, pursuant to Article I of this chapter,
provided that the provisions of this article and Article I of this chapter
are fully complied with. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
C. The provisions of this article regarding open consumption of fermented
malt beverages or intoxicating liquor shall not apply within 200 feet of a
parade route for which the Village of East Troy has granted a parade
permit from one hour prior to the scheduled start of said parade until
one hour after the end of said parade, except that the foregoing
exemption does not extend to any vehicle or unit of the parade, however
propelled, nor to any parade participant for that period of time during
which the vehicle, unit of the parade or person is participating within
the assembly and disembarkment points of the parade.
D. The provisions of § 125.26(6), regarding "beer walks," and § 125.51(10),
regarding "wine walks," of the Wisconsin Statutes, or as may be
hereafter amended, are hereby adopted in full. [Added 3-7-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-03]
E. Upon application by an authorized organization for either a beer walk
or wine walk, the Village Board shall authorize the area to be included
in the walk. [Added 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
§ 305-24 EAST TROY CODE § 305-24
1:250
Chapter 318
JUVENILES
§ 318-1. Curfew.
A. Curfew established. It shall be unlawful for any juvenile under age 18 to
be on foot, bicycle or in any type of vehicle on any public street, avenue,
highway, road, alley, park, school grounds, place of amusement and
entertainment, cemetery, playground, public building or any other
public place in the Village of East Troy between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. the next day, unless accompanied by his/her parent or
legal guardian, or person having lawful custody and control of his/her
person, or unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor. The fact
that said juvenile, unaccompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other
person having legal custody, is found upon any such public place during
the aforementioned hours shall be prima facie evidence that said
juvenile is there unlawfully and that no reasonable excuse exists
therefor.
B. Exceptions.
(1) This section shall not apply to a juvenile:
(a) Who is performing an errand as directed by his/her parent,
legal guardian or person having lawful custody.
(b) Who is on his/her own premises or in the areas immediately
adjacent thereto.
(c) Whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets,
alleys or public places or in any motor vehicle during such
hours.
(d) Who is returning home from a supervised school, church or
civic function, but not later than 60 minutes after the ending of
such function.
(2) These exceptions shall not, however, permit a juvenile to
unnecessarily loiter about the streets, alleys or public places or be
in a parked motor vehicle on the public streets.
C. Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal
guardian or other person having the lawful care, custody and control of
any person under age 18 to allow or permit such person to violate the
provisions of Subsection A or B above. The fact that prior to the present
offense a parent, legal guardian or custodian was informed by any law
enforcement officer of a separate violation of this section occurring
within 30 days of the present offense shall be prima facie evidence that
such parent, legal guardian or custodian allowed or permitted the
present violation. Any parent, legal guardian or custodian herein who
shall have made a missing person notification to the Police Department
§ 305-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-1
1:251
§ 318-2. Possession of controlled substances by juveniles.
It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to possess a controlled substance
contrary to the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 961 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
shall not be considered to have allowed or permitted any juvenile under
age 18 to violate this section.
D. Detaining a juvenile. Pursuant to Chapter 938 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, law enforcement officers are hereby authorized to detain any
juvenile violating the above provisions and other provisions in this
chapter until such time as the parent, legal guardian or person having
legal custody of the juvenile shall be immediately notified, and the
person so notified shall, as soon as reasonably possible thereafter,
report to the Police Department for the purpose of taking custody of the
juvenile and shall sign a release for him/her, or such juvenile may be
taken directly from the scene of his/her apprehension to his/her home.
If such juvenile's parents or relative living nearby cannot be contacted
to take custody of such juvenile, and it is determined by the
apprehending officer that the juvenile's physical or mental condition is
such as would require immediate attention, the police officer may make
such necessary arrangements as may be necessary under the
circumstances for the juvenile's welfare.
E. Warning and penalty.152
(1) Warning. The first time a juvenile is taken into custody by a law
enforcement officer as provided in Subsection D above, such
parent, legal guardian or person having such legal custody shall be
advised as to the provisions of this section and further advised that
any violation of this section occurring thereafter by this juvenile or
any other juvenile under his/her care or custody shall result in a
penalty being imposed as hereinafter provided.
(2) Penalty. Any parent, legal guardian or person having legal custody
of a juvenile described in Subsection A above who has been warned
in the manner provided in Subsection E(1) herein and who
thereafter violates this section shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in § 1-4 of this Code. After a second violation within a sixmonth
period, if the defendant, in a prosecution under this section,
proves that he/she is unable to comply with this section because of
the disobedience of the juvenile, the action shall be dismissed and
the juvenile shall be referred to the court assigned to exercise
jurisdiction under Chapter 938 of the Wisconsin Statutes. Any
juvenile under 16 years of age who shall violate this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50 nor more than
$100, together with the costs of prosecution.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 318-1 EAST TROY CODE § 318-3
1:252
§ 318-3. Petty theft by juveniles.
It shall be unlawful for any juvenile, with intent, to steal or take property
from the person or presence of the owner, without the owner's consent and
with the intent to deprive the owner of the use thereof.
§ 318-4. Receiving stolen goods.
It shall be unlawful for a juvenile to intentionally receive or conceal property
he/she knows to be stolen.
§ 318-5. Village jurisdiction over juveniles.
§ 318-6. Truancy.
A. Adoption of state statutes. Sections 938.02 and 938.17(2), Wis. Stats.,
are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if
fully set forth herein.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADULT — A person who is 18 years of age or older, except that for
purposes of prosecuting a person who is alleged to have violated any
civil law or municipal ordinance, "adult" means a person who has
attained 17 years of age.
JUVENILE — A person who is less than 18 years of age, except that for
purposes of prosecuting a person who is alleged to have violated a civil
law or municipal ordinance, "juvenile" does not include a person who
has attained 17 years of age.
C. Provisions of Code applicable to juveniles. Subject to the provisions and
limitations of § 938.17(2), Wis. Stats., complaints alleging a violation of
any provision of this Code of Ordinances against juveniles may be
brought on behalf of the Village of East Troy and may be prosecuted
utilizing the same procedures in such cases as are applicable to adults
charged with the same offense.
D. No incarceration as penalty. The court shall not impose incarceration as
a penalty for any person convicted of an offense prosecuted under this
section.
E. Additional prohibited acts. In addition to any other provision of the
Village of East Troy Code of Ordinances, no juvenile shall own, possess,
ingest, buy, sell, trade, use as a beverage, give away or otherwise
control any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in violation
of Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
F. Penalty for violations of Subsection E. Any juvenile who shall violate the
provisions of Subsection E shall be subject to the same penalties as are
provided in § 1-4 of the Code of the Village of East Troy, exclusive of the
provisions therein relative to commitment in the county jail.153
§ 318-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-6
1:253
A. Authority. The authority for adoption of this section is § 118.163, Wis.
Stats.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
be applicable:
ACCEPTABLE EXCUSE — The meaning as defined in §§ 118.15 and
118.16(4), Wis. Stats.
ACT OF COMMISSION OR OMISSION — Anything that contributes
to the truancy of a juvenile, whether or not the juvenile is adjudged
to be in need of protection or services, if the natural and probable
consequences of that act would be to cause the child to be truant.
DROPOUT — A child who ceased to attend school, does not attend
a public or private school, technical college or home-based private
educational program on a full-time basis, has not graduated from high
school, is not enrolled in a program leading to high school graduation
or a high school equivalency diploma, and does not have an acceptable
excuse for being absent from school.
HABITUAL TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school without an
acceptable excuse for part or all of five or more days in which school is
held during a school semester.
OPERATING PRIVILEGE — Has the meaning given in § 340.01(40), Wis.
Stats.
TRUANCY — Any absence of part or all of one or more days from school
during which the school attendance officer, principal or teacher has
not been notified of the legal cause of such absence by the parent or
guardian of the absent pupil. Intermittent attendance carried on for the
purpose of defeating the intent of § 118.15, Wis. Stats., shall also be
considered truancy.
TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable
excuse under §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis. Stats., for part or all of any
day on which school is held during a school semester.
C. Prohibition of truancy. A person under 18 years of age is prohibited
from being truant.
D. Prohibition against habitual truant. Any person attending school in the
Village, between the ages of six and 18 years, subject to the exceptions
found under § 118.15, Wis. Stats., is prohibited from becoming a
habitual truant as the term is defined in this section. Any police officer
in this Village is authorized to issue a citation to any such person who is
determined to be a habitual truant under the terms of this section.
153. Editor's Note: Original § 11-5-6, Possession, manufacture and delivery of drug
paraphernalia by a minor prohibited, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See now
§ 366-14, Drug paraphernalia.
§ 318-6 EAST TROY CODE § 318-6
1:254
E. Prohibition of dropout. A person under 18 years of age is prohibited
from being a dropout.
F. Preconditions to issuance of citation. Prior to the issuance of any
citation, the district school attendance officer shall provide evidence to
the Police Department that appropriate school personnel in the school
in which the juvenile is enrolled have, within the school year during
which the truancy occurred:
(1) Met with or attempted to meet with the juvenile's parent or legal
guardian to discuss the juvenile's truancy.
(2) Provided an opportunity for educational counseling to the juvenile
and considered curriculum modifications.
(3) Evaluated the juvenile to determine whether learning problems are
the cause of the truancy and, if so, taken steps to overcome the
learning problems.
(4) Conducted an evaluation to determine whether social problems are
the cause of the juvenile's truancy and, if so, taken appropriate
action or made appropriate referrals.
G. Form of citation. Any citation issued shall be returnable in the
Municipal Court in the same manner as all other ordinance citations are
returnable. The citation is to state on its face that this is a "must
appear" citation, and no forfeiture amount is to be written on the face of
the citation.
H. Disposition for truant. Upon finding a child to be truant, the Court shall
impose one or more of the following dispositions:
(1) Attendance order. An order for the person to attend school.
(2) Forfeiture. A forfeiture of not more than $50 plus costs for a first
violation, or a forfeiture of not more than $100 plus costs for any
second or subsequent violation committed within 12 months of a
previous violation, subject to § 938.37, Wis. Stats., and subject to a
maximum cumulative forfeiture of not more than $500 plus costs
for all violations committed during a school semester. All or part of
the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the child, the
parents or legal guardians of the child, or both.
I. Disposition for habitual truant. Upon finding the juvenile is habitually
truant, the following dispositions are available to the Court:
(1) Suspension of operating privileges. Suspend the juvenile's
operating privileges as defined in § 340.01(40), Wis. Stats., for not
less than 30 days nor more than 365 days. The Judge shall
immediately take possession of the suspended license and forward
it to the Department of Transportation of the State of Wisconsin,
together with a notice setting forth the reason for and duration of
the suspension.
§ 318-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-6
1:255
(2) Counseling, service or work program. Order the juvenile to
participate in counseling, community service or a supervised work
program under § 938.34(5g), Wis. Stats. The costs of such
counseling, supervised work program or other community service
may be assessed against the child, the parents or legal guardians of
the child, or both.
(3) In house restraint. Order the juvenile to remain at home except for
the hours in which the juvenile is attending religious worship or a
school program, including travel time required to get to and from
the school program or place of worship. The order may permit a
juvenile to leave home if the juvenile is accompanied by a parent or
legal guardian.
(4) Education programs. Order the juvenile to attend an educational
program as set forth in § 938.34(7d), Wis. Stats.
(5) Revocation of work permits. Order the Wisconsin Department of
Workforce Development to revoke a work permit to the juvenile.154
(6) Teen court program. Order the juvenile to be placed in a teen court
program if all of the following conditions apply:
(a) The chief judge of the judicial administrative district has
approved a teen court program established in the juvenile's
county of residence, and the Judge determines that
participation in the court program will likely benefit the
juvenile and the community.
(b) The juvenile admits or pleads no contest to the allegations that
the juvenile was truant, in open court, with the juvenile's
parent, guardian or legal custodian present.
(c) The juvenile has not successfully completed participation in a
teen court program during the two years before the date of the
alleged violation.
(7) Parental counseling. Order the parent, guardian or legal custodian
of a habitually truant juvenile to participate in counseling at his/her
own expense.
(8) Attendance order. Order the child to attend school.
(9) Forfeiture. A forfeiture of not more than $500 plus costs, subject to
§ 938.37, Wis. Stats. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be
assessed against the child, the parents or legal guardians of the
child, or both.
(10) Other conditions. Any other reasonable conditions consistent with
this subsection, including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 318-6 EAST TROY CODE § 318-6
1:256
remaining on specified premises, and restrictions on associating
with other children or adults.
(11) Supervision placements. An order placing the child under formal or
informal supervision as described in § 938.34(2), Wis. Stats., for up
to one year.
J. Required school attendance.
(1) Violations. Any person having under his/her control a juvenile who
is between the ages of six and 18, subject to the exceptions found in
§ 118.15, Wis. Stats., shall cause the juvenile to attend school
regularly during the full period and hours that the public or private
school in which the juvenile shall be enrolled is in session until the
end of the school term, quarter or semester of the school year in
which the juvenile becomes 18 years of age.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) A person will not be found in violation of this subsection if that
person can prove that he/she is unable to comply with the
provisions of this section because of the disobedience of the
juvenile. The juvenile shall be referred to the court assigned to
exercise jurisdiction under Chapter 48 or 938 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(b) A person will not be found in violation of this subsection if he/
she has a juvenile under his/her control and the child has been
sanctioned under § 49.26(1)(h), Wis. Stats.
(3) Proof required for exacting a penalty. Before a person may be found
guilty of violating this subsection, the school attendance officer
must present evidence to the court that the activities under
§ 118.16(5), Wis. Stats., have been completed by the school system.
If that evidence has been presented to the court and if the court
finds a person guilty of violating this subsection, a forfeiture may
be assessed as hereinafter provided.
K. Contributing to truancy.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection K(2) below, any person 18 years
of age or older who, by an act or omission, knowingly encourages
or contributes to the truancy, as defined in Subsection K(4), of a
juvenile shall be subject to a forfeiture pursuant to § 1-4.
(2) Subsection K(1) above does not apply to a person who has under
his/her control a juvenile who has been sanctioned under
§ 49.26(1)(h), Wis. Stats.
(3) An act or omission contributes to the truancy of a child, whether or
not the juvenile is adjudged to be in need of protection or services,
if the natural and probable consequences of that act or omission
would be to cause the juvenile to be truant.
§ 318-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-6
1:257
§ 318-7. Unlawful sheltering of minors.
(4) "Truancy" means any absence of part or all of one or more days
from school during which the school attendance officer, principal or
teacher has not been notified of the legal cause of such absence by
the parent or guardian of the absent pupil, and also means
intermittent attendance carried on for the purpose of defeating the
intent of § 118.15, Wis. Stats.
L. Parent or guardian liability for truancy.
(1) Unless the juvenile is excepted or excused under § 118.15, Wis.
Stats., or has graduated from high school, any person having under
control a juvenile who is between the ages of six and 18 years shall
cause the juvenile to attend school regularly during the full period
of hours, religious holidays excepted, that the public or private
school in which the juvenile should be enrolled is in session until
the end of the school term, quarter or semester of the school year
in which the juvenile becomes 18 years of age.
(2) Penalty; exception.
(a) A person found to have violated Subsection L(1) above, after
evidence is provided by a school official that the activities
under § 118.16(5), Wis. Stats., have been completed, shall be
subject to a forfeiture pursuant to § 1-4.
(b) Subsection L(2)(a) above does not apply to a person who has
under his/her control a juvenile who has been sanctioned
under § 49.26(1)(h), Wis. Stats., nor does it apply if the person
proves that he/she is unable to comply with Subsection L(1)
because of the disobedience of the juvenile.
A. No person shall intentionally shelter or conceal a juvenile under the age
of 18 who:
(1) Is a runaway child, meaning a juvenile who has run away from his/
her parent, guardian or legal or physical custodian; or
(2) Is a child who may be taken into custody pursuant to § 938.19, Wis.
Stats.
B. Subsection A applies when the following conditions are present:
(1) The person knows or should have known that the child is a child
described in either Subsection A(1) or (2); and
(2) The child has been reported to a law enforcement agency as a
missing person or as a child described in Subsection A(1) or (2).
C. Subsection A does not apply to any of the following:
§ 318-6 EAST TROY CODE § 318-7
1:258
§ 318-8. Sale, purchase or possession of tobacco products.
§ 318-9. Criminal gang activity.
(1) A person operating a runaway home in compliance with § 48.227,
Wis. Stats.;
(2) A person who shelters or conceals a child at the request or with the
consent of the child's parent, guardian or legal or physical
custodian, except if the sheltering or concealment violates
§ 948.31, Wis. Stats.; or
(3) A person who immediately notifies a law enforcement agency,
county department of public welfare or social services, or the
intake worker of the court exercising jurisdiction under Chapter 48
of the Wisconsin Statutes that he/she is sheltering or concealing
such child and provides the person or agency notified with all
information requested.
A. Definition of tobacco products. For the purpose of this section, "tobacco
products" mean any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but
not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco,
dipping tobacco, nicotine containing or dispensing products, such as ecigarettes
or vapor cigarettes. [Amended 7-20-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-04]
B. Purchase by minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of 18 years to purchase tobacco products or to
misrepresent his or her identity or age or to use any false or altered
identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products.
C. Possession by minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of 18 years to possess any tobacco products, provided
that the possession by a person under the age of 18 years under the
direct supervision of the parent or legal guardian of such person in the
privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited.
D. Sale to minor prohibited. No person shall sell, purchase for or distribute
samples of or furnish any tobacco product in any form to any minor
under 18 years of age within the limits of the Village. [Amended
7-20-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-04]
E. Statutes adopted. The provisions of §§ 254.92, 134.66 and 778.25(1)(a),
Wis. Stats., are adopted by reference and incorporated herein.
A. Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by
§ 66.0107 and Chapter 948 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms are
defined:
CRIMINAL GANG — An ongoing organization, association or group of
three or more persons, whether formal or informal, that has as one
§ 318-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-9
1:259
§ 318-10. Parental responsibility for misconduct of minors.
of its primary activities the commission of one or more criminal or
unlawful acts, or acts that would be criminal or unlawful if the actor
were an adult, specified in § 939.22(21)(a) to (s), Wis. Stats., or in
any of the Municipal Code sections referred to in the definition of
"pattern of criminal gang activity" below, that has a common name or
common identifying sign or symbol, and whose members individually or
collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal activity.
PATTERN OF CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY — Has the same meaning
as the definition in § 939.22(21), Wis. Stats., the list of offenses in this
chapter and the following chapters of this Code: Chapter 305, Article
II, Alcohol Beverages in Public Areas, Chapter 354, Nuisances, and
Chapter 366, Peace and Good Order.
UNLAWFUL ACT — Includes a violation of any of the Municipal Code
sections referred to in the definition of "pattern of criminal gang
activity" above or any criminal act or act that would be criminal if the
actor were an adult.
C. Unlawful activity.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to engage in criminal gang activity.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit a person
who has not attained the age of 18 years to commit or attempt to
commit any violation of the provisions of this section or any one or
more of those sections of the Municipal Code referred to in the
definition of "pattern of criminal gang activity" in Subsection B
above.
(3) It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit a person
who has not attained the age of 18 years to participate in criminal
gang activity.
(4) It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit a person
who has not attained the age of 18 years to join a criminal gang.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to reduce incidence of
misconduct by juveniles by requiring proper supervision on the part of
custodial parents.
B. Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this section,
unless otherwise defined:
CHILD — A person under the age of 17 years.
CUSTODIAL PARENT — A parent of a child who has custody of said
child.
CUSTODY — Either physical custody of a child under a court order
under § 767.225 or 767.41, Wis. Stats., custody of a child under a
stipulation pursuant to § 767.34, Wis. Stats., or actual physical custody
§ 318-9 EAST TROY CODE § 318-10
1:260
§ 318-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
of the child. "Custody" does not include legal custody as defined under
§ 48.02(12), Wis. Stats., by an agency or person other than a child's
birth or adoptive parent. In determining which parent has custody of a
child for purposes of this section, the court shall consider which parent
had responsibility for caring for and supervising the child at the time
that the child's ordinance violations occurred.
STATUS OFFENSE — An offense for which only an individual under the
age of 18 may be charged.
C. Prohibited conduct. Every custodial parent has a duty to properly
supervise his/her child. Any custodial parent whose child is convicted of
a Village of East Troy Code of Ordinances violation, excluding violations
of the traffic code or status offenses, twice in a six-month period or
three or more times within a twelve-month period is guilty of failing to
properly supervise said child. The six- and twelve-month periods shall
be measured from the date of conviction.
D. Parent effectiveness training. The first time a person is convicted of an
offense described in Subsection C, the person shall not be required to
pay a fine exceeding $100 if the person successfully participates in, and
completes, a court-approved parent effectiveness program to the
satisfaction of the court. The parents will be responsible for the cost of
this program.
E. Penalty. The offense described shall be subject to those penalties as
prescribed in § 1-4 of the Village of East Troy Code of Ordinances.
A. Citation process. For violations of §§ 318-2 through 318-9, juveniles
may be cited by the citation process on a form approved by the Village
Attorney, which shall contain on the reverse side the penalties that the
juvenile may receive simultaneously with issuing the citation to the
juvenile. A copy will be mailed to the parent or legal guardian.155
B. Penalties. Violations of §§ 318-2 through 318-9 by a person under the
age of 18 shall be punishable according to § 1-4 of the Code of the
Village of East Troy and §§ 938.17(2), 938.343, 938.344 and 938.345,
Wis. Stats. Nothing in this section shall prevent the juvenile officer, in
his/her discretion, from referring cases directly to the District
Attorney's office.
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 318-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-11
1:261
Chapter 340
MOBILE HOMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 510.
§ 340-1. Mobile home park license required.
The owner or operator of a mobile home park shall apply for a license on an
annual basis and pay the annual license fee according to the most current
fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Village Board.
§ 340-2. Monthly permit fee. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
There is hereby imposed on each owner of a nonexempt, occupied mobile
home in the Village of East Troy a monthly permit fee, as determined
in accordance with § 66.0435(3), Wis. Stats., which is hereby adopted by
reference and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
A. It shall be the full and complete responsibility of the licensee to collect
the proper amount from each mobile home owner. Licensees shall pay
to the Village Treasurer such monthly permit fees on or before the 10th
day of the month following the month for which such fees are due, in
accordance with the terms of this chapter and such regulations as the
Village Clerk may reasonably promulgate.
B. Licensees of mobile home parks and owners of land on which are
parked any occupied, nonexempt mobile homes shall furnish
information to the Village Clerk and Assessor on such homes added to
their park or land within five days after arrival of such home on forms
furnished by the Village Assessor in accordance with § 66.0435(3)(c)
and (e), Wis. Stats. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not more than $25. Each failure to report is a
separate offense.
C. It shall be the full and complete responsibility of the licensees of a
mobile home park to collect cash deposits from each occupied,
nonexempt mobile home therein and to remit such deposits to the
Village. Upon receipt of a notice from the owner or licensee that the
nonexempt, occupied mobile home has been or is about to be removed
from the Village, the Village Clerk shall apply said cash deposit to
reduce any monthly permit fees for which said owner is liable and
refund the balance, if any, to said owner.
§ 318-11 EAST TROY CODE § 340-3
1:262
§ 340-3. Parking outside of mobile home park prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any mobile home in the Village of
East Troy at any site other than a licensed mobile home park.
Chapter 354
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 189.
Offensive industry — See Ch. 217, Art. I.
Hazardous materials and pollution — See Ch.
285.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 289.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 366.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 375.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 443.
Junked and abandoned vehicles — See Ch.
461.
Waste management — See Ch. 470.
§ 354-1. Public nuisances prohibited.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any public nuisance within the Village of East Troy.
§ 354-2. Public nuisance defined.
A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property
which shall continue for such length of time as to:
§ 354-3. Public nuisances affecting health.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such enumeration
shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the
definition of § 354-2:
A. Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or
safety of the public.
B. In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property.
C. Greatly offend the public morals or decency.
D. Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct
or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable
body of water or other public way or the use of public property.
A. Adulterated food. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome
food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public.
§ 340-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-3
1:263
§ 354-4. Public nuisances offending morals and decency.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and
decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other
nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition
of § 354-2:
B. Unburied carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended
for human consumption or food which are not buried or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death.
C. Breeding places for vermin, etc. Accumulations of decayed animal or
vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing
material, scrap metal or any material whatsoever in which flies,
mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed.
D. Stagnant water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other
insects can multiply.
E. Garbage cans. Garbage cans which are not flytight.
F. Noxious weeds. All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation.
G. Water pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream,
lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial
wastes or other substances.
H. Noxious odors, etc. Any use of property, substances or things within the
Village, or within four miles thereof, causing any foul, offensive,
noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or
stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons
which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any
appreciable number of persons within the Village.
I. Street pollution. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or
unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter,
alley, sidewalk or public place within the Village.
J. Animals at large. All animals running at large.
K. Accumulations of refuse. Accumulations of old cans, lumber, elm
firewood and other refuse.
L. Air pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes,
gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the Village limits, or within one
mile therefrom, in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons
of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to
property.156
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 354-3 EAST TROY CODE § 354-4
1:264
§ 354-5. Public nuisances affecting peace and safety.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting
public peace or safety coming within the definition of § 354-2:
A. Disorderly houses. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill
fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to
for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse, or
gambling.
B. Gambling devices. All gambling devices and slot machines, except as
permitted by state law.
C. Unlicensed sale of liquor and beer. All places where intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed,
bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license, as
provided for in the ordinances of the Village.
D. Continuous violations of Village ordinances. Any place or premises
within the Village where Village ordinances or state laws relating to
public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously,
repeatedly and intentionally violated.
E. Illegal drinking. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of
drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of
the laws of the State of Wisconsin or ordinances of the Village.
A. Signs, billboards, etc. All signs and billboards, awnings and other
similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or
places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to
endanger the public safety.
B. Illegal buildings. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation
of the provisions of the ordinances of the Village relating to materials
and manner of construction of buildings and structures within the
Village.
C. Unauthorized traffic signs. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or
devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or
railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official
traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which, because of their
color, location, brilliance or manner of operation, interfere with the
effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal.
D. Obstruction of intersections. All trees, hedges, billboards or other
obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets,
alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when
approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
§ 354-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-5
1:265
§ 354-6. Abatement of public nuisances.
E. Tree limbs. All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less
than 10 feet above the surface thereof, and all limbs which project over
a public street less than 14 feet above the surface thereof.
F. Dangerous trees. All trees which are a menace to public safety or are
the cause of substantial annoyance to the general public.
G. Fireworks. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws
of the State of Wisconsin and ordinances of the Village.
H. Dilapidated buildings. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or
out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit
for human use.
I. Wires over streets. All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds
which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface thereof.
J. Noisy animals or fowl. The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl
which, by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or
making of other noises, shall greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood
or any considerable number of persons within the Village.
K. Obstruction of streets; excavations. All obstructions of streets, alleys,
sidewalks or crosswalks, and all excavations in or under the same,
except as permitted by the ordinances of the Village, or which, although
made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for
an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has
been accomplished, or which do not conform to the permit.
L. Open excavations. All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or
unused basements accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
M. Abandoned refrigerators. All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from
which the doors and other covers have not been removed or which are
not equipped with a device for opening from the inside.
N. Flammable liquids. Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances
of the Village, or laws of the state, relating to the storage of flammable
liquids.
O. Unremoved snow. All snow and ice not removed shall be sprinkled with
sand or other chemical removers, as provided in this Code.157
A. Summary abatement.
(1) Notice to owner. If the inspecting officer determines that a public
nuisance exists within the Village and that there is a danger to
public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, notice may be
served by the inspecting officer or an authorized deputy on the
157. Editor's Note: See § 423-10, Snow and ice removal.
§ 354-5 EAST TROY CODE § 354-6
1:266
§ 354-7. Recovery of abatement costs.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance; such costs shall be assessed against the real estate as a special
charge.
§ 354-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
person causing, maintaining or permitting such nuisance, or on
the owner or occupant of the premises where such nuisance is
caused, maintained or permitted, and a copy of such notice shall
be posted on the premises. Such notice shall direct the person
causing, maintaining or permitting such nuisance, or the owner or
occupant of the premises, to abate or remove such nuisance within
a period not less than 24 hours nor greater than seven days and
shall state that unless such nuisance is so abated, the Village will
cause the same to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the
owner, occupant or person causing, maintaining or permitting the
nuisance, as the case may be.
(2) Abatement by Village. If the nuisance is not abated within the time
provided, or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance
cannot be found, the officer having the duty of enforcement shall
cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance.
B. Abatement by court action. If the inspecting officer determines that a
public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such
nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the inspector shall file a
written report of such findings with the Village President, who, upon
direction of the Village Board, shall cause an action to abate such
nuisance to be commenced in the name of the Village in Walworth
County Circuit Court, in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 823, Wis.
Stats.158
C. Court order. Except where necessary under Subsection A, an officer
hereunder shall not use force to obtain access to private property to
abate a public nuisance but shall request permission to enter upon
private property if such premises is occupied and, if such permission is
denied, shall apply to any court having jurisdiction for an order
assisting the abatement of the public nuisance.
D. Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Village or its
officials in accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 354-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-8
1:267
Chapter 362
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 362-1. Park regulations.
A. Enforcement. The Chief of Police, Fire Inspector, Director of Public
Works and Building Inspector shall enforce those provisions of this
chapter that come within the jurisdiction of their offices, and they shall
make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure
that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under
§ 354-6 to abate a public nuisance unless the officer has inspected or
caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to
exist and is satisfied that a nuisance does, in fact, exist.
B. General penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code.
A. Purpose and definition. In order to protect the parks, parkways,
recreational facilities and conservancy areas within the Village of East
Troy from injury, damage or desecration, these regulations are enacted.
The term "park" as hereinafter used in this chapter shall include all
grounds, structures and watercourses which are or may be located
within any area dedicated to the public use as a park, parkway,
recreation facility, playground, swimming pool or conservancy area in
the Village.
B. Specific regulations.
(1) Littering prohibited. No person shall litter, dump or deposit any
rubbish, refuse, earth or other material in any park.
(2) Sound devices. No person shall operate or play any amplifying
system unless specific authority is first obtained from the Village
Board.
(3) Bill posting. No person shall post, paste, fasten, paint or attach any
placard, bill, notice, sign or advertising matter upon any structure,
tree or other natural object in any park, except park regulations
and other signs authorized by the Village Board.
(4) Throwing stones and missiles prohibited. No person shall throw
stones or other missiles in or into any park.
(5) Removal of park equipment prohibited. No person shall remove
benches, seats, tables or other park equipment from any park.
(6) Trapping. "Trapping" when used in this subsection includes the
taking, or the attempting to take, of any wild animal by means of
setting or operating any device, mechanism or contraption that is
designated, built or made to close upon, hold fast or otherwise
capture a wild animal or animals; live traps on a person's property
§ 354-8 EAST TROY CODE § 362-1
1:268
are excluded. The trapping of wild animals is hereby prohibited in
Village parks.
(7) Making of fires. No person shall start, tend or maintain a fire
except in personal grills or designated fireplaces. Personal grills
shall be used only in designated picnic areas. The use of personal
grills is permitted provided that lawns and vegetation are not
endangered. Unburned fuel and ashes shall be disposed of in such a
manner as to prevent fire or damage to any park property.
(8) Protection of park property.
(a) No person shall kill, injure or disturb or attempt to injure or
disturb waterfowl, birds or animals, wild or domestic, within
any park, except as permitted by this chapter. No person shall
climb any tree or remove flowers or fruit, wild or cultivated, or
break, cut down, trample upon, remove or in any manner
injure, deface, write upon or ill use any tree, shrub, flower,
flowerbed, turf, soil, sand, fountain, ornament, building,
structure, apparatus, bench, table, official notice, sign or other
property within any park.
(b) No person shall deface by throwing stones, pebbles or other
debris in any of the toilets, bubblers or other sanitary facilities
located in any Village park or deface by drawing with crayon,
chalk, paint or anything else on any of the buildings or
equipment at any Village park or deface the equipment by
means of a sharp instrument.
(9) Motorized vehicles. Except for authorized maintenance vehicles, no
person shall operate an unlicensed or licensed motorized vehicle
outside of areas specifically designated as parking areas or areas
where the operation of such vehicles is specifically permitted.
Motor vehicles are restricted to the roads and drives and parking
areas. No motor vehicles of any nature may be used on the seeded
areas except vehicles which have Village Board authorization for
shows, rides or exhibits, and then only for the purpose of loading
and unloading.
(10) Snowmobiles. No person shall operate a snowmobile in a Village
park. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(11) Speed limit. No person shall operate any vehicle in a Village park in
excess of 15 miles per hour unless otherwise posted.
(12) Glass beverage bottles in parks prohibited. No individual shall
possess or consume any beverage in a glass bottle or glass
container in any Village park.
(13) Reckless driving in parks prohibited. No person shall operate a
motor vehicle in a reckless manner in any of the public parks of the
Village.
§ 362-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-1
1:269
(14) Parking in parks. No person shall park any motor vehicle in any
park in the Village, except in the designated parking area.
(15) Horses and carriages. No person shall ride a horse or drive a horsedriven
vehicle in any park, except on roads or designated bridle
paths, unless approval of the Village Board is first obtained. It shall
be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or drive a horse-driven
vehicle in a careless, negligent or reckless manner which may
endanger the safety and well-being of others. Horseback riding
shall be allowed only during the daylight hours. No person shall
ride a horse which cannot be held under such control that it may be
easily turned or stopped. Horses shall not be left unbridled or
unattended.
(16) Removing tree protectors. No person shall remove any device for
the protection of trees or shrubs.
(17) Golfing and sporting activities. No golfing or practicing golf in
Village parks or recreation areas shall be allowed except with the
use of a whiffle ball. All sporting activities must be held in areas so
designated for that purpose.
(18) Arrows. No person shall use or shoot any bow and arrow in any
Village park, except in authorized areas.
(19) Fees and charges. The Village Board shall establish such fees as
deemed necessary for use of any park facility, shelter or land area.
It shall be unlawful to use such areas without payment of such fee
or charge when required.
(20) Firearms. Possessing or discharging of any airgun, slingshot,
explosive, firearm or weapon of any kind is prohibited in all Village
parks.
(21) Fish cleaning. Cleaning of fish in shelters, toilet facilities or picnic
areas is prohibited in all Village parks.
(22) Controlled substances. Possessing, using or dispensing of a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act159 is prohibited in all Village parks.
(23) Vendors restricted. No person shall sell, vend or give away any
article of merchandise whatsoever without a written permit from
the Village Board.
(24) Alcohol beverages. The consumption or possession of alcohol
beverages in Village parks shall be as regulated by Chapter 305,
Article II, Alcohol Beverages in Public Areas, of this Code.
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
§ 362-1 EAST TROY CODE § 362-1
1:270
§ 362-2. Operation of airborne toys or devices.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fly, operate or make use of any
airborne remote- or radio-controlled model airplane, helicopter, vehicle or
any other such device in, over or upon any street or private property, except
in parks or areas specifically designated and posted for such purpose and
with the consent of the property owner or lessee of the property.
§ 362-3. Turf protection on public property.
Except as authorized by the Chief of Police or Village Board, no person shall
dig into the turf of any Village-owned park or recreational property for any
purposes whatsoever or remove any trees or flowers. Absent authorization
by the Chief of Police or Village Board, the use of metal detectors and
digging for buried objects in Village parks or recreational property are
prohibited.
§ 362-4. Park hours.
§ 362-5. (Reserved)160
(25) Camping. No overnight camping shall be permitted in any park,
except where written approval of the Village Board or duly
authorized agent is first obtained.
A. Hours established. No person, except an authorized employee and
individuals engaged in special activities after obtaining the proper
authorization from the appropriate department head, shall be in or
upon the public parks, including any structure located thereon,
between sunset and sunrise. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
B. Exceptions.
(1) The regular closing hours of Village parks do not apply to persons
having permission from the Village Board to be present in the
Village parks during closed hours on specific days, for specific
purposes, or for special events.
(2) The regular closing hours of the Village parks do not apply to
persons in attendance at a regularly scheduled ball game at the ball
diamond located in the Village, except that those persons shall
vacate the park within 15 minutes after the ending of the regularly
scheduled game.
160. Editor's Note: Former § 362-5, Reservation of park space, as amended, was repealed
12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-17.
§ 362-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-6
1:271
§ 362-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-02; amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
In addition to any other penalties provided by this Municipal Code of the
Village of East Troy, any person cited for a violation of any Village of East
Troy municipal ordinance or state statute in any parks within the Village of
East Troy shall be banned from all parks for a period of 90 days for a first
offense and six months for any subsequent offense. Any person violating the
ban will be cited for trespassing and may be fined pursuant to § 1-4 of this
Code. The person banned from the parks shall be personally served with the
ban notice within 48 hours of being cited for any such violation.
Chapter 366
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 170.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 181.
Animals — See Ch. 189.
Fireworks — See Ch. 273.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 305.
Juveniles — See Ch. 318.
Nuisances — See Ch. 354.
§ 362-6 EAST TROY CODE § 362-6
1:272
ARTICLE I
State Statutes Adopted
§ 366-1. Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture.161
A. The following statutes defining offenses against the peace and good
order of the state are adopted by reference to define offenses against
the peace and good order of the Village of East Troy. With the exception
of § 938.342, Wis. Stats., the penalty for commission of such offenses
hereunder shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under § 1-4 of this
Code. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the
statutes incorporated herein by reference are intended to be made part
of this Code. The penalty for truancy and high school dropouts shall be
governed by the provisions of § 938.342, Wis. Stats., as adopted herein.
(1) Section 118.07, Health and safety requirements.
(2) Section 118.08, School zones; crossings.
(3) Section 118.09, Safety zones.
(4) Section 118.10, School safety patrols.
(5) Section 118.105, Control of traffic on school premises.
(6) Section 118.11, School fences.
(7) Section 118.123, Reports and records.
(8) Section 118.163, Municipal truancy and school dropout
ordinances.
(9) Section 134.65, Cigarette and tobacco products retailer license.
(10) Section 134.66, Restrictions on sale or gift of cigarettes or nicotine
or tobacco products.
(11) Section 167.10, Regulation of fireworks.
(12) Section 167.31, Safe use and transportation of firearms and bows.
(13) Section 173.10, Investigation of cruelty complaints.
(14) Section 173.24, Reimbursement for expenses.
(15) Section 175.25, Storage of junked automobiles.
(16) Section 254.92, Purchase or possession of cigarettes or tobacco
products by person under 18 prohibited.
(17) Section 938.125, Jurisdiction over juveniles alleged to have
violated civil laws or ordinances.
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-1
1:273
(18) Section 938.17, Jurisdiction over traffic, boating, snowmobile, allterrain
vehicle, and utility terrain vehicle violations and over civil
law and ordinance violations.
(19) Section 938.342, Disposition; truancy and school dropout
ordinance violations.
(20) Section 938.343, Disposition of juvenile adjudged to have violated a
civil law or an ordinance.
(21) Section 938.344, Disposition; certain intoxicating liquor, beer and
drug violations.
(22) Section 938.345, Disposition of juvenile adjudged in need of
protection or services.
(23) Section 939.05(2)(b), Aiding and abetting.
(24) Section 939.22, Words and phrases defined.
(25) Section 940.19(1), Battery.
(26) Section 940.291, Law enforcement officer; failure to render aid.
(27) Section 940.42, Intimidation of witnesses.
(28) Section 940.44, Intimidation of victims.
(29) Section 941.01, Negligent operation of vehicle.
(30) Section 941.10, Negligent handling of burning material.
(31) Section 941.12(2) and (3), Interfering with fire fighting.
(32) Section 941.13, False alarms.
(33) Section 941.20(1), Endangering safety by use of dangerous
weapon.
(34) Section 941.23, Carrying concealed weapon.
(35) Section 941.235, Carrying firearm in public building.
(36) Section 941.24, Possession of switchblade knife.
(37) Section 941.35, Emergency telephone calls.
(38) Section 941.36, Fraudulent tapping of electric wires or gas or
water meters or pipes.
(39) Section 941.37(1) and (2), Obstructing emergency or rescue
personnel.
(40) Section 942.01, Defamation.
(41) Section 942.03, Giving false information for publication.
§ 366-1 EAST TROY CODE § 366-1
1:274
(42) Section 942.05, Opening letters.
(43) Section 943.01(1), Damage to property.
(44) Section 943.11, Entry into locked vehicle.
(45) Section 943.125, Entry into locked coin box.
(46) Section 943.13, Trespass to land.
(47) Section 943.14, Criminal trespass to dwellings.
(48) Section 943.145, Criminal trespass to a medical facility.
(49) Section 943.15, Entry onto a construction site or into a locked
building, dwelling or room.
(50) Section 943.20(1), (2) and (3)(a), Theft.
(51) Section 943.21(3)(am), Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper,
recreational attraction, taxicab operator, or gas station.
(52) Section 943.22, Use of cheating tokens.
(53) Section 943.23(1) and (5), Operating vehicle without owner's
consent.
(54) Section 943.24, Issue of worthless check.
(55) Section 943.34(1)(a), Receiving stolen property.
(56) Section 943.37, Alteration of property identification marks.
(57) Section 943.38(3), Forgery.
(58) Section 943.41, Financial transaction card crimes.
(59) Section 943.46, Theft of video service.
(60) Section 943.50(1) to (3) and (4)(a), Retail theft; theft of services.
(61) Section 943.55, Removal of shopping cart.
(62) Section 943.70, Computer crimes.
(63) Section 944.15, Public fornication.
(64) Section 944.17, Sexual gratification.
(65) Section 944.20, Lewd and lascivious behavior.
(66) Section 944.21, Obscene material or performance.
(67) Section 944.23, Making lewd, obscene or indecent drawings.
(68) Section 944.30, Prostitution.
(69) Section 944.31, Patronizing prostitutes.
§ 366-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-1
1:275
(70) Section 944.33, Pandering.
(71) Section 944.36, Solicitation of drinks prohibited.
(72) Section 945.01, Definitions relating to gambling.
(73) Section 945.02, Gambling.
(74) Section 945.04, Permitting premises to be used for commercial
gambling.
(75) Section 946.40, Refusing to aid officer.
(76) Section 946.41, Resisting or obstructing officer.
(77) Section 946.42(2), Escape.
(78) Section 946.46, Encouraging violation of probation, extended
supervision or parole.
(79) Section 946.69, Falsely assuming to act as a public officer or
employee or a utility employee.
(80) Section 946.70, Impersonating peace officers, fire fighters, or other
emergency personnel.
(81) Section 946.72(2), Tampering with public records and notices.
(82) Section 947.01, Disorderly conduct.
(83) Section 947.012, Unlawful use of telephone.
(84) Section 947.013, Harassment.
(85) Section 947.06, Unlawful assemblies.
(86) Section 948.01, Definitions relating to crimes against children.
(87) Section 948.09, Sexual intercourse with a child age 16 or older.
(88) Section 948.10, Exposing genitals, pubic area or intimate parts.
(89) Section 948.11(1)(b) and (2)(b), Exposing a child to harmful
material or harmful descriptions or narrations.
(90) Section 948.21, Neglecting a child.
(91) Section 948.40, Contributing to the delinquency of a child.
(92) Section 948.50, Strip search by school employee.
(93) Section 948.51(1), (2) and (3)(a), Hazing.
(94) Section 948.60, Possession of a dangerous weapon by a person
under 18.
§ 366-1 EAST TROY CODE § 366-1
1:276
§ 366-2. Liability; attempt; parties to acts.
(95) Section 948.61(1) and (2), Dangerous weapons other than firearms
on school premises.
(96) Section 948.63, Receiving property from a child.
(97) Section 951.01, Definitions relating to crimes against animals.
(98) Section 951.015, Construction and application.
(99) Section 951.02, Mistreating animals.
(100) Section 951.03, Dognapping and catnapping.
(101) Section 951.04, Leading animal from motor vehicle.
(102) Section 951.05, Transportation of animals.
(103) Section 951.06, Use of poisonous and controlled substances.
(104) Section 951.07, Use of certain devices prohibited.
(105) Section 951.08, Instigating fights between animals.
(106) Section 951.09, Shooting at caged or staked animals.
(107) Section 951.10, Sale of baby rabbits, chicks and other fowl.
(108) Section 951.11, Artificially colored animals; sale.
(109) Section 951.13, Providing proper food and drink to confined
animals.
(110) Section 951.14, Providing proper shelter.
(111) Section 951.15, Abandoning animals.
A. Penalty. In addition to the general penalty provisions of this Code in
§ 1-4, or any other penalty imposed for violation of any section of this
chapter or Chapter 305, Article II, Chapter 318 or Chapter 354, any
person who shall cause physical damage to or destroy any public
property shall be liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such
damaged or destroyed property. The parent or guardian of an
unemancipated juvenile who violates § 366-21 may also be held liable
for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed
property, in accordance with the Wisconsin Statutes. Nothing in this
Code of Ordinances shall prevent the Police Department from referring
a violation of the provisions of this chapter or Chapter 305, Article II,
Chapter 318 or Chapter 354 to the District Attorney's office in the
interest of justice.
B. Attempt.
§ 366-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-2
1:277
(1) Whoever attempts to commit an act prohibited by this chapter,
Chapter 305, Article II, Chapter 318 or Chapter 354 of the Code of
Ordinances of the Village of East Troy may be required to forfeit
amounts not to exceed 1/2 the maximum penalty for the completed
act.
(2) An attempt to commit an act prohibited by the ordinances in this
chapter, Chapter 305, Article II, Chapter 318 or Chapter 354
requires that the actor have an intent to perform acts and attain a
result which, if accomplished, would constitute a violation of these
ordinances and that he/she does acts towards the commission of
the violation which demonstrate unequivocally, under all
circumstances, that he/she formed that intent and would commit
the violation except for the intervention of another person or some
other extraneous factor.
C. Parties to acts.
(1) Whoever is concerned in the commission of an act prohibited by
this chapter, Chapter 305, Article II, Chapter 318 or Chapter 354 of
this Code of Ordinances is a principle and may be charged with and
convicted of the commission of said act although he/she did not
directly commit it, and although the person who directly committed
it has not been convicted or has been convicted of some other act
prohibited by these ordinances.162
(2) A person is concerned in the commission of an act prohibited by
these ordinances if he/she:
(a) Directly commits the act;
(b) Intentionally aids and abets the commission of it; or
(c) Is a party to a conspiracy with another to commit it or advises,
hires, counsels or otherwise procures another to commit it.
Such party is also concerned in the commission of any other
act which is committed in pursuance of the intended violation
and which, under the circumstances, is the natural and
probable consequence of the intended violation. This
subsection does not apply to a person who voluntarily changes
his/her mind and no longer desires that the act be committed
and notifies the other parties concerned of his/her withdrawal
within a reasonable time before the commission of the
violation, so as to allow the others also to withdraw.
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-2 EAST TROY CODE § 366-2
1:278
ARTICLE II
Offenses Against Public Safety and Peace
§ 366-3. Firearms, explosives and other missiles; hunting.
A. Discharge of firearms regulated. No person, except a law enforcement
officer in the performance of an official duty, shall fire or discharge any
firearm, rifle, spring gun, air gun or pneumatic pellet gun of any
description in his/her possession or under his/her control within the
Village of East Troy, provided that this subsection shall not prevent the
firing or discharging of BB guns upon private premises by persons over
16 years of age or under direct supervision of a parent or guardian.163
B. Hunting prohibited. Hunting within the Village of East Troy is
prohibited, except hunting may be permitted with bows and arrows and
crossbows subject to the provisions of Subsection F of this section.
[Amended 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
C. Shooting into Village limits. No person shall, in the territory adjacent to
the Village, discharge any firearm in such manner that the discharge
shall enter or fall within the Village of East Troy.
D. Shooting ranges. This section shall not prevent the maintenance and
use of duly supervised rifle or pistol ranges or shooting galleries
approved by the Village Board, upon the recommendation of the Chief
of Police, where proper safety precautions are taken.
E. Explosive devices. No person shall discharge or detonate any dynamite,
nitroglycerin or other explosive within the Village without first
obtaining a permit to do so from the Village Board.
F. Throwing or shooting of arrows, stones or other missiles. [Amended
9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause the
discharge of any dangerous missile from any slingshot or other
means, other than a bow and arrow or crossbow, within 50 yards of
any inhabited dwelling or building or any public park, square or
enclosure.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause the
discharge of a bow and arrow or crossbow within 50 yards of
another person's building or any public park, square or enclosure
unless the person who owns the land on which the building is
located gives permission to do so.
(3) Any person discharging the arrow or bolt from a bow or crossbow,
respectively, must discharge the respective weapon toward the
ground.
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-3
1:279
§ 366-4. Concealed weapons; dangerous weapons; reckless use of
weapons.
(4) This subsection shall not apply:
(a) To the shooting or discharging of toy arrows.
(b) To a supervised archery range approved by the Village Board.
(c) Within the interior of a single-family dwelling.
G. Definitions. For purposes of this section, "firearm" is defined as any
instrumentality from or with which a shot, bullet or pellet may be
discharged or expelled, regardless of whether the propelling force is
provided by the air, spring or other similar mechanical device or
gunpowder.
A. Concealed weapons prohibited.
(1) Prohibition. No person shall, within the Village of East Troy, wear
or in any manner carry under his/her clothes, or conceal upon or
about his/her person, any deadly or dangerous weapon, provided
that this subsection shall not apply to a peace officer or such
persons as may be authorized to carry such weapons in accordance
with §§ 941.23, 941.235 and 941.237, Wis. Stats.164
(2) Dangerous weapon defined. "Dangerous weapon" means any
firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, or any device designed as a
weapon and capable of producing death or great bodily harm, or
any other device or instrumentality which, in the manner it is used
or intended to be used, is calculated or likely to produce death or
great bodily harm.
B. Weapons in public establishments. No person shall carry or be
possessed of a dangerous weapon in any public building or business
establishment open to the public, except a bona fide weapons repair,
display or sales establishment, unless such dangerous weapon is so
stored and secured (other than on the person) so as not to be readily
accessible to any person or patron. This subsection shall not apply to
peace officers or others duly authorized by law, acting within the scope
of their duties. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the
sale, purchase, repair or trade of firearms by a retail business
establishment doing so in the course of its regular business, in accord
with state and federal law, nor to hinder a prospective customer from
attempting to buy, sell or trade firearms to or from a retailer.
C. Specific concealed weapons prohibited.
(1) No person, except a sheriff, constable, police officer or other law
enforcement officer acting within the scope of his or her duties,
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-3 EAST TROY CODE § 366-4
1:280
shall carry or wear, concealed about his/her person, any pistol,
revolver, firearm, slingshot, cross-knuckle of lead, brass or other
materials, bowie knife, switchblade, dirk or dagger, or any other
dangerous or deadly weapon within the Village.
(2) Any weapon involved in an offense under this subsection above may
be seized and may be forwarded, within 48 hours of seizure, to the
Crime Laboratory Division of the Wisconsin Department of Justice
for examination. After examination by the Crime Laboratory, the
weapon shall be returned to the Village of East Troy Police
Department. If the weapon is owned by a person convicted under
this subsection, it may be confiscated by the East Troy Police
Department. If it is owned by a person other than the person
convicted, the trial judge may decide whether such weapon shall be
returned to its rightful owner or confiscated by the East Troy Police
Department.
D. Possession, sale and manufacture of certain weapons prohibited.
(1) No person shall sell, manufacture, purchase, possess or carry
metallic knuckles or knuckles of any substance which could be put
to the same use with the same or similar effect as metallic
knuckles, a numchuk (also called a "nunchaku") or any similar
weapon, a cestus or similar material weighted with metal or other
substance and worn on the hand, a churkin (also called a "suriken")
or any similar object intended to injure a person when thrown, a
sucbai or similar weapon, a manrikigusari or a similar length of
chain having weighted ends, or any other martial arts device or
instrumentality which, in the manner it is used or intended to be
used, is calculated or likely to produce injury or death to another
person within the Village of East Troy.
(2) For the purpose of this Subsection D, the following definitions
apply:
CHURKIN — A round throwing knife consisting of several points
protruding from a rounded disc.
NUMCHUK or NUNCHAKU — An instrument consisting of two or
more sticks, clubs or rods connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain.
SUCBAI — A short length of wood or metal or similar material
which, when gripped in the hand, protrudes on either side of the
fist. Such prohibited instrument may or may not have spikes or
short, pointed protrusions from either end.
(3) Any such device shall be seized by a law enforcement officer and
destroyed or turned over to the State of Wisconsin Crime
Laboratory for destruction.
E. Reckless use of weapons.
(1) Acts prohibited.
§ 366-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-4
1:281
§ 366-5. Fireworks.
No person shall sell, expose or offer for sale, use, keep, possess, discharge
or explode any fireworks except toy pistol paper caps, sparklers and toy
snakes within the limits of the Village, unless he/she shall be authorized
by a fireworks permit as provided in Chapter 273, Fireworks, of this Code.
The term "fireworks" as used in this section shall be defined as provided
in § 167.10(1), Wis. Stats., and shall be deemed to include all fireworks,
rockets or similar missiles containing explosive fuel.
§ 366-6. Obstructing streets and sidewalks.
(a) No person shall endanger another's safety by reckless conduct
in the operation or handling of a firearm, air gun, knife, or bow
and arrow.
(b) No person shall operate or go armed with a firearm, air gun,
knife or bow and arrow while he/she is under the influence of
an intoxicant.
(c) No person shall intentionally point a firearm, air gun, knife, or
bow and arrow at or towards another person.
(2) Reckless conduct defined. "Reckless conduct" consists of an act
which creates a situation of unreasonable risk and high probability
of death or great bodily harm to another and which demonstrates a
conscious disregard for the safety of another and a willingness to
take chances of perpetrating an injury.165
A. Obstructing streets. No person shall obstruct, loiter, cause a nuisance
or engage in any sport or exercise on any public street, sidewalk, bridge
or public ground within the Village of East Troy, in such a manner as to:
(1) Prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic thereon;
(2) Prevent or hinder free ingress or egress to or from any place of
business or amusement, church, public hall or meeting place; or
(3) Cause a nuisance by congregating and hindering the free passage
of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
B. Obstructing sidewalk prohibited. No person shall block any sidewalk or
bridge by obstructing the same so that it is impossible for a pedestrian
to travel along the sidewalk without leaving the sidewalk and walking
on adjacent property or on the street.
165. Editor's Note: Original § 11-2-3, Safe use and transportation of firearms and bows, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II). See § 167.31, Wis. Stats., adopted by reference in § 366-1 of
this chapter.
§ 366-4 EAST TROY CODE § 366-6
1:282
§ 366-7. Loitering and soliciting.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended:
LOITER — To sit, stand, loaf, lounge, wander or stroll in an aimless
manner, or to stop, pause or remain in an area for no apparent reason.
NUISANCE — Unnecessary conduct which may tend to annoy,
intimidate, threaten or otherwise disturb another in or about any public
street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground, which is offensive to the
public morals or decency of the citizens of the Village of East Troy.
OBSTRUCT — To interfere with unobstructed travel by any means,
including but not limited to standing on the part of the walk that is fit
for travel or placing any object or vehicle whatsoever on such sidewalk.
SIDEWALK — Any sidewalk owned or maintained by the Village. The
term shall not include sidewalks or walkways on private property in
shopping centers, apartment complexes, office building sites or any
other private property.
D. Free speech. This section shall not be interpreted as prohibiting any
person from stopping on any sidewalk to talk or make a speech,
provided that such person shall not stand in such a location that it is
impossible for any pedestrian to travel along the sidewalk without
leaving the sidewalk and walking on adjacent property or on the street.
If two or more persons are engaged in talking while stopped on a
sidewalk, they shall not stand in such a location as to completely
prevent any pedestrian from passing them on the sidewalk.
A. Public property loitering prohibited.
(1) No person shall loiter in or about any public street, public sidewalk,
street crossing, alley, bridge, public parking lot or other place of
assembly or public use after being requested to move by any law
enforcement officer.
(2) Upon being requested to move, a person shall immediately comply
with such request by leaving the premises or area thereof at the
time of the request.
(3) No person shall loiter in or about any toilet open to the public for
the purpose of engaging in or soliciting any lewd or lascivious
conduct or any unlawful act.
(4) No person shall loiter in or about any school or public place at or
near which children or students attend or normally congregate. As
used in this subsection, "loiter" means to delay, to linger or to idle
in or about any said school or public place without a lawful purpose
for being present.
B. Private property loitering prohibited.
§ 366-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-7
1:283
(1) No person shall loiter in or about any private premises or adjacent
doorways or entrances or upon private property held out for public
use, including but not limited to business or industry parking lots
or shopping malls, without invitation from the owner or occupant or
by any person in authority at such places. No person shall loiter in
or about the doorway, stairway, steps or entrance of any business
place or private residence without the expressed consent of the
owner thereof or at any time other than usual business hours.
Under this subsection, "business place" shall include a public
building at such times that the same shall be closed for the usual
and normal business conducted thereat.
(2) Upon being requested to move by any such person in authority, or
by any police officer, a person shall immediately comply with such
request by leaving the premises or area thereof at the time of the
request.
(3) No person shall sit, lie or otherwise recline upon or against any
parked motor vehicle without the expressed consent of the owner
thereof, whether such is parked upon a public street, alley, parking
lot, driveway or private premises.
(4) No person shall stand or loiter on any roadway other than in a
safety zone if such act interferes with the lawful movement of
traffic.
C. Loitering or prowling prohibited.
(1) No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner
not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that
warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity.
Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes
flight upon appearance of a police or peace officer, refuses to
identify himself/herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself/
herself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other
circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer
shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this subsection, afford
the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would
otherwise be warranted by requesting him/her to identify himself/
herself and explain his/her presence and conduct. No person shall
be convicted of an offense under this subsection if the law
enforcement officer did not comply with the preceding sentence or
if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was
true and, if believed by the law enforcement officer at the time,
would have dispelled the alarm.
(2) No person shall hide, wait or otherwise loiter in the vicinity of any
private dwelling house, apartment building, or any other place of
residence with the unlawful intent to watch, gaze or look upon the
occupants therein, in a clandestine manner.
§ 366-7 EAST TROY CODE § 366-7
1:284
(3) No person shall lodge in any building, structure or place, whether
public or private, without the permission of the owner or person
entitled to possession or in control thereof.
(4) No person shall loiter in or about a restaurant, tavern or other
public building. As used in this subsection, "loiter" means to,
without just cause, remain in a restaurant, tavern or public
building, or to remain upon the property immediately adjacent
thereto, after being asked to leave by the owner or person entitled
to possession or in control thereof.
D. Loitering by underage persons where alcohol beverage is dispensed.
(1) Underage persons and intoxicants. No underage person shall enter,
remain or loiter in any public or private place where any fermented
malt beverage or other alcohol beverage is sold, dispensed, given
away or made available, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian
or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age.
(2) Permitting loitering prohibited. No person of legal drinking age
shall permit any underage person to enter, remain or loiter in any
premises, public or private, where fermented malt beverages or
other alcohol beverages are served, sold, dispensed, given away or
made available, unless such underage person is accompanied by a
parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age.
E. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended:166
LOITER — To sit, stand, loaf, lounge, wander or stroll in an aimless
manner, or to stop, pause or remain in an area for no obvious reason.
F. Soliciting. No person shall loiter in or near any thoroughfare or public
place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of
inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of
prostitution. Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether such purpose is manifested are that such person
is a known prostitute or panderer or that such person repeatedly
beckons to stop or attempts to stop or engage a male or female
passerby in conversation or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor
vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms or any other bodily
gestures. The violator's conduct must be such as to demonstrate a
specific intent to induce, entice, solicit or procure another to commit an
act of prostitution. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this
subsection unless the law enforcement officer first affords such person
an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one shall be convicted of
violating this subsection if it appears at trial that the explanation given
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-7
1:285
§ 366-8. Loud and unnecessary noise.
was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. As used in this subsection, the
following terms shall have the following meanings:167
KNOWN PROSTITUTE OR PANDERER — A person who, within five
years previous to the date of arrest for violation of this subsection, had,
within the knowledge of the sworn police officer, been convicted in any
municipal court or circuit court in the State of Wisconsin of an offense
involving prostitution.
PUBLIC PLACE — An area generally visible to public view and includes
streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking
lots, automobiles, whether moving or not, and buildings open to the
general public, including those which serve food or drink or provide
entertainment, and the doorway and entrance to buildings or dwellings
and the grounds enclosing them.
A. Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud
and unnecessary noise. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or
wantonly to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, any
mechanical device, machine, apparatus or instrument for
intensification or amplification of the human voice or any sound or noise
in any public or private place, in such manner that the peace and good
order of the neighborhood are disturbed or that persons owning, using
or occupying property in the neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed.
B. Types of loud and unnecessary noises. The following acts are declared
to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this
section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle, on any
street or public place in the Village, for longer than three seconds
in any period of one minutes or less, except as a danger warning;
the creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of
any signaling device and the sounding of any plainly audible device
for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any
signaling device, except one operated by hand or electricity; the
use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine
exhaust; and the use of any signaling device when traffic is for any
reason held up.
(2) Radios, phonographs and similar devices. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound in a loud and unnecessary
manner. The operation of any set, instrument, phonograph,
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-7 EAST TROY CODE § 366-8
1:286
machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
in a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the
building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this subsection.
(3) Loudspeakers and amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating
or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving
set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier
or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of
commercial advertising or attracting attention of the public to any
building or structure. Announcements over loudspeakers can only
be made by the announcer in person and without the aid of any
mechanical device.
(4) Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which causes
frequent or long continued unnecessary noise.
(5) Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop
work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper
Village authorities.
(6) Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motorboat,
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(7) Construction or repair of buildings. The erection (including
excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, as well
as the operation of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic
hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or any other similar
equipment attended by loud or unusual noise, other than between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays; provided,
however, that the Chief of Police shall have the authority, upon
determining that the loss or inconvenience which would result to
any party in interest would be extraordinary and of such nature as
to warrant special consideration, to grant a permit for a period
necessary within which time such work and operation may take
place within the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(8) Schools, courts, churches and hospitals. The creation of any
excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, church or court, while in use, or adjacent to any hospital
which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that
institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the
hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in those
streets indicating a school, hospital or court street. No person,
while on public or private grounds adjacent to any building, or
while within any building in which a school or any class thereof is in
session, shall willfully make or assist in the making of any noise or
§ 366-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-8
1:287
§ 366-9. Disorderly conduct.168
diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace or good
order and operation of such school session or class thereof.
C. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Any vehicle of the Village while engaged in necessary public
business.
(2) Excavations or repairs of streets or other public construction by or
on behalf of the Village, county or state at night, when public
welfare and convenience render it impossible to perform such work
during the day.
(3) The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of
public addresses which are noncommercial in nature.
(4) Public events for which special event permits have been approved.
D. Permits for amplifying devices.
(1) Permit required. The use of loudspeakers or amplifying devices on
the streets or in the parks of the Village of East Troy is prohibited
unless the party desiring to use such loudspeaker or amplifying
device first obtains a special event permit.
(2) Grounds or reasons for denial or allowance. The Chief of Police
shall have the authority to revoke such permit when he/she
believes such loudspeaker or amplifying device is becoming a
nuisance because of the volume, the method in which it is being
used, or the location in which it is being operated.
(3) Time restrictions. The Chief of Police shall not grant a permit to use
a loudspeaker or amplifying device before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or
after 10:00 p.m. No permit shall be granted to anyone who, in the
opinion of the Chief of Police, uses said loudspeaker or amplifying
device in such a manner, or for such a purpose, as to constitute a
nuisance.
A. Disorderly conduct prohibited. No person within the Village of East
Troy shall:
(1) In any public or private place engage in violent, noisy, riotous,
abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud, or
otherwise disorderly conduct which tends to cause or provoke an
immediate disturbance of public order or tends to annoy or disturb
any other person.
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-8 EAST TROY CODE § 366-9
1:288
§ 366-10. Unauthorized presence or disorderly conduct on school
property.
(2) Intentionally cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, riot or
noisy altercation.
(3) Indecently expose his or her person.
(4) Be in any business or private structure, private vehicle or upon any
private grounds without the consent of the owner.
B. Defecating or urinating in public places. It shall be unlawful for any
person to defecate or urinate outside of designed sanitary facilities,
upon any sidewalk, street, alley, public parking lot, park, playground,
cemetery or other public areas within the Village or upon any private
property in open view of the public, or in the halls, rooms without rest
room facilities, stairways or elevators of public or commercial
buildings.
A. Unauthorized presence.
(1) No student who is under suspension, expulsion, or other
disciplinary procedures excluding him/her from attending any
school located within the Village, or any person not a student
presently enrolled or not an employee of such schools, or not a
parent or guardian of a student, or not an otherwise authorized
person, shall be present within any school building or upon any
school grounds without having first secured authorization to be
there from the principal or other person in charge of the school
building or school grounds, except while in direct route to secure
such authorization.
(2) Any unauthorized person who shall come upon school property and
refuse to leave upon request by the school principal, or any person
acting under the direction of the school principal, in addition to
violation of Subsection A(1), shall be guilty of trespass.
(3) "Authorized person" shall include:
(a) Any person who is present at any school building or school
grounds for a purpose previously authorized by the school or
its designee.
(b) Any person transporting a student and who utilizes the
driveway specified for loading and unloading personnel.
(c) Any person utilizing a designated area for attending an athletic
or other organized school event.
(4) Unauthorized presence shall include any vehicle that is found on
school property which has not received permission to be there. If
the occupants or owners are not on school property for some
legitimate business or activity, or are parked in an area that
§ 366-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-10
1:289
§ 366-11. Failure to obey lawful order; resisting or interfering with
officer.
regulates parking to certain authorized vehicles, they are in
violation. Such vehicle may be issued a Village summons that
regulates parking or may be towed away at the direction of the
school principal or person in charge of such school building. Law
enforcement officers may also have any vehicle towed away which,
because of its location, creates a hazard to life or property.
(5) All entrances to the school buildings referred to in Subsection A(1)
shall be posted by the School Board with a notice stating "Entry
Into School Building by Unauthorized Person Prohibited."
B. Disorderly conduct on public school property. No person shall, on any
school property or building, engage in violent, abusive, loud or
otherwise disorderly conduct which causes or provokes an immediate
disturbance of public order or disturbs or annoys any other person, nor
shall a person intentionally engage in any fight, brawl, riot or noisy
altercation other than a bona fide athletic contest.
C. Violators. Nonstudents, students from schools other than the school on
the property, or students from a school who are not in compliance with
the school system's published rules and regulations shall be considered
in violation of this section. The published rules and regulations of the
school system are incorporated as if fully set forth herein.
D. Loitering near school prohibited. No person not in official attendance or
on official school business shall enter into, congregate, loiter or cause a
nuisance in any school building in the Village of East Troy, or upon any
School District grounds, or within adjacent posted school zones on any
day when such schools are in session.
E. Possession of intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages. No
person shall possess intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages
while on any school property.
F. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended:
LOITER — To sit, stand, loaf, lounge, wander or stroll in an aimless
manner, or to stop, pause or remain in an area for no obvious reason.
NUISANCE — Unnecessary conduct which may tend to annoy,
intimidate, threaten or otherwise disturb another, in or about any
school building or school grounds, which is offensive to the public
morals or decency of the citizens of the Village of East Troy.169
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-10 EAST TROY CODE § 366-11
1:290
§ 366-12. Possession of controlled substances and marijuana.
A. Lawful orders. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the
direction or order of a police officer while such police officer is acting in
an official capacity in carrying out his/her duties.
B. Resisting or interfering with officer prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person to resist or in any way interfere with any police officer or
member of the Police Department, or any person called to assist such
officer, or to threaten, resist or interfere with such officer or person, or
to advise or encourage any other person to resist or interfere with such
officer or person in the discharge of his/her duty, or to in any way
interfere with or hinder or prevent him/her from discharging his/her
duty as such officer or assistant, or to offer or endeavor to do so, or to in
any manner assist any person in the custody of any law enforcement
officer to escape or to attempt to escape from such custody, or to try to
persuade any person to escape from the custody of such officer, or to
rescue or attempt to rescue any person so in custody, or to fail to obey
the order or direction of such officer while such officer is acting in his/
her official capacity in carrying out his/her duties.
A. Possession of controlled substances. It is unlawful for any person to
possess a controlled substance, other than a controlled substance
classified as Schedule I and II,170 which is a narcotic drug, unless the
substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid
prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of his/
her professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by this
Code of Ordinances.
B. Possession of marijuana.171
(1) No person shall possess marijuana, as defined in § 961.01(14), Wis.
Stats., unless it was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid
prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of
his/her professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by
Ch. 961, Wis. Stats. If a complaint is issued regarding an allegation
of possession of more than 25 grams of marijuana, or possession of
any amount of marijuana following a conviction in this state for
possession of marijuana, the subject of the complaint may not be
prosecuted under this subsection for the same action that is the
subject of the complaint unless the charges are dismissed or the
District Attorney declines to prosecute the case.
(2) For purposes of this section, "practitioner" means:
(a) A physician, advanced practice nurse, dentist, veterinarian,
podiatrist, optometrist, scientific investigator or, subject to
170. Editor's Note: See §§ 961.14 and 961.16, Wis. Stats.
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-12
1:291
§ 366-13. Synthetic cannabinoids.172
The possession of a controlled substance specified in § 961.14(4)(tb), Wis.
Stats., is prohibited. If a complaint is issued regarding an allegation of
possession of a controlled substance specified in § 961.14(4)(tb), Wis. Stats.,
following a conviction in this state for possession of a controlled substance,
the subject of the complaint may not be prosecuted under this section for
the same action that is the subject of the complaint unless the charges are
dismissed or the District Attorney declines to prosecute the case.
§ 366-14. Drug paraphernalia.173
The provisions of §§ 961.571, 961.572, 961.573, 961.574, 961.575 and
961.576, Wis. Stats., and the definitions therein are adopted by reference.
§ 366-15. Crossing police or fire line.
No individual shall cross a police or fire line that has been so designated by
banner, signs or other similar identification.
§ 366-16. Harassment.
§ 448.21(3), Wis. Stats., a physician assistant, or other person
licensed, registered, certified or otherwise permitted to
distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to,
administer or use in teaching or chemical analysis a controlled
substance in the course of professional practice or research in
this state.
(b) A pharmacy, hospital or other institution licensed, registered
or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct
research with respect to or administer a controlled substance
in the course of professional practice or research in this state.
(3) This subsection does not apply to any person who is charged with
possession of more than 25 grams of marijuana, or who is charged
with possession of any amount of marijuana following a conviction
for possession of any amount of marijuana, in the State of
Wisconsin.
A. Harassment. No person, with intent to harass or intimidate another
person, shall do any of the following; each instance shall be considered
a separate violation:
(1) Strike, shove, kick or otherwise subject the person to physical
contact or attempt or threaten to do the same.
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
173. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 366-12 EAST TROY CODE § 366-16
1:292
§ 366-17. Open cisterns, wells, basements or other dangerous
openings.
No person shall have or permit on any premises owned or occupied by him/
her any open cisterns, cesspools, wells, unused basements, excavations or
other dangerous openings. All such places shall be filled, securely covered
or fenced in such manner as to prevent injury to any person, and any cover
shall be of a design, size and weight that the same cannot be removed by
small children.
§ 366-18. Gambling, lotteries and fraudulent devices and practices.
All forms of gambling, lotteries and fraudulent devices and practices are
prohibited within the Village, except as provided by state law. Any police
officer of the Village may seize anything devised solely for gambling or
found in actual use for gambling within the Village and dispose thereof after
a judicial determination that such device was used solely for gambling or
found in actual use for gambling.
§ 366-19. Obstructing emergency or rescue personnel.
(2) Engage in a course of conduct or repeatedly commit acts which
harass or intimidate the person and which serve no legitimate
purpose.
B. Harassing or obscene telephone calls. Whoever commits any of the
following acts shall be subject to § 1-4 of this Code:174
(1) Makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is
obscene, lewd, lascivious or indecent.
(2) Makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with
the intent to abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called
number or numbers.
(3) Makes or causes the telephone of another repeatedly or
continuously to ring, with intent to harass any person at the called
number or numbers.
(4) Makes repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues
solely to harass any person at the called number or numbers.
(5) Knowingly permits any telephone under his/her control to be used
for any purpose prohibited by this section.
(6) In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, makes
repeated calls or simultaneous calls solely to harass any person at
the called number or numbers.
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-19
1:293
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply to the terms as used herein:
AMBULANCE — An emergency vehicle, including any motor vehicle,
boat or aircraft, whether privately or publicly owned, which is
designated, constructed or equipped to transport patients.
AMBULANCE SERVICE PROVIDER — A person engaged in the
business of transporting sick, disabled or injured persons by ambulance
to or from facilities or institutions providing health services.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Any of the following:
(1) Police vehicles, whether publicly or privately owned.
Conservation wardens' vehicles or foresters' trucks, whether
publicly or privately owned.
(2)
(3) Vehicles of a fire department or fire patrol.
Privately owned motor vehicles being used by deputy state fire
marshals or by personnel of a full-time or part-time fire department
or by members of a volunteer fire department while en route to a
fire or on an emergency call pursuant to orders of their chief or
other commanding officer.
(4)
Such emergency vehicles of municipal or county departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the
local authorities to be authorized emergency vehicles.
(5)
Such emergency vehicles of state departments as are designated
or authorized by the heads of such departments to be authorized
emergency vehicles.
(6)
Such ambulances, publicly owned, as are designated or authorized
by local authorities to be authorized emergency vehicles.
(7)
Such ambulances which are privately owned and are operated by
owners or their agents and which vehicles are authorized by the
Sheriff or others designated by the County Board to be operated
as emergency vehicles. The Sheriff or others designated by the
County Board may make such authorization which shall be in
writing and which shall be effective throughout the state until
rescinded. The Sheriff or others designated by the County Board
may designate any owner of ambulances usually kept in the county
to operate such vehicles as authorized emergency vehicles. Such
written authorization shall, at all times, be carried on each
ambulance used for emergency purposes. The Sheriff shall keep a
file of such authorizations in his/her office for public inspection,
and all other persons permitted to issue authorizations shall file a
copy of all authorizations issued with the Sheriff, who shall keep
them on file.
(8)
§ 366-19 EAST TROY CODE § 366-19
1:294
§ 366-20. Sex offender residency restrictions; child safety zones.
BONA FIDE EMERGENCY or BONA FIDE REQUEST FOR
EMERGENCY SERVICES — Those circumstances wherein the caller
reasonably believes that person(s) and/or property may be in actual or
potential danger of injury and, in the case of person(s), in danger of
illness.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL PERSONNEL — Any emergency medical
personnel, ambulance attendant, peace officer or firefighter or other
person operating or staffing an ambulance or an authorized emergency
vehicle.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN — A person who is responsible
for the administration of emergency care procedures and proper
handling and transporting of sick, disabled or injured persons,
including but not limited to ambulance attendants and ambulance
drivers.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
trust, foundation, company, any governmental agency other than the
U.S. government, or any group of individuals, however named,
concerned with the operation of an ambulance.
B. Prohibitions. It is the intent of the Village of East Troy, in its adoption of
this provision, to protect against the following activities in a manner
consistent with that provided by § 941.37, Wis. Stats. The following acts
are prohibited and perpetration thereof subjects the violator to penalty
as provided by § 1-4 of this Code:
(1) Knowingly obstructing any emergency medical personnel in the
performance of duties relating to an emergency or rescue.
(2) Intentionally interfering with any medical personnel in the
performance of duties relating to an emergency or rescue, when it
is reasonable that the interference may endanger another's safety.
(3) Knowingly making any telephone call to any emergency medical
personnel, police agency or fire department for any purpose other
than to report a bona fide emergency or to make a bona fide
request for emergency services.
A. Purpose and intent.
(1) The Village finds and declares that sex offenders are a serious
threat to public safety. When convicted sex offenders reenter
society, they are much more likely than any other type of offender
to be rearrested for a new rape or sexual assault. Given the high
rate of recidivism for sex offenders and that reducing opportunity
and temptation is important to minimizing the risk of reoffense,
there is a need to protect children where they congregate or play in
public places in addition to the protections afforded by state law
near schools and day-care centers. The Village finds and declares
§ 366-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-20
1:295
that, in addition to schools and day-care centers, children
congregate or play in a number of public places, including public
parks and other facilities for children.
(2) This section is a regulatory measure aimed at protecting the health
and safety of children in East Troy from the risk that convicted sex
offenders may reoffend in locations close to their residences. It is
the intent of this section not to impose a criminal penalty but rather
to serve the Village's compelling interest to promote, protect, and
improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the Village
by creating areas around locations where children regularly
congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual
offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing
temporary or permanent residence and by creating child safety
zones where children regularly congregate in concentrated
numbers wherein access by certain sexual offenders and sexual
predators to such zones shall be restricted or excluded.
B. Definitions. As used in this section and unless the context otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHILD — A person under the age of 18 years.[Added 12-21-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-10]
175FACILITY FOR CHILDREN — A public or private school, a group
home, as defined in § 48.02(7), Wis. Stats., a residential care center for
children and youth, as defined in § 48.02(15d), Wis. Stats., a shelter
care facility, as defined in § 48.02(17), Wis. Stats., a foster home, as
defined in § 48.02(6), Wis. Stats., a place which provides special
treatment or care as defined in § 48.02(17m), Wis. Stats., a day-care
center licensed under § 48.65, Wis. Stats., a day-care program
established under § 120.13(14), Wis. Stats., a day-care provider
certified under § 48.651, Wis. Stats., or a youth center, as defined in
§ 961.01(22), Wis. Stats.[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
OFFENDER — [Amended 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
Any person who is required to register under § 301.45, Wis. Stats.,
for any offense against a child or any person who is required to
register under § 301.45, Wis. Stats., and who is subject to the
special bulletin notification process set forth in § 301.46(2) and
(2m), Wis. Stats.
(1)
Any person subject to the sex crimes commitment provisions of
§ 975.06, Wis. Stats.
(2)
Any person found not guilty by reason of disease or mental defect
placed on lifetime supervision under § 971.17(1j), Wis. Stats.
(3)
175. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “crime against children,” which immediately
preceded this definition, was repealed 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10.
§ 366-20 EAST TROY CODE § 366-20
1:296
PERMANENT RESIDENCE — A place where the person sleeps, abides,
lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
SEXUALLY VIOLENT OFFENSE — As set forth in § 980.01(6), Wis.
Stats., as amended from time to time.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE — Residence or premises meeting either of
the following criteria:
A place where the person sleeps, abides, lodges, or resides for a
period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar
year and which is not that person's permanent residence as defined
in this section; or
(1)
A place where the person routinely sleeps, abides, lodges, or
resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive
days in any month and which is not that person's permanent
residence as defined in this section.
(2)
C. Residency restrictions.
(1) An offender shall not reside within 1,500 feet of real property that
supports or upon which there exists any of the following uses:
(a) Any facility for children;
(b) A public park, parkway, parkland or park facility;
(c) A public swimming pool;
(d) A public library;
(e) A recreational trail;
(f) A public playground;
(g) A school for children;
(h) Athletic fields used by children;
(i) A day-care center;
(j) Any specialized school for children, including but not limited to
a gymnastics academy, dance academy or music school; or
(k) Aquatic facilities open to the public.
(2) Measurement of distance. The distance shall be measured from the
closest boundary line of the real property supporting the residence
of an offender to the closest boundary line of the real property that
supports or upon which there exists any of the uses enumerated in
Subsection C(1) above.
(3) Residency restriction exceptions. An offender residing within 1,500
feet of real property that supports or upon which there exists any of
§ 366-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-20
1:297
the uses enumerated in Subsection C(1) above does not commit a
violation of this section if any of the following apply:
(a) The offender is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison,
juvenile facility, or other correctional institution or facility.
(b) The offender has established a permanent or temporary
residence and reported and registered that residence pursuant
to § 301.45, Wis. Stats., prior to the effective date of this
section.
(c) The use enumerated in Subsection C(1) above began after the
offender established a permanent or temporary residence and
reported and registered that residence pursuant to § 301.45,
Wis. Stats.
(d) The offender is a minor or ward under guardianship.
(4) Original domicile restriction. Subject to Subsection C(3) above, no
offender shall be permitted to reside in the Village of East Troy,
unless that person was domiciled in the Village of East Troy at the
time of the most recent offense giving rise to that person's status as
an offender.
D. Child safety zones.
(1) No offender shall enter or be present upon any real property that
supports or upon which there exists any facility used for or that
supports any one or more of the following uses:
(a) A public park, parkway, parkland or park facility;
(b) A public swimming pool;
(c) A public library;
(d) A recreational trail;
(e) A public playground;
(f) A school for children;
(g) Athletic fields used by children;
(h) A day-care center;
(i) Any specialized school for children, including but not limited to
a gymnastics academy, dance academy or music school;
(j) Aquatic facilities open to the public; or
(k) Any facility for children.
(2) Child safety zone exceptions. An offender does not commit a
violation of Subsection D(1) above and may be allowed on the
§ 366-20 EAST TROY CODE § 366-20
1:298
property used for or supporting a use enumerated in Subsection
D(1) above if any of the following apply:
(a) The property used for or supporting a use enumerated in
Subsection D(1) above also supports a church, synagogue,
mosque, temple or other house of religious worship
(collectively "church"), subject to all of the following
conditions:
[1] The offender's entrance and presence upon the property
occurs only during hours of worship or other religious
program/service as posted to the public;
[2] The offender sends advance written notice to an individual
designated by the church to be in charge and receives
advance approval from that individual allowing the
offender's attendance; and
[3] The offender shall not participate in any religious
education programs which include individuals under the
age of 18.
(b) The property used for or supporting a use enumerated in
Subsection D(1) above also supports a use lawfully attended by
an offender's natural or adopted child, which child's use
reasonably requires the attendance of the offender as the
child's parent upon the property, subject to all of the following
conditions:
[1] The offender's entrance and presence by the offender upon
the property occur only during hours of activity related to
the use as posted to the public; and
[2] The offender sends advance written notice to an individual
designated by the property owner to be in charge of the
property's enumerated use and receives advance approval
from that individual allowing the offender's attendance.
(c) The property used for or supporting a use enumerated in
Subsection D(1) above also supports a polling location in a
local, state or federal election, subject to all of the following
conditions:
[1] The offender is eligible to vote;
[2] The designated polling place for the person is an
enumerated use; and
[3] The offender enters the polling place, proceeds to cast a
ballot with whatever usual and customary assistance is
provided to any member of the electorate, and vacates the
property immediately after voting.
§ 366-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-20
1:299
(d) The property used for or supporting a use enumerated in
Subsection D(1) above also supports an elementary or
secondary school lawfully attended by an offender as a student,
subject to the condition that the offender may only enter upon
the property supporting the school at which the person is
enrolled for such purposes and at such times as are reasonably
required for the educational purposes of the school.
E. Property owners prohibited from renting real property and penalties.
(1) It is unlawful to let or to rent any place, structure or part thereof,
trailer or other conveyance with the knowledge that it will be used
as a permanent residence or as a temporary residence by any
person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or
temporary residence pursuant to this section, if such place,
structure or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance is located
within a prohibited location zone/child safety zone as described
herein.
(2) A property owner's failure to comply with the provisions of this
section shall constitute a violation of this section and shall subject
the property owner to the enforcement provisions as provided
herein.
F. Penalties and remedies.
(1) Forfeitures. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall
be subject to a forfeiture as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each
violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. Neither the issuance of a citation nor
the imposition of a forfeiture hereunder shall preclude the Village
from seeking or obtaining any or all other legal and equitable
remedies to prevent or remove a violation of this section.
(2) Injunction.
(a) Violation of residency restrictions. If an offender establishes a
permanent or temporary residence in violation of Subsection C
above, the Chief of Police may refer the matter to the Village
Attorney. The referral shall include a written determination by
the Chief of Police that, upon all of the facts and circumstances
and the purpose and intent of this section, such violation
interferes substantially with the comfortable enjoyment of life,
health, safety of another or others. Upon such referral, the
Village Attorney shall bring an action in the name of the Village
in Circuit Court to permanently enjoin such residency as a
public nuisance.
(b) Violation of child safety zones. If an offender violates
Subsection D(1) above more than once in any twelve-month
period, the Chief of Police may refer the matter to the Village
Attorney. The referral shall include a written determination by
§ 366-20 EAST TROY CODE § 366-20
1:300
the Chief of Police that, upon all of the facts and circumstances
and the purpose and intent of this section, such violations
interfere substantially with the comfortable enjoyment of life,
health, safety of another or others. Upon such referral, the
Village Attorney shall bring an action in the name of the Village
in Circuit Court to permanently enjoin such violations as a
public nuisance.
§ 366-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-20
1:301

ARTICLE III
Offenses Against Property
§ 366-21. Destruction of property; use of poles for posting notices.
§ 366-22. Littering.
A. Destruction of property; posting notices. No person shall willfully injure
or intentionally deface, destroy or unlawfully remove or interfere with
any property belonging to the Village of East Troy, the School District,
or to any private person without the consent of the owner or proper
authority, nor shall any person or organization place or permit to be
placed any sign, poster, advertisement, notice or other writing upon any
utility or ornamental light pole belonging to the Village without the
consent of the proper authority. Any signs, posters, advertisements,
notices or other writings so placed shall be removed by law
enforcement authorities and the placing person or organization cited
for violation of this section.
B. Parental liability. Pursuant to § 895.035, Wis. Stats., the parents of an
unemancipated minor shall be liable for the damage of property caused
by the willful, malicious or wanton act of such child; such liability shall
not exceed $5,000.176.
C. Penalty provisions. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates this
section is subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code,
restitution to the injured party, and the costs of prosecution.
D. Victim remedies. Any person or entity injured by a violation of this
section by a minor child shall be advised of the rights and remedies
available under § 895.035, Wis. Stats.
A. Littering prohibited. No person shall throw any glass, refuse or waste,
filth or other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or
other property of the Village of East Troy, or upon property within the
Village owned by the East Troy School District or any private person, or
upon the surface of any body of water within the Village.
B. Litter from conduct of commercial enterprise.
(1) Scope. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all sales,
promotions and other commercial ventures that result in litter
being deposited on any streets, alleys or other public ways.
(2) Litter to be cleaned up. Any person, firm, corporation or association
carrying on an enterprise that results in litter being deposited on
any street, alley or other public way shall clean up the same within
12 hours of the time the same is deposited. If any such litter is
subject to being blown about, it shall be picked up immediately. If
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-22
1:303
§ 366-23. Abandoned refrigerators.
No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building
or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building,
dwelling or other structure under his/her control, in a place accessible
to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator
or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other
locking device which may not be released from the inside without first
removing said door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from said
any such litter is likely to attract animals or vermin, such litter shall
be picked up immediately.
(3) Litter picked up at litterer's expense. If any person, firm,
corporation or association fails to pick up any litter as required by
Subsection B(2) within the time specified, the Village shall arrange
to have the same picked up by Village crews or by private
enterprise. The entire expense of picking up such litter, together
with an addition charge of 20% for administrative expenses, shall
be charged to the person, firm, corporation or association that did
the littering. If such sum is not promptly paid, steps shall be taken,
with the advice of the Village Attorney's office, to collect the same.
This charge shall be in addition to any forfeiture or other penalty
for violation of this section.
C. Depositing of materials prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
deposit or cause or permit to be deposited, placed or parked any
vegetation, grass, leaves, foliage, earth, sand, gravel, water, snow, ice,
debris, waste material, foreign substance, construction materials,
equipment or object upon any street, sidewalk or public property
without authorization of the Village Board or Director of Public Works
pursuant to the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, or upon any
private property without the consent of the owner or lessee of the
property. Any person who deposits or causes or permits to be deposited,
placed or parked any such materials, equipment or objects upon any
street, sidewalk or property shall be responsible to properly mark or
barricade the area so as to prevent a safety hazard.
D. Handbills.
(1) Scattering prohibited. It shall be unlawful to deliver any handbills
or advertising material to any premises in the Village, except by
being handed to the recipient, placed on the porch, stoop or
entranceway of the building, or firmly affixed to a building so as to
prevent any such articles from being blown about, becoming
scattered or in any way causing litter.
(2) Papers in public places prohibited. It shall be unlawful to leave any
handbills, advertising material or newspapers unattended in any
street, alley, public building or other public place, provided that
this shall not prohibit the sale of newspapers in vending machines.
§ 366-22 EAST TROY CODE § 366-23
1:304
icebox, refrigerator or container, unless such container is displayed for sale
on the premises of the owner or his/her agent and is securely locked or
fastened.
§ 366-24. Theft or damage of library material.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, certain words and terms
are defined as follows:
ARCHIVES — A place in which public or institutional records are
systematically preserved.
LIBRARY — Any public library or library of an educational or historical
organization or society or museum, and specifically the public libraries
within the Village of East Troy and school libraries.
LIBRARY MATERIAL — Includes any book, plate, picture, photograph,
engraving, painting, drawing, map, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet,
broadside, manuscript, document, letter, public record, microfilm,
sound recording, audiovisual materials in any format, magnetic or other
tapes, electronic data processing records, or other tapes, artifacts or
other documents, written or printed materials, regardless of physical
form or characteristics, belonging to, on loan to or otherwise in the
custody of a library.
B. Possession without consent prohibited. Whoever intentionally takes and
carries away, transfers, conceals or retains possession of any library
material without the consent of a library official, agent or employee,
and with intent to deprive the library of possession of the material, may
be subject to a forfeiture as provided by § 1-4 of this Code. The failure to
return library material after its proper return date, after written notice
from the library and the Village Attorney, shall be deemed to be theft.
Notice shall be considered given when written notice is mailed to the
last known address of the person with the overdue material; the notice
date shall be the date of mailing.177
C. Concealment. The concealment of library material beyond the last
station for borrowing library material in a library is evidence of intent
to deprive the library of possession of the material. The discovery of
library material which has not been borrowed in accordance with the
library's procedures or taken with consent of a library official, agent or
employee, and which is concealed upon the person or among the
belongings of another, is evidence of intentional concealment on the
part of the person so concealing the material.
D. Detention based on probable cause. An official or adult employee or
agent of a library who has probable cause for believing that a person
has violated this section in his/her presence may detain the person in a
reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time to deliver the person
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-24
1:305
§ 366-25. Damage to public property.
§ 366-26. Retail theft.
to a law enforcement officer or to the person's parent or guardian in
the case of a minor. The detained person shall be promptly informed of
the purpose of the detention and be permitted to make telephone calls
but shall not be interrogated or searched against his/her will before
the arrival of a law enforcement officer who may conduct a lawful
interrogation of the accused person. Compliance with this subsection
entitles the official, agent or employee effecting the detention to the
same defense in any action as is available to a peace officer making an
arrest in the line of duty.
E. Damaging material prohibited. No person shall mar, deface or in any
other way damage or mutilate any book, periodical, pamphlet, picture
or other article or property belonging to or in charge of the library. Any
person convicted of violating this subsection shall be subject to the
penalties as set forth in § 1-4 of this Code.
F. Return demanded. No person shall fail, on demand, to return any book,
periodical, pamphlet, picture or other articles or property belonging to
or in charge of the public library, according to the rules and regulations
duly made and adopted by the Library Board, and no person shall
remove from the library any book, periodical, pamphlet, picture or
other articles or property without first having it charged as provided by
such rules and regulations. Any person convicted of violating any
provision of this subsection shall be subject to the penalties as set forth
in § 1-4 of this Code.
A. Damaging public property. No person shall climb any tree or pluck any
flowers or fruit, wild or cultivated, or break, cut down, trample upon,
remove or in any manner injure or deface, write upon, defile or ill use
any tree, shrub, flower, flowerbed, turf, fountain, ornament, statue,
building, fence, apparatus, bench, table, official notice, sign, bridge,
structure or other property within any park or parkway or in any way
injure, damage or deface any public building, sidewalk or other public
property in the Village of East Troy.
B. Breaking of streetlamps or windows. No person shall break glass in any
streetlamps or windows of any building owned or occupied by the
Village.
C. Damaging fire hydrants and water mains. No person shall, without the
authority of Village authorities, operate any valve connected with the
street or water supply mains, or open any fire hydrant connected with
the water distribution system, except for the purpose of extinguishing a
fire. No person shall injure or impair the use of any water main or fire
hydrant.
§ 366-24 EAST TROY CODE § 366-26
1:306
§ 366-27. Issuance of worthless checks.
A. Whomever intentionally alters indicia of price or value of merchandise,
or takes and carries away, transfers, conceals or retains possession of
merchandise held for resale by a merchant, without consent and with
intent to deprive the merchant permanently of possession or the full
purchase price, may be penalized as provided in Subsection D.
B. The intentional concealment of unpurchased merchandise which
continues from one floor to another, or beyond the last station for
receiving payments in a merchant's store, is evidence of intent to
deprive the merchant permanently of possession of such merchandise
without paying the purchase price thereof. The discovery of
unpurchased merchandise concealed upon the person or among the
belongings of another is evidence of intentional concealment on the
part of the person so concealing such goods.
C. A merchant or merchant's adult employee who has probable cause for
believing that a person has violated this section in his/her presence may
detain such person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time to deliver him/her to a peace officer or to his/her parent or
guardian, if a minor. The detained person must be promptly informed of
the purpose for the detention and may make phone calls, but he/she
shall not be interrogated or searched against his/her will before the
arrival of a law enforcement officer who may conduct a lawful
interrogation of the accused person. Compliance with this subsection
entitles the merchant or his/her employee effecting the detention to the
same defense in any action as is available to a peace officer making an
arrest in the line of duty.
D. If the value of the merchandise does not exceed $500, any person
violating this section shall forfeit not more than $1,000. If the value of
the merchandise exceeds $500, this section shall not apply and the
matter shall be referred to the District Attorney's office for criminal
prosecution.178
A. Violations. Whomever issues any check or other order for the payment
of money less than $1,000 which, at the time of issuance, he/she intends
shall not be paid is guilty of a violation of this section.
B. Prima facie evidence. Any of the following is prima facie evidence that
the person at the time he/she issued the check or other order for
payment of money intended it should not be paid:
(1) Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have an
account with the drawee;
(2) Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have
sufficient funds or credit with the drawee and that the person
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-27
1:307
§ 366-28. Trespassing.
§ 366-29. Smoking.
failed, within five days after receiving notice of nonpayment or
dishonor, to pay the check or other order; or
(3) Proof that, when presentment was made within a reasonable time,
the person did not have sufficient funds or credit with the drawee
and the person failed, within five days after receiving notice of
nonpayment or dishonor, to pay the check or other order.
C. Exceptions. This section does not apply to a postdated check or to a
check given in past consideration, except a payroll check.
D. Penalties.
(1) In addition to any other penalties provided for under § 1-4 of this
Code, the Municipal Judge may order a violator of this section to
pay restitution to a victim. In determining the method of payment,
the Court shall consider the financial resources and future ability of
the violator to pay. The Court shall provide for payment of an
amount equal to the pecuniary loss caused by the offense. Upon the
application of an interested party, the Court shall schedule and hold
an evidentiary hearing to determine the value of the victim's
pecuniary loss resulting from the offense. A victim may not be
compensated under this section and under § 943.245, Wis. Stats.
(2) In this section, "pecuniary loss" means:
(a) All special damages, but not general damages, substantiated
by evidence in the record, which a person could recover
against the violator in a civil action arising out of the facts or
events constituting the violator's criminal activities, including,
without limitation because of enumeration, the money
equivalent of loss resulting from property taken, destroyed,
broken or otherwise harmed and out-of pocket losses, such as
medical expenses; and
(b) Reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the victim
resulting from the filing of charges or cooperating in the
investigation and prosecution of the offense.
A. Trespass to land. No person shall enter or remain on any land after
having been notified by the owner or occupant not to remain on the
premises.
B. Trespass to dwelling. No person shall intentionally enter the dwelling of
another without the consent of some person lawfully upon the premises,
under circumstances tending to create or provoke a breach of the
peace.
§ 366-27 EAST TROY CODE § 366-29
1:308
§ 366-30. Theft.
A. State statute adopted. The provisions of § 101.123, Wis. Stats., relating
to the regulation of smoking and clean indoor air, except provisions
therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any
act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated
herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future
amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated
herein are intended to be made a part of this section.
B. Smoking prohibited within or upon all buildings and equipment owned,
leased or rented by the Village and Village-owned property. In
recognition of a need to protect the health and comfort of the public and
Village employees from the detrimental effects of smoking, pursuant to
the authority granted to the Village by § 101.123, Wis. Stats., smoking
as defined by § 101.123(1)(h), Wis. Stats., is hereby prohibited by any
person within or upon all buildings and enclosed equipment owned,
leased or rented by the Village of East Troy and upon all Village-owned
property, excluding streets, alleys, sidewalks, all Village parks and the
Village Square. As prescribed by state statutes, a warning notice shall
be issued to the person in charge for the first violation.
C. State statutes adopted. The provisions contained in § 120.12(20), Wis.
Stats., regulating smoking on school premises are adopted by reference
and made a part of this section as though set forth in full.
D. Penalties. A violation of this section relating to the prohibition of
smoking in various places shall be subject to a penalty as prescribed in
§ 101.123(8), Wis. Stats.179
A. Acts. Whoever does any of the following may be penalized as provided
in § 1-4 of this Code:
(1) Intentionally takes and carries away, uses, transfers, conceals or
retains possession of movable property of another, without his/her
consent, and with intent to deprive the owner permanently of
possession of such property.
(2) By virtue of his/her office, business or employment, or as trustee or
bailee, having possession or custody of money or of a negotiable
security, instrument, paper or other negotiable writing of another,
intentionally uses, transfers, conceals or retains possession of such
money, security, instrument, paper or writing, without the owner's
consent, contrary to his/her authority, and with intent to convert to
his/her own use or to the use of any other person except the owner.
A refusal to deliver any money or a negotiable security, instrument,
paper or other negotiable writing which is in his/her possession or
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-30
1:309
§ 366-31. Fraud on residential landlords.
custody by virtue of his/her office, business or employment, or as
required by law, is prima facie evidence of an intent to convert to
his/her own use within the meaning of this subsection.
(3) Having a legal interest in movable property, intentionally and
without consent, takes such property out of the possession of the
pledgee or such other person having a superior right of possession
with intent thereby to deprive the pledgee or other person
permanently of the possession of such property.180
(4) Obtains title to property of another by intentionally deceiving him/
her with a false representation which is known to be false, made
with intent to defraud, and which does defraud the person to whom
it is made. "False representation" includes a promise made with
intent not to perform it if it is a part of a false and fraudulent
scheme.181
(5) Intentionally fails to return any personal property which is in his/
her possession or under his/her control, by virtue of a written lease
or written rental agreement, within 10 days after the lease or
rental agreement has expired.
B. Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this section:
MOVABLE PROPERTY — Property whose physical location can be
changed, without limitation, including electricity and gas and
documents which represent or embody intangible rights, and things
growing on or affixed to or found in land.
PROPERTY — All forms of tangible property, whether real or personal,
without limitation, including electricity, gas and documents which
represent or embody a chose in action or other intangible rights.
PROPERTY OF ANOTHER — Includes property in which the actor is a
co-owner and property of a partnership of which the actor is a member,
unless the actor and the victim are husband and wife.
VALUE — The market value at the time of the theft, or the cost to
the victim of replacing the property within a reasonable time after the
theft, whichever is less, if the property stolen is a document evidencing
a chose in action or other intangible right; "value" means either the
market value of the chose in action or other right or the intrinsic value
of the document, whichever is greater. If the thief gave consideration
for or had a legal interest in the stolen property, the amount of such
consideration or value of such interest shall be deducted from the total
value of the property.
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 366-30 EAST TROY CODE § 366-31
1:310
A. Prohibited acts. Any person who, with intent to defraud, does any of the
following shall be guilty of violating this section:
(1) Intentionally absconds without paying rent that has been
contractually agreed upon in an oral or written lease with a
landlord. Prima facie evidence of intentionally absconding will be
established if a tenant fails to pay rent due prior to the vacating of
the rental premises by the tenant and the nonpayment of said rent
continues for a period of five days after vacation of the premises;
or
(2) Issues any check, money order or any other form of bank or
monetary draft as a payment of rent, where such document lacks
sufficient funds, where the account is closed, or where such draft is
unredeemable in any other form or fashion. Prima facie evidence of
intention to defraud will be established if a tenant fails, within five
days of a written demand by the landlord or agent, to pay in full the
total amount of the draft present as rent payment, plus any bank
charges to the landlord attributable to the unredeemability of the
draft.
B. Applicability. This section shall apply to rental agreements between
residential landlords and tenants only. The words and terms used in this
section shall be defined and construed in conformity with the provisions
of Ch. ATCP 134, Wis. Adm. Code, Ch. 704, Wis. Stats., and
§ 990.001(1), Wis. Stats. The act of service by a landlord of a legal
eviction notice to terminate tenancy shall not, in itself, act as a bar to
prosecution under this section.
C. Procedure. An officer may issue a citation only when the complainant
provides the following:
(1) The name and current address of the tenant, a copy of the subject
lease agreement, or sworn testimony of the terms of the subject
oral lease.
(2) The amount of rent due, the date it was due, the date the tenant
actually vacated the premises, and testimony that the rent
remained unpaid for not less than five days after vacating and that
the tenant did not notify or attempt to notify the complainant of the
tenant's new address, or that the tenant knowingly gave the
complainant a false address.
(3) As to an unredeemable payment, the document used for attempting
rent payment, the written demand for payment of the full amount
plus bank charges, proof that the tenant received the written
demand, and testimony that at least five days have elapsed since
the demand was received and no payment has been made.
§ 366-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-31
1:311
Chapter 375
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials and pollution — See Ch.
285.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 289.
Nuisances — See Ch. 354.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 443.
Junked and abandoned vehicles — See Ch.
461.
Waste management — See Ch. 470.
§ 366-31 EAST TROY CODE § 366-31
1:312
ARTICLE I
Minimum Standards
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 15, Ch. 4, of the 2000
Code]
§ 375-1. Minimum property maintenance standards.
§ 375-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall be applicable:
ABANDONED DWELLING — A dwelling which is not occupied and which
is not intended by the owner to be occupied within a reasonable period
of time. A dwelling shall be presumed to be abandoned if it is unoccupied
for a period of 12 consecutive months. Occupancy required hereunder
shall be bona fide and not acquired for the sole purpose of defeating the
abandonment of a dwelling.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental to
that of the main building and which is attached thereto or located on the
same premises.
BLIGHTED AREA — Any area (including a slum area) in which a majority
of the structures are residential (or in which there is a predominance
of buildings or improvements, whether residential or nonresidential) and
which, by reason of dilapidation, deterioration, age or obsolescence,
inadequate provision for ventilation, light, air, sanitation or open spaces,
high density of population and overcrowding, or the existence of conditions
which endanger life or property by fire and other causes, or any
A. Policy. There exist in the Village of East Troy structures, residential
yards or vacant areas or combinations thereof which are, or may
become, unhygienic, dilapidated or unsafe with respect to structural
integrity, equipment or maintenance and as such constitute a menace to
the health, safety and welfare of the public. Lack of maintenance and
progressive deterioration of certain properties have the further effect
of creating blighted area conditions, and, if such conditions are not
curtailed and removed, the expenditure of large amounts of public
funds to correct and eliminate the same will be necessary. Timely
regulation and restriction to contain and prevent blight is necessary,
thereby maintaining the desirability and amenities, as well as property
values, of the neighborhoods in the Village.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect public health, safety
and welfare by establishing minimum property maintenance standards.
This article does not replace or modify standards otherwise established
by other portions of this Code of Ordinances for construction, repair,
alteration or use of buildings. This article is meant to be remedial, and
this article shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes stated
herein. Violation of the minimum standards set forth in this article shall
be deemed to be a public nuisance.
§ 375-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-2
1:313
combination of such factors, is conducive to all ill health, transmission of
disease, infant mortality, juvenile delinquency and crime and is detrimental
to the public health, safety, morals or welfare.
BUILDING — Any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind and which is
permanently affixed to the land or connected to a utility, and includes those
structures resting on runners, wheels, or similar supports.
DETERIORATION — The condition or appearance of a building or part
thereof characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling,
rusting or other evidence of physical decay, neglect, lack of maintenance or
excessive use.
DILAPIDATED — Describes a building, structure or part thereof which is in
a state of ruin or shabbiness resulting from neglect. The term applies to a
hazard to life or property.
DWELLING — Any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
NUISANCE — Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity
jurisprudence or as provided by the statutes of the State of Wisconsin or
the Village of East Troy Code of Ordinances. Further, a public nuisance is a
thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for
such length of time as to:
OCCUPANT — Any person living or sleeping in or having actual possession
of a building.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation.
PREMISES — A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land
or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by a dwelling or nondwelling
structure, and includes any such building, accessory structure or other
structure thereon.
Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or
safety of the public; or
A.
In any other way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property.
B.
Shall have legal title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or
A.
Shall have charge, care or control of any premises as owner or agent
of the owner or an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the
estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual
owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article and
of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent as
if he/she were the owner.
B.
§ 375-2 EAST TROY CODE § 375-2
1:314
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solids (except body wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of
either:
§ 375-3. Litter, rubbish or debris.
No owner or occupant shall accumulate or allow the accumulation outside
of a building or accessory structure of waste matter, litter, refuse, rubbish,
lumber, metal scraps, machine parts, discarded or nonfunctioning
appliances, accessories, furniture or other material on such property which
presents a blighted appearance on the property or which constitutes a
nuisance or which tends to decrease the value of neighboring properties.
§ 375-4. Standards for dwelling units; abandoned dwellings.
Combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, plastic containers, yard
clippings and wood; or
A.
B. Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans, glass or crockery.
A. Minimum standards. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall
let or hold out to another for occupancy any dwelling or family unit for
the purpose of living therein or own or be in control of any vacant
dwelling or dwelling unit which is not safe, clean, sanitary and fit for
human occupancy and which does not comply with the particular
requirements of the following subsections.
B. Foundations, exterior walls and roofs. No person shall be an owner or
occupant of any premises which does not comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Every exterior wall shall be free of deterioration, holes, breaks, and
loose or rotting board or timbers.
(2) Structures that require paint or stain should have paint or stain
applied at regular intervals to exterior building surfaces. When the
building has more than 30% deterioration of its finished surface on
any wall, that wall shall be painted or stained. Such painting and
staining shall be completed within 90 days from the date of first
application.
(3) All cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, oriel windows and similar
projections shall be kept in good repair and free from cracks and
defects which make them hazardous or unsightly.
(4) Roof surfaces shall be tight and have no defects which admit water.
All roof drainage systems shall be secured and hung properly.
(5) Chimneys, antennas, air vents and other similar projections shall
be structurally sound and in good repair. Such projections shall be
§ 375-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-4
1:315
§ 375-5. Notice of violation.
secured properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior
roof.
C. Grading and drainage of lots. Every yard, court, vent passageway,
driveway and other portion of the lot on which the building stands shall
be graded and drained so as to prevent the accumulation of water on
any surface or on adjacent property. Driveways shall be maintained in
good repair.
D. Accessory structures. All accessory structures shall be maintained in a
state of good repair and vertical alignment. All exterior appurtenances
or accessory structures which serve no useful purpose and are in a
deteriorated or dilapidated condition, which are not economically
repairable, shall be removed. Such structures include, but are not
limited to, porches, terraces, entrance platforms, garages, driveways,
carports, walls, fences and miscellaneous sheds.
E. Abandoned dwellings. The owner of any abandoned dwelling shall:
(1) Cause all services and utilities to be disconnected from or
discontinued to said dwelling;
(2) Lock all exterior doors and windows of said dwelling;
(3) Maintain such dwelling so that its foundation, floors, windows,
walls, doors, ceilings, roof, porches and stairs shall be reasonably
weathertight, waterproof, rodentproof, structurally sound and in
good repair such that they comply with Subsection B; and
(4) Maintain the yard and accessory structures such that they comply
with Subsections C and D.
F. Nuisances. The interior and exterior of vacant and abandoned dwellings
shall be maintained in a nuisance-free condition.
A. Upon determination by the Village Building Inspector of a violation of
this article, the Village Building Inspector shall notify the owner and, if
different from the owner, the occupant of the premises of such
violation.182
B. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation, the required
correction and a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, to correct the
violation. The notice shall be served upon the person or persons named
personally or by certified mail addressed, postage paid, to the last
known address of such person or persons.
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 375-4 EAST TROY CODE § 375-5
1:316
§ 375-6. Other methods not excluded.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of
public nuisances by the Village of East Troy or its officials in accordance
with the laws of the State of Wisconsin or Village ordinances.
§ 375-7. Recovery of abatement costs.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this article for erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner,
such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
C. The person so notified shall have the right to appeal the decision of the
Building Inspector to the Village Board within 30 days of the date of
notice.
D. If, upon expiration of time given for correction of a violation and time
for any appeal thereof, such correction is not made, the Building
Inspector shall file an action in the name of the Village in the Circuit
Court for Walworth County, Wisconsin, in accordance with the
provisions of Ch. 823, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time.
§ 375-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-7
1:317

ARTICLE II
Commercial Property
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 15, Ch. 5, of the 2000
Code]
§ 375-8. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Village of East Troy Commercial Property
Exterior Maintenance Code."
§ 375-9. Intent and purpose.
§ 375-10. Minimum standards for property maintenance.
A. This article is adopted for the purpose of preserving and promoting the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general
welfare of the people of the Village and environs. This includes, among
others, physical, aesthetic and monetary values.
B. It is recognized that there may now be or may in the future be
commercial buildings, structures, yards or vacant areas and
combinations thereof which are so dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous,
unhygienic or inadequately maintained as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety and general welfare of the people. The establishment and
enforcement of minimum commercial property maintenance standards
is necessary to preserve and promote the private and public interest.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to recognize the private and
public benefits resulting from the safe, sanitary and attractive
maintenance of commercial buildings, structures, yards or vacant
areas. Attractive and well-maintained property will enhance the
neighborhood and Village and provide a suitable environment for
increasing physical and monetary values.
B. Minimum requirements. Every owner or operator shall improve and
maintain all property under his or her control to comply with the
following minimum requirements:
(1) Drainage. All courts, yards or other areas on the premises shall be
properly graded to divert water away from any building or
structure.
(2) Weeds. All exterior property areas shall be kept free from noxious
weeds as required by this Code of Ordinances. Where weed cutting
is required, the Weed Commissioner shall perform said weed
cutting and process the charge therefor as a special charge against
the benefitted property.183
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). See § 289-3, Destruction of noxious weeds.
§ 375-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-10
1:319
(3) Debris. All exterior property areas shall be properly maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition, free from debris, rubbish or garbage,
physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation and animal
feces. All animal feces shall be removed within 24 hours.
(4) Fences, walks and parking areas. Fences, other minor construction,
walks, driveways, parking areas and similar paved areas shall be
properly maintained in a safe, sanitary and substantial condition.
Approved walks shall provide all-weather access to buildings or
structures.
(5) Exterior surfaces. Exterior surfaces of buildings and structures not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be treated with a
protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative which will
provide adequate resistance to weathering and maintain an
attractive appearance. Any exterior surface treated with paint or
other preservative shall be maintained so as to prevent chipping,
cracking or other deterioration of the exterior surface or the
surface treatment and to present an attractive appearance. All
paint or other preservative shall be applied in a workmanlike
fashion.
(6) Yard areas. Yard areas of real estate shall not be permitted to
deteriorate or remain in a condition that is not in accord with the
following: yard areas shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, free from any accumulation of combustible or
noncombustible materials (which are not used as an integral part of
the authorized business carried out on the premises), debris or
refuse. Unless in a properly zoned district and screened by a visual
barrier at least five feet high, yards shall not be used to store
appliances, furnaces, hot-water heaters, water softeners or
building material not used within five days, or any unsightly bulk
items, unless these items are raw materials used in the business
carried out on the premises.
(7) General requirements. Every foundation, exterior wall and roof
shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodentproof and
shall be kept in proper repair and shall be capable of affording
privacy. Any hazardous sagging or bulging shall be properly
repaired to a level or plumb position. All chimneys and breeching
shall be so constructed and maintained so as to ensure that they
safely and properly remove the products of combustion from the
building.
(8) Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door and basement
hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight and
rodentproof and kept in proper repair. All door and window
hardware shall be installed and maintained in proper working
condition.
§ 375-10 EAST TROY CODE § 375-10
1:320
§ 375-11. Responsibility of owners, operators and occupants.
Every owner, operator or occupant of a commercial property, or part
thereof, shall maintain that portion of the exterior of the property controlled
by him/her.
§ 375-12. Notice of violation; enforcement.
Whenever the Building Inspector determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he/she shall
give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible
therefor and commence an enforcement action pursuant to Article I of this
chapter.
(9) Outside stairs and porches. Every outside stair, every porch and
every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to
use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause
to be placed thereon and shall be kept in proper condition and
repair and shall present an attractive appearance. All exterior
stairs and steps and every appurtenance thereto shall comply with
the requirements specified in the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(10) Removal of debris.
(a) No person shall dispose of rocks, trees, stumps, waste building
material, or other debris from land development, building
construction, street grading or installation of underground
utilities upon the surface of any land in the Village, except at
approved disposal sites.
(b) No landowner shall allow an accumulation of rocks, trees,
stumps, waste building material or other debris from land
development, building construction, street grading or
installation of underground utilities upon the surface of his/her
land for a period of more than 10 days.
(c) All land filling operations shall be leveled off to permit the
mowing of the weeds between June 1 and November 1. This
includes the removal of stones, bottles, wire and other debris
that will interfere with mowing operations.
§ 375-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-12
1:321
Chapter 400
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 289.
Water — See Ch. 475.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 495.
§ 375-12 EAST TROY CODE § 375-12
1:322
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 400-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to:
§ 400-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows. "May" is permissive; "shall" is
mandatory.
A. Establish rules regulating connections to the wastewater facilities.
B. Establish rules regulating sewer construction.
C. Establish rules regulating discharge of domestic wastewater to the
wastewater facilities.
D. Establish rules regulating discharge of industrial wastewater to the
wastewater facilities.
E. Establish rules regulating discharge of septage and holding tank wastes
to the wastewater facilities.
F. Establish rules prohibiting or limiting discharge of deleterious
substances to the wastewater facilities.
G. Establish rules for the management, regulation, protection, and use of
the wastewater facilities.
H. Establish a sewer service charge system for providing equitable
distribution of the costs of construction, administration, operation, and
maintenance of the wastewater facilities among all wastewater
facilities users.
I. Establish the billing procedures to be used by the Village of East Troy.
J. Establish rules and regulations regarding provision of wastewater
treatment service to outside users.
K. Establish penalties for violation of the rules and regulations of this
chapter.
L. Enable the Village of East Troy to comply with administrative
provisions, water quality requirements, toxic and pretreatment
standards, and other federal and state rules and regulations applicable
to the wastewater facilities.
M. Obtain and preserve the maximum public benefit of the wastewater
facilities by regulating the characteristics of wastewater discharged
into the wastewater facilities.
§ 400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-2
1:323
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory conditions in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per
liter. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as indicated in Chapter NR 219 of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping within or
below a building or structure which conveys wastewater to the building
sewer. The building drain ends and the building sewer begins at a distance
of five feet outward from the inner face of the building's exterior wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The sanitary sewer lateral extending from the
building drain through the connection to the sanitary sewer or other place
of disposal.
BUILDING SEWER STUB — The section of the building sewer extending
from the connection at the sanitary sewer through the public right-of-way
or easement or to the user's property line.
COMMERCIAL USER — Any user whose premises is used primarily for
conduct of profit-oriented enterprises and who discharges primarily
domestic wastewater to the wastewater facilities. This category shall
include, but not be limited to, wholesale or retail trade businesses, financial
institutions, insurance agencies, restaurants, bars, hotels, motels, gas
stations, convenience stores, grocery stores, car washes, laundromats, real
estate businesses, and multifamily dwellings having three or more units.
CONNECTION FEE — A fee applied to all new building sewer connections
to the wastewater facilities and to users which increase their wastewater
discharge by more than one residential user flow equivalent. The
connection fee is separate from the sewer service charge.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE — A charge levied on all users of the wastewater
facilities to recover the debt service cost.
DEBT SERVICE COST — The annual payment of principal and interest for
the retirement of debt issued to finance the cost of capital improvements to
the wastewater facilities. The debt service cost shall include administrative
costs associated with the debt retirement.
DELETERIOUS SUBSTANCE — A substance that, alone or in conjunction
with other discharged substances, has any of the following impacts:
A. Inhibits or disrupts any wastewater treatment processes.
B. Damages any of the wastewater facilities.
C. Causes violation of the WPDES permit.
Interferes with the operation or maintenance of the wastewater
facilities.
D.
E. Creates or constitutes a hazard to humans or the environment.
Results in wastewater treatment sludge characteristics that do not
meet regulatory requirements for sludge disposal.
F.
§ 400-2 EAST TROY CODE § 400-2
1:324
DEVELOPER — A person owning and/or developing lands and requesting
a sewer extension to the area being developed and/or a person taking
any action that will result in additional users being served by the Village
wastewater collection system.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — The combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes and wastewater discharged from toilets and other sanitary plumbing
facilities which contain no deleterious substances, which contain no
prohibited substances, and for which five-day biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD5), total suspended solids (TSS), total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN), and
total phosphorus concentrations, on average, do not exceed the following
levels:
EASEMENT — The acquired right for the specified use of land owned by
others.
ENGINEER — A person who is licensed as a professional engineer by the
State of Wisconsin and whose license is in good standing with the State of
Wisconsin.
EQUIVALENT METER — The basic unit of service for the purposes of
determining debt service charges for users in the Village of East Troy. The
five-eighths-inch and three-fourths-inch size water meters represent one
unit of service.
EQUIVALENT METER FACTOR — A multiplication factor, assigned to each
size water meter, which is used to calculate the debt service charge for each
size meter, relative to a five-eighths-inch or three-fourths-inch water meter.
FATS, OILS AND GREASE — A group of substances including fats, waxes,
free fatty acids, calcium and magnesium soaps, mineral oils, and certain
other nonfatty materials. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as indicated in
Chapter NR 219 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
FLOATABLE OIL — Fat, oil, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered to be free of
floatable oil if it is properly pretreated to the extent that it does not result
in increased maintenance requirements for the wastewater facilities.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of food or from the handling, storage, and
sale of food products or produce.
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) concentration less than or equal
to 220 mg/l.
A.
Total suspended solids (TSS) concentration less than or equal to 220
mg/l.
B.
C. Total nitrogen concentration less than or equal to 40 mg/l as N.
D. Total phosphorus concentration less than or equal to eight mg/l as P.
§ 400-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-2
1:325
GOVERNMENTAL USER — Any user whose premises is used for the
conduct of legislative, judicial, administrative, or regulatory activities of
any federal, state, local, or international units of government. This does
not include government-owned or -operated businesses or any users which
meet the requirements of this chapter for classification as a significant
industrial user.
HAULED WASTES — Septage, holding tank wastes, landfill leachate, or any
other wastewater or wastes hauled by truck and requiring treatment.
HIGH-STRENGTH WASTEWATER — Wastewater with concentrations of
five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5), total suspended solids (TSS),
total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN), or total phosphorus which exceed the
concentrations defined in this chapter for domestic wastewater.
HOLDING TANK WASTES — The liquid and solids from residential holding
tanks. This term does not include wastes from grease traps. See also
"septage."
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of the
wastewater facilities which discharges industrial wastewater to the
wastewater facilities. Industrial users shall include, but not be limited to,
those types of industries identified in Divisions A, B, D, E, and I of the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual and those industries subject to
categorical pretreatment standards set forth in Chapters NR 221 to NR 297
of the Wisconsin Administrative Code. See also "significant industrial user."
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — Any trade or process wastewater generated
by an industrial process, including but not limited to those categories
identified in Divisions A, B, D, E, and I of the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, and as distinct from domestic wastewater.
INFILTRATION — The water entering sanitary sewers and building sewers
from the soil through defective pipe joints, broken or cracked pipes,
improper connections, manhole walls, or other defects.
INFLOW — The water discharged into sanitary sewers and building sewers
from such sources as, but not limited to, downspouts, roof leaders, cellar
and yard area drains, foundation drains, commercial and industrial noncontact
cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas,
manhole covers, and cross-connections between storm sewers and sanitary
sewers.
INSTITUTIONAL USER — Not-for-profit facilities, which are not engaged
in retail trade or in manufacturing, which discharge primarily domestic
wastewater, including but not limited to schools, hospitals, churches,
religious facilities, clubs, and fraternities.
LOAD — The mass of a contaminant discharged to the sanitary sewer,
calculated as the wastewater flow in millions of gallons per day times the
concentration of the contaminant in the wastewater in milligrams per liter
times 8.34 pounds per gallon.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, town, village, county, county utility district,
town sanitary district, metropolitan sewerage district, or lake district.
§ 400-2 EAST TROY CODE § 400-2
1:326
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pool, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (O&M) COST — All costs associated
with the administration, operation and maintenance of the wastewater
facilities.
ORDINANCE — A statute or regulation enacted by a governing body.
OUTSIDE USER — Any municipality, nonprofit organization, industry,
business, or private enterprise which receives, or is requesting to receive,
wastewater treatment services from the Village of East Troy, which is not
located within the Village of East Troy corporate limits, and for which the
Village requires that a contract be established between the Village and said
outside user for the purpose of providing wastewater treatment service to
said outside user. Outside users shall include, but not be limited to, the
Town of East Troy Sanitary District No. 2, the Alpine Valley Resort, the
Alpine Valley Music Theatre, and the Salvation Army.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, limited liability company, corporation,
association, joint venture, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other
legal entity.
pH — The negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles
per liter of solution. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as indicated in
Chapter NR 219 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
wastewater, garbage, refuse, oil, solvent, flammables, toxic substances,
wastewater sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive substance, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
dirt, and industrial, commercial, municipal, and agricultural waste.
PRETREATMENT — Reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging such
pollutants into the wastewater facilities.
PRETREATMENT PROGRAM — A program administered by the Village
that meets the criteria established in Chapter NR 211 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code and which has been approved by the WDNR in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter NR 211 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation which applies to industrial
users and which contains pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
WDNR in accordance with Chapter 283 of the Wisconsin Statutes. This term
shall include both prohibited discharge standards set forth in or established
under Chapter NR 211 and categorical pretreatment standards set forth in
Chapter NR 211 and in Chapters NR 221 through NR 297 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
PRIVATE WASTEWATER FACILITIES — Privately owned and operated
facilities designed for the purpose of on-site conveyance, treatment, and
§ 400-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-2
1:327
disposal of wastewater. This term shall include, but not be limited to, septic
tank/effluent absorption area systems.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sanitary sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch
in any dimension.
REPLACEMENT COSTS — Expenditures for purchasing and installing
equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are required to be
replaced during the service life of the wastewater facilities in order to
maintain the capacity and performance for which the wastewater facilities
were designed and constructed.
REPLACEMENT FUND — An account established to provide funds for the
replacement costs in accordance with Chapter NR 162 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
RESIDENTIAL USER — An individual household unit and shall include
single-family and duplex units.
RESIDENTIAL USER FLOW EQUIVALENT — The metered water usage,
in gallons per day, representative of the average residential user. The
residential user flow equivalent shall be defined at a standard rate of 155
gallons per day. The Village Board may redefine this value, from time to
time, at its discretion, based on evaluation of historical metered water
usage and the number of residential meters. For the purposes of assessing
debt service charges, in special cases, as applicable, one residential user
flow equivalent shall be assigned an equivalent meter factor of 1.0.
SANITARY SEWER — The sewers owned, maintained, and operated by
the Village which convey liquid and waterborne wastes from residential,
commercial, industrial, institutional, governmental, and outside user
facilities, together with inflow and infiltration that are not intentionally
admitted.
SANITARY SEWER EXTENSION — Any addition of sanitary sewer or related
facilities to the Village of East Troy wastewater collection system for the
purpose of providing sanitary sewer service to a housing development,
business park, industrial park, etc. An extension is intended to include
any action that will result in additional users being served by the Village
wastewater collection system.
SANITARY SEWER SERVICE AREA — All areas, as delineated by the
Village, and as approved by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission, which are presently served, or are anticipated to be served in
the future, by sanitary sewer.
SEPTAGE — The liquid or solids from septic tanks, chemical toilets,
campers, privies, dosing chambers, seepage beds, seepage pits, or seepage
trenches. "Septage" does not include waste from a grease trap or grease
interceptor. See also "holding tank wastes."
SEWAGE — Shall be synonymous with "wastewater."
§ 400-2 EAST TROY CODE § 400-2
1:328
SEWER — A pipe or conduit designed to convey wastewater or drainage
water.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — A service charge levied on users of the
wastewater facilities and shall include the user charge and the debt service
charge.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user which meets one or
more of the following conditions:
SLUG — Any discharge of any wastewater, for any duration, during which
the rate of flow or the concentration of any constituent increases to such
magnitude so as to adversely affect the operation of the wastewater
facilities or the ability of the wastewater treatment plant to meet the
requirements of the WPDES permit.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION MANUAL — The reference
document published by the United States Office of Management and
Budget, latest edition.
STANDARD METHODS — Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater as published by American Public Health Association,
American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation,
latest edition.
Any industrial user of the wastewater facilities which discharges more
than 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of wastewater, excluding domestic
wastewater and non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater.
A.
Any industrial user that discharges a process waste stream which
makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic capacity,
or more than 5% of the BOD5, TSS, TKN, or total phosphorus treating
capacity, of the wastewater treatment plant.
B.
C. Any centralized waste treater.
Any industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards in
Chapters NR 221 to NR 297 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
D.
Any user of the wastewater facilities which discharges wastewater to
the wastewater facilities which contains toxic substances or poisonous
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of the
wastewater treatment plant or injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment plant process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in or have an adverse
effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the wastewater
facilities.
E.
Any industrial user that is required to file effluent reports for discharge
to the wastewater facilities as required by Chapter NR 101 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code and Chapter 283 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
F.
§ 400-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-2
1:329
STORM SEWER — A sewer designed to convey stormwater, surface water,
and drainage. Excludes all wastewater but may include non-contact cooling
water.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN) — The total of organic and ammonia
nitrogen present in a wastewater sample. Acceptable test method(s) shall
be as indicated in Chapter NR 219 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
TOTAL NITROGEN — The total of organic, ammonia, nitrate, and nitrite
nitrogen present in a wastewater sample. Acceptable test method(s) shall
be as indicated in Chapter NR 219 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
TOTAL PHOSPHORUS — Total phosphorus in wastewater which may be
present in any of three principal forms: orthophosphate, polyphosphate,
and organic phosphate. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as indicated in
Chapter NR 219 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) — Solids that either float on the surface
of or are in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids and that are
removable by laboratory filtering. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as
indicated in Chapter NR 219 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Those pollutants or combination of pollutants,
including disease-causing agents, which after discharge and upon exposure,
ingestion, inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either directly from
the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, will, on
the basis of the best available scientific information, cause death, disease,
behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, or physiological
malfunctions in such organisms or their offspring. "Toxic substances" shall
include, but not be limited to, those toxic pollutants listed in Chapter NR
215 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
UNALTERED WATER — Waters which are not changed chemically or
physically as a result of use.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Any water substantially free of pollutants and of
such quality that it would not cause violation of the water quality standards
for the receiving body of water and would not be benefited by discharge to
the wastewater facilities.
USER — Any residential, commercial, institutional, governmental,
industrial, and outside user which discharges wastewater to the wastewater
facilities.
USER CHARGE — A charge levied on users of the wastewater facilities for
the cost of administration, management, operation, and maintenance of the
wastewater facilities. The user charge shall be contained within the sewer
service charge as created by this chapter. The user charge shall also include
the annual contribution to the replacement fund.
USER CHARGE COST — All costs associated with the administration,
management, operation, and maintenance of the wastewater facilities. The
user charge cost shall also include the annual contribution to the
replacement fund.
§ 400-2 EAST TROY CODE § 400-2
1:330
VILLAGE — The Village of East Troy and the governing bodies thereof,
including the Village Board or designated staff.184
VILLAGE BOARD — The governing body of the Village of East Troy. The
Board shall have the powers of a governing body as set forth in Chapters 61
and 66 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended from time to time.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from any
residential, commercial, governmental, institutional, industrial, or outside
user into the wastewater facilities, together with any infiltration or inflow
that may enter the wastewater collection system but which is not
intentionally admitted. See also "domestic wastewater" and "industrial
wastewater."
WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM — A system of sanitary sewers,
pump stations, force mains, and other related facilities owned, maintained,
and operated by the Village and designed to convey wastewater. Grinder
pump stations and associated force mains located on private property and
designed to convey wastewater from an individual structure, or group of
structures, to the wastewater collection system shall be considered to be
part of the wastewater collection system only when such facilities are
owned, operated and maintained by the Village.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — All facilities for collecting, conveying,
pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater. Includes the wastewater
collection system and the wastewater treatment plant.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT — The equipment, devices, structures,
and other facilities which are used for treating wastewater and which are
owned, operated, and maintained by the Village. Synonymous with "publicly
owned treatment works (POTW)."
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WATER UTILITY — The Village of East Troy Water Utility.
WDNR — The State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
WISCONSIN ADMINISTRATIVE CODE — The published rules of executive
agencies having rule-making authority for the State of Wisconsin, latest
edition.
WPDES — Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit as
issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
§ 400-3. Conflicts; amendments; emergency rules.
A. Previous ordinances superseded. This chapter shall supersede any
previous Village of East Troy ordinance, rules or regulations and shall
repeal all parts thereof that may be inconsistent with this chapter.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 400-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-3
1:331
B. Conflicts with state and federal rules. If there is any conflict between
this chapter and any applicable state or federal statutes or regulations,
then the statutes or regulations of the state or federal government shall
take precedence.
C. Conflicts with outside user rules. If there is any conflict between this
chapter and any ordinance, rule, or regulation for any outside user, then
this chapter shall take precedence.
D. Amendment. The Village reserves the right to amend this chapter, in
part or in whole, wherever it may deem such an amendment necessary.
Public notice of amendments to or revisions of this chapter shall be
provided as required by Wisconsin Statutes.
E. Emergency rule. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the Village from adopting an emergency rule in order to
preserve the public health, safety, and welfare.
§ 400-3 EAST TROY CODE § 400-3
1:332
ARTICLE II
Management of Wastewater Facilities
§ 400-4. Authority to construct wastewater facilities.
The Village shall have the power to construct wastewater facilities for
public use in accordance with Chapter 61 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The
Village shall have the power to construct sanitary sewers in and through
the alleys, streets, and public grounds of the Village and, generally, to do all
such work as may be found necessary or convenient in the management of
the wastewater facilities.
§ 400-5. Authority to purchase property.
The Village shall have authority to purchase and acquire for the Village all
real and personal property which may be necessary for construction of the
wastewater facilities, or for any repair, remodeling, or additions thereto, in
accordance with Chapter 61 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 400-6. Authority of Village Board; recovery of costs. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
The management, operation, maintenance, and control of the Village of
East Troy wastewater facilities shall be vested in the Village Board or its
authorized representatives. All records, minutes, and written proceedings
thereof shall be kept by the Village Clerk and all financial records shall be
kept by the Village Treasurer. All costs associated with the management,
operation, maintenance, and control of the wastewater facilities shall be
recovered by the Village through user charges, except that any cost or
expense associated with damage to the wastewater facilities as a result of
carelessness, negligence, or intentional misconduct may be collected from
the person or persons who cause such damage. If damage is caused by a
property owner or the tenant, guest, or family member of a property served
by the Village, such costs and expenses may be recovered by a special
assessment against the property through which the damage was caused.
§ 400-7. Outside user wastewater collection systems.
Unless otherwise indicated in this chapter, or in the agreement between an
outside user and the Village of East Troy, outside users shall be responsible
for the management, operation, maintenance, and control of all facilities
used for the collection of wastewater within their properties or sanitary
sewer service area and for transport of said wastewater to the Village
of East Troy wastewater facilities. Unless otherwise indicated in the
agreement between the outside user and the Village, the outside user shall
be responsible for the operation, maintenance, and repair of all facilities
up to the point of connection with the Village of East Troy wastewater
collection system.
§ 400-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-8
1:333
§ 400-8. Maintenance of building sewers.
Each user shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the
building sewer from that user's structure to the connection at the sanitary
sewer, or the equivalent thereof, including all piping and ancillary facilities,
without expense to the Village, except when they are damaged as a result of
negligence or carelessness on the part of the Village. All building drains and
building sewers shall be maintained free of defective conditions, including
but not limited to cleaning or clearing the building drain and building sewer
by rodding or flushing by and at the expense of the user or occupant of the
property.
§ 400-9. Condemnation of real estate.
Whenever any real estate or any easement therein, or use thereof, shall in
the judgment of the Village be necessary to the wastewater facilities, and
whenever, for any cause, an agreement for the purchase thereof cannot be
made with the owner thereof, the Village shall proceed with all necessary
steps to take such real estate or easement, or use, by condemnation in
accordance with Chapter 32 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 400-10. Title to real estate and personalty.
All property, real, personal and mixed, acquired for the construction of the
wastewater facilities, and all plans, specifications, diagrams, papers, books
and records connected with said wastewater facilities, and all buildings,
machinery, and fixtures pertaining thereto, shall be the property of the
Village.
§ 400-8 EAST TROY CODE § 400-10
1:334
ARTICLE III
Service to Outside Users
§ 400-11. Provision of service.
The Village may provide wastewater treatment service to persons located
outside of the Village of East Troy corporate limits, provided that said
person's property is contained within the approved sanitary sewer service
area. Additionally, the Village may provide wastewater treatment service to
persons located outside of the Village of East Troy sanitary sewer service
area either by establishment of a service agreement or by annexation of the
person's property into the sanitary sewer service area. The Village reserves
the right to refuse service to any and all persons requesting service for
properties located outside of the existing sanitary sewer service area.
§ 400-12. Authority to establish agreements.
The Village shall have the authority to establish agreements with persons
located outside of the Village of East Troy corporate limits (outside users),
in accordance with Chapter 66 of the Wisconsin Statutes, for the purpose of
providing wastewater treatment service to such persons.
§ 400-13. General conditions of agreements.
In addition to any rules, regulations, limitations, conditions, charges, or
other provisions set forth in the agreement between the outside user and
the Village, the following general conditions shall apply to all agreements
with outside users:
A. Agreements with outside users shall not be made unless the Village
determines that adequate excess treatment capacity exists to provide
service to said outside user, or unless said outside user agrees to pay all
costs associated with upgrading the wastewater facilities to provide the
additional capacity required.
B. The agreement shall establish the allowable wastewater flows, loads,
and wastewater characteristics which the outside user will be allowed
to discharge to the wastewater facilities; shall establish other
conditions and limitations as required to protect the wastewater
facilities and the proper operation thereof; shall establish the period of
time for which the agreement will be valid; and shall establish penalties
for violation of any of the provisions of the service agreement.
C. Under all agreements, the outside user shall pay an equitable portion of
the Village of East Troy wastewater facilities debt service charge cost
and user charge costs. The methodology for calculating the allocation of
costs to outside users shall be as indicated in Article XIV of this chapter.
D. The agreement shall assure continued outside user participation in debt
service charge costs over the life of the agreement. The Village may
require the outside user to pay its share of the wastewater facilities
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13
1:335
debt service charge costs prior to connection to the wastewater
facilities. Alternatively, the Village may bill the outside user for its
share of the debt service charge costs and associated financing and
administration costs on a quarterly basis. Should the outside user
eliminate its discharge, the Village, at its option, may elect to assign
to another user that portion of the design capacity of the wastewater
facilities and associated debt service charge costs, thereby relieving the
outside user of continued financial participation.
E. In addition to any rules, regulations, requirements, restrictions, or
provisions provided in the agreement between the outside user and the
Village, the outside user shall be subject to the rules and regulations
provided in this chapter, as applicable.
F. All municipal outside users shall incorporate into their sewer use
ordinance the rules and regulations provided in this chapter, as may be
modified or amended from time to time.
G. The method of connection of the outside user's wastewater collection
system to the Village of East Troy wastewater facilities shall be as
specified by the Village.
H. For all outside users, facilities shall be provided to allow flow
measurement and sampling of the wastewater discharged by the
outside user to the Village wastewater facilities. The construction,
operation, and monitoring requirements for said facilities shall be
consistent with the requirements of § 400-60, Control manholes, flow
monitoring and wastewater sampling, of this chapter. Flow meters shall
be calibrated a minimum of one time per year by a factory-authorized
technician. The costs for installation, operation, and maintenance of
said facilities shall be borne in their entirety by the outside user. Plans
and specifications for said facilities shall be submitted to the Village for
review and approval.
I. All outside users shall limit expansion and growth as required to
maintain their wastewater discharge within the flow and/or load
allocations stated in their agreement with the Village. Any outside user
which exceeds it allocated flows and/or load capacity shall be subject to
fines, penalties, and surcharges as stated in its agreement with the
Village or, where the agreement does not specify fines, penalties, and
surcharges, as provided for in this chapter.
J. An outside user may request additional capacity from the Village to
accommodate anticipated expansion or growth. If capacity is available,
and the Village is willing to reallocate the requested capacity to the
user, then the agreement between the outside user and the Village shall
be amended to indicate the change in the allocated capacity. In all
cases, outside users obtaining additional capacity from the Village shall
be required to pay an additional share of the wastewater facilities debt
service charge costs. If there is no available capacity, or the Village is
not willing to reallocate the available capacity, then the outside user
§ 400-13 EAST TROY CODE § 400-13
1:336
may request that the Village upgrade the wastewater facilities to
provide the additional requested capacity, with all cost of the upgrades
being charged to the outside user. The right to obtain additional
capacity is not guaranteed to any outside user.
K. Outside users shall maintain, inspect, and repair their sanitary sewers
as required to limit infiltration and inflow to nonexcessive levels.
Infiltration shall be considered excessive if the highest average flow, for
the outside user, recorded over a fourteen-day period, under seasonal
high groundwater and dry weather conditions, exceeds 120 gallons per
capita per day or the equivalent thereof. Combined inflow and
infiltration shall be considered excessive if the maximum day flow for
the outside user exceeds 275 gallons per capita per day or the
equivalent thereof. The Village may impose fines, penalties, and
surcharges for excessive infiltration and/or excess infiltration and
inflow; said charges shall be in addition to the sewer service charges
applied to the outside user.
L. In the event that the Village of East Troy wastewater facilities need to
be upgraded at any time in the future, all outside users shall be
required to pay an equitable share of the costs of such upgrades. The
cost allocation to the outside user for such costs shall be consistent with
the methodology provided in Article XIV of this chapter. Outside users
shall be required to contribute to the cost of any wastewater facilities
upgrades associated with permit compliance, replacement of aging
structures or equipment, or any other upgrades which the outside user,
directly or indirectly, benefits from. Outside users shall not be required
to contribute to any costs associated with those components of a
wastewater treatment facilities upgrade which are solely associated
with provision of additional treatment capacity for users located in the
Village of East Troy and from which said outside user receives no direct
or indirect benefit.
M. No outside user shall allow an industrial user to connect to its
wastewater collection system without written approval from the
Village. The requirements of Article VII, Control of Industrial
Wastewater Discharged to Wastewater Facilities, of this chapter shall
apply to all industrial users discharging to the Village wastewater
facilities either directly or indirectly through the wastewater collection
system of an outside user.
N. No outside user shall allow septage, holding tank waste, or other
hauled wastes to be discharged into its wastewater collection system
without written permission from the Village.
O. No outside user shall accept wastewater from any user located outside
of the service area for said outside user as defined in the agreement
with the Village.
P. Proposals for all sanitary sewer extensions to the wastewater collection
systems of outside users shall be submitted to the Village for review and
§ 400-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13
1:337
approval. Where sanitary sewer extension proposals are approved by
the Village, plans and specifications for the sanitary sewer extension
shall be submitted to the Village for review and approval. Submittal
requirements shall be as indicated in Article VI of this chapter.
Q. Outside users shall not expand their sanitary sewer service areas
without approval from the Village. The outside user shall submit a
proposal for expansion of the sanitary sewer service area to the Village
for review and approval. The proposal shall include sufficient
information to verify that the additional flow from said extension will
not result in exceedance of the outside user's flow allocation as defined
in the agreement with the Village. In addition, Village approval of any
sanitary sewer service area expansion shall be contingent on approval
of the expansion by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission.
R. Outside users shall, in all cases, submit written notification to the
Village in the event that the property covered under an agreement with
the Village is sold or transferred to another person.
S. In the event that an outside user sells or transfers the property covered
under an agreement with the Village to another person, then the
agreement, in principle, between the Village and the original outside
user shall be transferable to the person receiving said property,
provided that the use of the property will remain substantially the
same. However, the Village shall require that a new agreement be
executed with the new owner of said property providing a signature on
said agreement. The person receiving the property shall be bound by
the conditions of the agreement with the Village. In the event that the
use of the property is changed by the person receiving the property,
such that the quantity or characteristics of the wastewater discharged
will be changed, then the Village may require that a new agreement be
executed with the person who received the property, with revised
conditions and restrictions as deemed appropriate by the Village.
Alternatively, the Village may deny service to said person if insufficient
capacity exists to accommodate the increased wastewater flows or
loads or if, in the opinion of the Village, said wastewater could
adversely impact the operation, maintenance, or performance of the
wastewater facilities.
T. Nothing in this chapter, or any agreement between the Village and an
outside user, shall be construed as granting the outside user ownership
of any part of the Village of East Troy wastewater facilities or a voice in
the government of the wastewater facilities.
U. In the event that wastewater from an outside user's wastewater
collection system results in odor nuisance in, or corrosion of, the
Village's wastewater facilities, then the Village may require the outside
user to install facilities to remedy the problem or the Village may install
said facilities and charge the cost to the outside user.
§ 400-13 EAST TROY CODE § 400-13
1:338
ARTICLE IV
Use of Wastewater Facilities
§ 400-14. User rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations as set forth in this chapter shall be considered
a part of the contract with every person who is connected with the
wastewater facilities, and every such person, by connecting with the
wastewater facilities, shall be considered as expressing his or her assent
to be bound thereby. Whenever any of said rules and regulations, or such
others as the Village may hereafter adopt, are violated by any person, said
person shall be subject to the penalties, fines, and actions as provided for
under this chapter.
§ 400-15. Prohibitions on discharge of storm drainage and
groundwater.
No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
waters, including but not limited to stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff,
basement sump pump discharge, foundation drain discharge, subsurface
drainage, or cooling water, to the wastewater collection system, except that
stormwater runoff from limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted
at times, may be discharged to the wastewater collection system by
permission of the Village. Such approval will be considered by the Village
only when no reasonable alternate method of disposal is available.
Applicable charges and limitations for such discharge to the wastewater
collection system shall be determined by the Village. Any user determined
to be discharging unpolluted waters to the wastewater collection system
without written approval from the Village shall be issued a notice to
permanently disconnect and abandon, within 14 days, any piping or
facilities which enable such discharge. Failure to disconnect after such
notice shall authorize the Village to have the piping and facilities
disconnected and assess the costs of such disconnection against the
property involved. The Village shall have the alternative right, at the end
of such notice, to institute court proceedings for violation of this chapter,
including assessment of fines.
§ 400-16. Storm sewers.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the Village and other applicable regulatory agencies
with authority over such discharges. Unpolluted industrial cooling water
or process waters may be discharged, with approval from the Village and
other applicable regulatory agencies with authority over such discharges,
to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
§ 400-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-17
1:339
§ 400-17. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described substances into the wastewater facilities:
§ 400-18. Limitations on discharge characteristics.
The following described substances, materials, liquids, wastewater, waters,
or wastes shall be limited in discharges to the wastewater facilities to
concentrations or quantities which will not harm or interfere with the
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
B. Any wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans, flora, or fauna, create a public nuisance, or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant.
C. Any substances having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and/or personnel operating the wastewater
facilities.
D. Any solid or viscous substances in quantities, of such character, or of
such size as to cause partial or total obstruction of the sanitary sewer or
to cause interference with the proper operation of the wastewater
facilities, such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, clay, sand,
mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
improperly shredded garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, disposable dishes, cups, milk containers, and similar
materials, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
E. Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or gases which, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are, or may be, sufficient to prevent entry
into the sanitary sewer for maintenance and repair work.
F. Any substances which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
result in the creation of foam in the wastewater treatment plant
facilities.
G. Any solids in size, in any dimension, of greater than 1/2 inch.
H. Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the wastewater facilities in a quantity that may pose a
hazard to the health and safety of wastewater facilities workers.
I. Any substances which may cause the wastewater treatment plant to
violate the WPDES permit effluent limits or which may cause the sludge
produced by the wastewater treatment plant to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposal criteria.
§ 400-17 EAST TROY CODE § 400-18
1:340
proper operation of the sanitary sewer or the wastewater treatment plant
processes or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the wastewater
treatment plant receiving stream, will not cause the wastewater treatment
plant to violate any conditions of the WPDES discharge permit, will not have
an adverse effect on the Village's sludge management program, will not
endanger person or property, and will not constitute a public nuisance. The
Village may set limitations more restrictive than those indicated below if, in
the opinion of the Village, more restrictive limitations are necessary to meet
said objectives. In forming an opinion as to the need for more restrictive
limitations, the Village will give consideration to such factors as the quantity
of waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sanitary sewer, materials of
construction of the sanitary sewer, the capacity of the wastewater treatment
plant, the ability of the wastewater treatment plant processes to treat the
wastes, potential negative impacts of the waste on the performance of the
wastewater treatment plant or on the characteristics of the wastewater
treatment plant effluent or sludge, and other pertinent factors as applicable.
A. The following limitations apply to all users of the wastewater facilities:
(1) Any liquid having a temperature higher than 120° F. and maximum
flow of 5,000 gallons per day.185
(2) Wastewater containing more than 25 mg/l of petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin.
(3) Any liquid containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified
or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and
120° F.186
(4) Wastewater from an industrial user containing floatable excess
fats, oils, or grease.
(5) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded or solid material
having any dimension greater than 1/2 inch.
(6) Pollutants containing any toxic substances, including but not
limited to arsenic, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury,
nickel, silver, zinc, phenol, and all other toxic pollutants listed in
Chapter NR 215 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, in
concentrations that exceed levels specified under all applicable
state and federal regulations.
(7) Wastewater containing polychlorinated biphenyls.
(8) Industrial discharges exceeding applicable national categorical
pretreatment standards or state standards.
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 400-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-18
1:341
§ 400-19. Alternatives to acceptance of wastewater.
(9) Any substance with objectionable color not removed by the
wastewater treatment plant processes, such as, but not limited to,
dye wastes and vegetable tanning solution.
(10) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by all applicable state or federal
regulations.
(11) Substances which are not treatable by the wastewater treatment
plant processes employed, or are untreatable to such a degree that
the wastewater treatment plant effluent will not meet the
requirements of the WPDES permit.187
(12) Any substance containing odor-producing compounds in excess of
that associated with domestic wastewater.
(13) Volumes or concentrations of wastes constituting a slug.
(14) Industrial or commercial wastewater discharges containing
chlorides in sufficient quantity to increase the concentration of
chlorides in the wastewater treatment plant effluent more than 1%
above the concentration which would be attained in the absence of
such discharge.
B. The Village may alter, amend, or modify the limitations indicated above
if it determines it is necessary to do so to meet the objectives of this
chapter or to comply with all applicable state and federal regulations.
A. If any user proposes a discharge to the wastewater facilities containing
any substances, materials, liquids, wastewater, waters, or wastes in
excess of any of the limitations listed above, the user shall submit to the
Village, in writing, a request to allow exceedance of the limitations on
discharge characteristics as set forth in this chapter. The Village, or its
agent, shall evaluate the request based on information which shall be
provided by the user, including the proposed discharge flows and
characteristics. The cost for the Village to evaluate the potential effects
of the proposed discharge on the wastewater facilities shall be borne in
its entirety by the proposed discharger. Upon completion of its
evaluation, the Village may, in exercise of reasonable discretion:
(1) Reject the wastewater;
(2) Require pretreatment of the wastewater;
(3) Control the quantities and rates of discharge of the wastewater;
and/or
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 400-18 EAST TROY CODE § 400-19
1:342
§ 400-20. Accidental discharge of prohibited wastes.
Any person who accidentally discharges into the wastewater facilities any
wastes or wastewater prohibited under this chapter shall immediately
report such a discharge to the Village and shall report the location of the
discharge, the time thereof, the volume thereof, and the type of waste or
wastewater so discharged. Within seven days of such discharge, a detailed
written statement describing the cause of the discharge and the measures
taken to prevent a future occurrence shall be submitted to the Village. Such
reporting shall not relieve the person causing the accidental discharge from
any penalties imposed by this chapter. Where the Village deems necessary,
users shall provide facilities to prevent accidental discharges or spills of
wastes or wastewater prohibited under this chapter.
§ 400-21. Disposal of wastes at unauthorized locations.
No person shall dispose of any wastewater, waters, or wastes, including but
not limited to septage, holding tank wastes, and other hauled wastes, into
any manhole, lift station wet well, or at the wastewater treatment plant
without written permission from the Village.
§ 400-22. User to allow wastewater sampling.
The Village may sample, or cause to be sampled, wastewater discharged
by any user when, in the opinion of the Village, there is reason to believe
that the user may be discharging wastewater containing any substances or
having any characteristics prohibited under this chapter or containing any
substances or having any characteristics in excess of those allowed under
the requirements of this chapter. The user shall grant the Village, or its
authorized representative, access to the user's facilities for the purpose of
collecting such samples. If the user is found to be discharging wastewater
which is in violation of any provision of this chapter, then the user shall pay
the costs of the collection and analysis of the samples and shall additionally
be subject to any fines or penalties as provided for in this chapter.
§ 400-23. Increased discharges.
(4) Recover the costs of handling and treating such wastewater from
the user discharging the waste.
B. In all cases where the Village allows discharge of said wastewater to
the wastewater collection system, the Village shall apply surcharges, as
applicable, to recover any additional costs associated with conveyance
and treatment of the wastewater, beyond that required for domestic
wastewater.
A. Any commercial, institutional, governmental or industrial user or
outside user planning a facility expansion, production increase, or
process modification which may, or will, result in new or increased
wastewater discharge to the wastewater collection system shall submit
a request for new or increased discharge to the Village, in writing, prior
§ 400-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-23
1:343
§ 400-24. Grease and oil separators and sand interceptors.
to making any such modifications. The request shall provide a detailed
description of the proposed changes along with an estimate of the
impact of the changes on wastewater flows and loads. The Village, or its
Engineer, shall evaluate the request. Upon completion of its evaluation,
the Village may, in exercise of its discretion:
(1) Reject the request;
(2) Approve the request as submitted; or
(3) Approve the request with conditions and limitations.
B. In all cases, the sewer service charge to the user shall be increased by
an amount as determined by the Village in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Grease and oil separators and sand interceptors shall be provided, at
the user's cost, when in the opinion of the Village they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease or oil in excess
of the limitations set forth in this chapter, or any flammable wastes,
sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors and
separators shall not be required for residential users.
B. All separators and interceptors shall be of the type and capacity
approved by the WDNR and/or the Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Plans, specifications, and other
pertinent information for all grease and oil separators and sand
interceptors shall be submitted to the Village for review prior to
installation. No equipment shall be installed until approval has been
issued by the Village. The introduction of grease or fat emulsifiers into a
grease separator is prohibited.
C. Grease and oil separators and sand interceptors shall be checked,
cleaned out, and maintained on a routine basis as required to ensure
proper operation. The user shall maintain a detailed log book clearly
indicating the dates on which the facilities were checked, cleaned out,
and maintained, the work which was done, the name of the person
performing the work, and any observations made. Log book records
shall be maintained for a period of not less than three years and shall be
available for inspection by the Village. Failure to maintain a log book
shall be considered to be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject
to the fines and penalties stated herein.
D. In maintaining these interceptors and separators, the user shall be
responsible for proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of
the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and
means of disposal of the captured materials, including the name of the
person or firm who or which disposed of the captured materials.
Disposal of the captured materials performed by the user, the user's
§ 400-23 EAST TROY CODE § 400-24
1:344
§ 400-25. Special arrangements.
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting
any special agreement between the Village and any person whereby a
wastewater of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the
wastewater facilities, either before or after pretreatment works, provided
that such discharge will not harm or interfere with the proper operation
of the sanitary sewer or the wastewater treatment plant processes or
equipment, will not cause the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant
to be in violation of the WPDES permit, will not have an adverse effect on
the wastewater treatment plant receiving stream, will not have an adverse
effect on the Village's sludge management program, will not endanger
person or property, and will not constitute a public nuisance, and provided
that no extra costs are incurred by the Village without recompense by the
person and that all rates and provisions set forth in this chapter are adhered
to.
§ 400-26. Discharges resulting in permit violation.
No person shall cause or permit any discharge to the wastewater facilities
which may result, directly or indirectly, in any violation of the wastewater
treatment plant WPDES permit.
§ 400-27. Connections by other users.
No user shall allow other users to connect to the sanitary sewer through its
building sewers or building drains.
personnel, or by a licensed waste disposal firm shall be in accordance
with applicable local, state, and federal regulations. Disposal records
shall be maintained for a period of not less than three years and shall
be available for inspection by the Village. Failure to maintain disposal
records shall be considered to be a violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to the fines and penalties stated herein.
E. Interceptors and separators shall, at a minimum, be cleaned out once
per year. More frequent cleaning shall be performed as required to
ensure proper operation of the systems. Failure to install, or properly
operate, clean out, and maintain, grease and oil separators or sand
interceptors, as required by this chapter, shall be a violation of this
chapter and the user shall be subject to the fines and penalties stated
herein. Additionally, any user failing to install, or properly operate,
clean out, and maintain, grease and oil separators or sand interceptors,
as required by this chapter, shall be liable for the costs of cleaning any
downstream sewers which are impacted by said discharge. It is the
responsibility of the user to request a determination from the Village
regarding the need for grease and oil separators or sand interceptors
prior to initiating discharge of any wastewater containing grease, oil, or
sand.
§ 400-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-27
1:345

ARTICLE V
Connection of Building Sewers to Sanitary Sewer
§ 400-28. Private wastewater facilities.188
Where wastewater collection system service is not currently available, or
where it is not currently cost-effective to extend service to any area of
the Village sewer service area, the owners of properties occurring in such
areas may be permitted to install private wastewater facilities with written
permission from the Village. A written request shall be submitted to the
Village requesting permission to install private wastewater facilities. Where
approval is granted by the Village, the type, capacity, location, and layout
of the private wastewater facilities shall comply with Chapter SPS 383
of the Wisconsin Administrative Code and Chapter 510, Zoning, § 510-72,
Groundwater Protection Overlay District, of this Code. If, at any time, the
sanitary sewer is extended so that it becomes accessible to said areas, the
Village shall require that the private wastewater facilities be abandoned
and that a building sewer be constructed to provide connection to the
sanitary sewer.
§ 400-29. New connections.
New connections to the sanitary sewer shall only be permitted if there is
sufficient capacity in the downstream wastewater facilities to adequately
transport and treat the additional wastewater anticipated to be received
from such connections. A building sewer permit shall be required for all
new connections. A connection fee shall be applied to all new connections
in accordance with § 400-93 of this chapter.
§ 400-30. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings or
structures only when they are found, through examination and testing, to
be free of defects and damage and to meet all other requirements of this
chapter. Televising of old building sewers shall be required to demonstrate
that the pipe and joints are in good condition and are essentially free of
defects. The televising tape shall be provided to the Village for review. The
owner of said building sewer shall submit a request for review, in writing,
to the Village. The costs for any and all examinations and tests, as required
by the Village, shall be paid by the owner of said building sewer. The old
building sewer may not be reused in connection with a new building or
structure without written approval from the Village.
§ 400-31. Work to be authorized.
No person shall alter, disturb, modify, uncover, or make any connections
with or opening into any wastewater collection system without first
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 400-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-31
1:347
obtaining written permission from the Village and without satisfying all
requirements of this chapter.
§ 400-32. License, bond and insurance.
All persons performing work on the wastewater facilities, including
installation of building sewers, shall hold a valid plumbing license with the
State of Wisconsin and said license shall be in good standing with the State
of Wisconsin. All persons performing work on the wastewater facilities,
including installation of building sewers, shall provide a bond to guarantee
performance and shall maintain liability insurance, with such minimum
coverage as is required by the Village. All certificates of insurance shall
name the Village as an additional insured. No work may be conducted prior
to the submittal of and approval by the Village of the required bond and
insurance.
§ 400-33. Building sewer permits.
A building sewer permit shall be applied for, paid for, and received before
the commencement of any building sewer installation work. The building
sewer permit fee shall be set by the Village.
§ 400-34. Permits, fees and requirements for excavations.
The following permits, fees, and requirements shall apply to all excavations
in any street, alley, or other public way to install or repair any building
sewer or associated facility:
A. A street opening permit shall be applied for and received before
excavating in any street, alley, or other public way to repair, alter, or
make any installation below the surface or whenever the opening of
surfaces is required to accommodate surface installations. A street
opening permit shall be applied for, paid for, and received before the
commencement of any work. The street opening permit fee shall be set
by the Village. In all cases, the Village shall be notified a minimum of 48
hours in advance of performing any excavation work.189
B. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in
the course of excavation work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory
to the Village. If the restoration work is not performed in a manner
satisfactory to the Village, the Village may bring action against the
property owner for violation of this chapter or may cause the
restoration to be made in an acceptable manner by another party, under
the direction of the Village, and charge the cost of such restoration as a
special tax against the property.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 400-31 EAST TROY CODE § 400-34
1:348
§ 400-35. Building sewer costs.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer to the wastewater collection system shall be borne by the
user. The user shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 400-36. Separate building sewers.
Every building requiring sanitary facilities shall be separately and
independently connected to the wastewater facilities. Exceptions to this
regulation may be granted, but only under unusual circumstances and only
with the written consent of the Village.
§ 400-37. Building sewer construction.
Building sewer construction standards and requirements shall include the
following:
C. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to minimize the hazard to the
public welfare and safety.
D. Except upon application made with written permission of the Village,
ample width of roadway shall be maintained at all times for the
continuous safe use and passage of one lane of traffic. Flagpersons shall
be provided when the amount of traffic on the street requires it as
determined by the Village. The traveled portion of the street shall be
kept free from machinery, tools, excavated materials, or other
obstruction at all times. All asphaltic concrete and portland cement
surfaces shall be saw cut at right angles or parallel to the center line of
the road.
A. All building sewers extending to within five feet of the outside
foundation walls of any building shall consist of Schedule 40 PVC pipe
with a minimum soil coverage of four feet and conforming to the
standards established in Chapters SPS 382 and SPS 384 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
B. All building drains inside the building and to a point five feet of the
outside foundation walls of any building shall consist of Schedule 40
PVC pipe with adequately sealed joints and conforming to the standards
established in Chapters SPS 382 and SPS 384 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
C. No person shall install any building sewer pipe that is cracked,
damaged, or of an inferior grade or quality.
D. The size, slope, alignment, materials for construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of Chapters SPS 382 and SPS 384 of the Wisconsin
§ 400-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-37
1:349
Administrative Code. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in Gravity
Sanitary Sewer Design and Construction (MOP FD5), as published by
the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) and Water Environment
Federation (WEF), latest edition, shall apply.
E. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the sanitary sewer,
wastewater carried by such a building drain shall be lifted and
discharged to the building sewer by facilities conforming to Chapter
SPS 382 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
F. All building sewer connections to the existing wastewater facilities shall
be made with a saddle wye fitting set upon a carefully cut opening
centered on the upper quadrant of the sanitary sewer. The fitting shall
be securely fastened with stainless steel straps or with solvent-welded
joints in the case of plastic pipe. Upon recommendation of the Village's
Engineer, the Village may vary the requirement for a saddle wye fitting
and may specify, rather, the use of cut-in wyes or tees. Except under
extraordinary circumstances, no building sewer shall connect directly
to a manhole. All building sewers shall connect to a sewer main, except
upon written approval of the Village after written application by the
person explaining why such an exception should be granted.
G. The person installing the building sewer section extending from the
building drain to the building sewer stub shall notify the Village when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
building sewer stub. The connection shall be made in the presence of
the Village Director of Public Works or Wastewater Treatment Manager
or an authorized representative thereof.190
H. The person installing the building sewer stub, which extends from the
sanitary sewer through the public right-of-way or easement or to the
user's property line, shall notify the Village when the building sewer
stub is ready for inspection and connection to the sanitary sewer. The
connection shall be made in the presence of the Village Director of
Public Works or Wastewater Treatment Manager or an authorized
representative thereof.191
I. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, basement sump pumps, or other
sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a
sanitary sewer.
190. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
191. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 400-37 EAST TROY CODE § 400-38
1:350
§ 400-38. Adoption of other rules.
The rules and regulations of the State Plumbing and State Building Codes,
the Department of Safety and Professional Services, and the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources are hereby adopted, insofar as the same
are applicable to the wastewater facilities of the Village of East Troy.
§ 400-39. Tapping the sanitary sewer.
No person, except those having written permission from the Village, or
persons in the service of, and approved by, the Village, shall be permitted
under any circumstances to tap the sanitary sewer. The kind and size of
the connection with the sanitary sewer shall be as specified in the building
sewer permit from the Village or the Village's authorized representative.
§ 400-40. Village not liable for damages.
The Village shall not be liable for damages resulting directly or indirectly
from the breaking, clogging, stoppage, or freezing of any sanitary sewer,
building sewer or building drain, nor shall the Village be liable to any
person for any damage resulting directly or indirectly from any repair of
the wastewater facilities, including making connections or extensions or
any other work which may be deemed necessary, excepting only damages
directly caused solely by the negligence of the Village.
§ 400-41. Right to suspend or terminate service.
The Village reserves the right to suspend or terminate the wastewater
collection system service at any time for the purpose of repairs or any other
purpose deemed necessary or advisable by the Village, notwithstanding any
permit granted or regulation to the contrary. Whenever it shall become
necessary to shut off the wastewater collection system service, the Village
shall, if practicable, give 48 hours' notice to each and every user affected.
§ 400-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-41
1:351

ARTICLE VI
Sanitary Sewer Extensions for Subdivisions and Commercial
Developments
§ 400-42. Initial submittals.
Prior to the design and construction of a sewer extension, the developer
requesting the sewer extension must submit to the Village an approved final
plat or certified survey for lands to be sewered. Plats and certified surveys
must be accompanied by a certification from appropriate town and county
zoning officials stating that the land is zoned for the proposed use.
§ 400-43. Planning agency concurrence.
The developer must obtain written confirmation from the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission that lands to be sewered are in
the approved Village of East Troy sewer service area.
§ 400-44. Downstream capacity.
Sewer extension requests may be considered by the Village if all
downstream sewers, interceptors, lift stations, force mains, and treatment
facilities have sufficient reserve capacity to accommodate the wastewater
flows and loads anticipated to be generated by the proposed sewer
extension. The Village reserves the right to reject the application for a
sewer extension if insufficient capacity exists in the downstream
wastewater facilities. Evaluation of the capacity of the downstream
wastewater facilities will be conducted by the Village's Engineer at the
expense of the developer.
§ 400-45. Sewer extension design.
The developer may select an engineer to design all proposed sewer
extensions. The resulting construction plans and specifications shall be
reviewed and approved by the Village's Engineer prior to submittal to the
WDNR. All plans shall conform to the standards of the WDNR and such
additional requirements and standards that the Village may establish. All
costs for the design of the sewer extension, including review of the plans
and specifications by the Village's Engineer, shall be paid by the developer.
§ 400-46. Sewer extension costs.
All costs and expenses incidental to the design, construction, and
installation of the sewer extension, including but not limited to engineering,
construction, legal, permits and other fees related to the project or
associated with the connection or hookup to the Village wastewater
collection system, shall be borne by the developer requesting the extension.
The developer shall establish an escrow account, or other security
acceptable to the Village, in a bank selected by the Village and shall initially
deposit in the account sufficient funds to cover all preliminary expenses
authorized by the Village. The account shall be subject to an agreement
§ 400-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-46
1:353
executed between the developer, the bank and the Village which allows the
Village to withdraw monthly amounts from the account sufficient to cover
payments then due. The developer will make subsequent deposits into the
account at the direction of the Village sufficient to cover the remaining costs
of the project.
§ 400-47. Easements.
The developer requesting the sewer extension shall assist in securing all
required utility easements, the location and width of which shall be
determined by the Village. The Village will furnish blank easement forms
to the person who will be responsible for the proper legal description
of the easement parcel and for the proper execution of the easement by
the grantor. All completed easements shall be submitted to the Village,
designated as the grantee, for its review and shall be recorded at the
appropriate county's Register of Deeds office by the Village, the cost of such
recording to be charged to the developer.
§ 400-48. Special agreements.
The developer requesting the sewer extension shall also execute all other
special agreements deemed necessary by the Village.
§ 400-49. Building sewers.
The project as approved must include the installation of building sewers,
extending from the connection at the sanitary sewer to the lot line of each
lot as shown on the approved final plat or certified survey map. This shall be
included in the developer's costs and made a part of the proposed project.
§ 400-50. License, bond and insurance.
All persons performing work on the wastewater facilities, including but
not limited to work on the installation of sewer extensions, shall hold a
valid license with the State of Wisconsin and said license shall be in good
standing with the State of Wisconsin. All persons performing work on the
wastewater facilities, including but not limited to work on the installation of
sewer extensions, shall provide a bond to guarantee performance and shall
maintain liability insurance, with minimum coverage to meet the Village's
then current requirements. All certificates of insurance shall name the
Village as an additional insured. No work may be conducted prior to the
submittal of and approval by the Village of the required bond and insurance.
§ 400-51. Construction inspection.
During the construction of any sanitary sewer extension which the Village
has approved, the Village, or an authorized representative thereof, will
inspect the same to see that said work is being constructed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications. Failure to make such
inspections shall not nullify the right of the Village to require reconstruction
should nonadherence to approved plans and specifications be subsequently
§ 400-46 EAST TROY CODE § 400-51
1:354
discovered. All costs associated with inspection of the sewer extension
construction shall be paid by the developer.
§ 400-52. Record drawings.
Following completion of sewer extension construction, complete and
accurate record drawings shall be prepared and submitted to the Village.
The engineer selected by the developer shall prepare the record drawings.
The contractor who performed the work shall keep detailed records of all
record drawing information as required by the project specifications and
shall submit such information to the engineer for use in preparation of the
record drawings. The record drawings shall be submitted to the Village
for review and approval. Lateral cards shall be prepared and submitted to
the Village for every building sewer installed. The format and details of all
lateral cards shall comply with the standards established by the Village.
Additionally, the Village's master sewer map shall be updated to reflect all
sanitary sewer extensions. The master map shall be updated by the Village's
Engineer or its authorized representative, with the cost of said work being
paid by the developer.
§ 400-53. Connection fees.
A connection fee shall be applied to each building sewer. The cost of the
connection fee shall be paid by the developer. Connection fees shall be
determined in accordance with § 400-93 of this chapter.
§ 400-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-53
1:355

ARTICLE VII
Control of Industrial Wastewater Discharged to Wastewater
Facilities
§ 400-54. Submission of data.
A. Within three months after enactment of this chapter, the Village may
require that any industrial user discharging industrial wastewater to
the wastewater facilities prepare and file with the Village a report that
shall include pertinent data relating to the quantity and characteristics
of the wastewater discharged to the wastewater facilities.
B. The Village may require that any industrial user desiring to make a new
connection to the wastewater facilities for the purpose of discharging
industrial wastewater, or proposing to increase its current discharge
flows or loads, prepare and file with the Village a report that shall
include actual or predicted data relating to the quantity and
characteristics of the wastewater to be discharged along with
information relating to general processes used at the facility, the types
and quantities of chemicals and additives used at the facility, and other
such information as deemed necessary for the Village to fully assess the
potential impacts of said discharge on the wastewater facilities. All
industrial users proposing to make a new connection or proposing to
increase their current discharge flows or loads shall, in writing, request
that the Village make a determination whether submittal of a report is
required.
C. The Village shall provide industrial users with a form detailing the
specific information that shall be submitted under Subsections A and B.
This information shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Average day, peak day, and peak hour wastewater flows.
(2) Average day and peak day wastewater BOD5, TSS, TKN, ammonia,
phosphorus loads and chlorine loads.192
(3) Chemical analysis of wastewater, including concentrations of any
parameters prohibited or limited under this chapter.
(4) Information on raw materials, processes, and products as may
affect the wastewater characteristics.
(5) Information on quantity and use of oils, solvents, cleaning
chemicals, chemical additives, toxic substances, and other
substances used at the facility which could enter the wastewater
either intentionally or accidentally.
192. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 400-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-54
1:357
§ 400-55. Acceptance of wastewater.
(6) A general process flow diagram showing the processes used at the
facility and the flow of water and wastewater throughout the
facilities.
(7) A plan of the user's facilities showing floor drains, chemical storage
areas, sewers, and pretreatment facilities.
(8) Detailed description and design information of any pretreatment
facilities.
(9) Detailed description and design information regarding all facilities
installed to prevent and/or control the accidental introduction of
oils, solvents, cleaning chemicals, chemical additives, toxic
substances, and other substances into the wastewater discharged
to the wastewater facilities.
D. No industrial user shall be required to submit detailed information
regarding proprietary processes. However, in all cases, the industrial
user shall provide sufficient information for the Village to fully evaluate
the likely chemical and physical characteristics of the wastewater to be
discharged from the user's facility and to assess any potential impacts
of said discharge on the wastewater facilities.
A. No new or increased discharges shall be allowed without written
authorization from the Village.
B. The Village shall not allow discharge into the wastewater facilities of
any wastewater which is not in compliance with the rules and
regulations stated in Article IV, Use of Wastewater Facilities, of this
chapter.
C. In addition to any other requirements set forth in this chapter, the
Village shall have the right to prohibit the discharge of any industrial
wastewater into the sanitary sewer which, in the opinion of the Village,
may interfere with the operation of the wastewater facilities, may pass
through the wastewater facilities insufficiently treated, may cause the
wastewater treatment plant to violate any conditions of the WPDES
discharge permit, may prevent the wastewater treatment plant from
meeting operational goals or effluent quality goals, or which may impair
the use or disposal of the wastewater treatment plant sludge.
D. Prior to allowing new or increased industrial wastewater discharges to
the wastewater facilities, the Village will determine if sufficient reserve
capacity is available in the downstream sanitary sewer and in the
wastewater treatment plant to provide proper conveyance and
treatment of the proposed wastewater. New or increased discharges
shall not be allowed if it is determined that insufficient capacity is
available in either the sanitary sewer or in the wastewater treatment
plant.
§ 400-54 EAST TROY CODE § 400-55
1:358
§ 400-56. Industrial service agreements.
E. In making its determination to accept, or not accept, said industrial
wastewater discharge, the Village will evaluate the information
provided by the industrial user in accordance with § 400-54 of this
chapter. The Village shall give consideration to available wastewater
facilities capacity and to potential adverse impacts of said discharge on
the wastewater facilities.
F. Determination.
(1) Upon completion of its evaluation, the Village may, in exercise of
reasonable discretion:
(a) Reject the new or increased discharge;
(b) Require pretreatment of the wastewater discharged; and/or
(c) Control the quantities and rates of the wastewater discharged.
(2) In all cases where the Village allows discharge of said industrial
wastewater to the wastewater facilities, the Village shall apply
surcharges, as applicable, to recover any additional costs
associated with conveyance and treatment of the wastewater,
beyond those costs normally associated with conveyance and
treatment of domestic wastewater.
A. The Village may require that a service agreement be executed between
the Village and an industrial user under the following conditions:
(1) If the industrial user meets any of the criteria for a significant
industrial user as defined in this chapter; and/or
(2) If, in the opinion of the Village, the industrial wastewater may
consistently, or at times, contain any substances or characteristics
which could potentially impair or interfere with operation of the
wastewater facilities.
B. The service agreement shall establish the allowable flows, loads, and
wastewater characteristics which the industrial user shall be allowed to
discharge to the wastewater facilities, shall establish other conditions
and limitations as required to protect the wastewater facilities and the
proper operation thereof, shall establish the period of time for which
the agreement will be valid, and shall establish penalties for violation of
any of the provisions of the service agreement.
C. The service agreement shall assure continued participation in debt
service charge costs by the industrial user over the life of the
agreement.
D. Should the industrial user eliminate its discharge, the Village, at its
option, may elect to assign to another user that portion of the design
capacity of the wastewater treatment plant and associated debt service
§ 400-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-56
1:359
§ 400-57. Pretreatment requirements.
costs, thereby relieving the industrial user of continued financial
participation.
E. Industrial users shall, in all cases, submit written notification to the
Village in the event that the property covered under an agreement with
the Village is sold or transferred to another person.
F. In the event that an industrial user sells or transfers the property
covered under an agreement with the Village to another person, then
the agreement, in principle, between the Village and the original
industrial user shall be transferable to the person receiving said
property, provided that the use of the property or facilities will remain
substantially the same. However, the Village shall require that a new
agreement be executed with the new owner of said property providing a
signature on said agreement. The person receiving the property shall
be bound by the conditions of the agreement. In the event that the use
of the property is changed by the person receiving the property, such
that the quantity or characteristics of the wastewater discharged will
be changed, then the Village may require that a new agreement be
executed, with revised conditions or restrictions as deemed appropriate
by the Village, or the Village may deny service to said user if insufficient
capacity exists to accommodate the increased wastewater flows or
loads, or if in the opinion of the Village said wastewater could adversely
impact the operation, maintenance, or performance of the wastewater
facilities.
G. Nothing in this chapter, or in any agreement between the Village and an
industrial user, shall be construed as granting the industrial user
ownership of any part of the Village of East Troy wastewater facilities or
a voice in the government of the wastewater facilities.
A. All industrial users subject to pretreatment standards, as established by
the WDNR, shall provide pretreatment of wastewater discharged to the
sanitary sewer in accordance with the requirements as set forth in
Chapters NR 211 and NR 221 through NR 297 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code. The Village shall not allow discharge of any
wastewater into the wastewater collection system from any industrial
user not in compliance with applicable pretreatment standards.
B. Any industrial user discharging industrial wastewater to the
wastewater collection system may be required to provide pretreatment
of the wastewater if the Village determines that the strength,
characteristics, or flow rate of the wastewater discharge could interfere
with, or impair operation of, the wastewater facilities.
C. All costs associated with the design, construction, operation, and
maintenance of pretreatment facilities shall be paid for by the industrial
user.
§ 400-56 EAST TROY CODE § 400-57
1:360
§ 400-58. Dilution of discharge.
Dilution of wastewater for purposes of reducing the pollutant
characteristics or concentrations to meet the limitations established in this
chapter or in any service agreement between the Village and the industrial
user is prohibited, except in cases where such dilution is authorized by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
§ 400-59. Requirement for monitoring of industrial wastewater
discharge.
§ 400-60. Control manholes, flow monitoring and wastewater
sampling.
D. Plans, specifications, and other pertinent information for all
pretreatment systems shall be submitted to the Village for review prior
to installation. No pretreatment systems shall be installed until
approval has been issued by the Village. The cost for review of the plans
and specifications, by the Village or the Village's Engineer, shall be
borne by the industrial user.
E. Where applicable, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information
shall be submitted for review and approval to the WDNR or other
regulatory agencies with applicable review authority. No pretreatment
systems shall be installed until approval has been issued by all
applicable regulatory agencies.
F. All costs associated with the construction, operation, and maintenance
of the pretreatment facilities shall be separate from, and in addition to,
the sewer service charge.
G. Separate building sewers shall be provided for discharge of industrial
wastewater subject to pretreatment standards; combined discharge of
said industrial wastewater with sanitary wastewater or other
wastewater, through a common building sewer, shall not be allowed.
A. Wastewater flow and sampling facilities may be required, at the
discretion of the Village, for any industrial user.
B. Wastewater flow and sampling facilities shall be required for all
significant industrial users.
A. Industrial users, where required by the Village, shall install one or more
control manholes to facilitate observation, flow measurement, and
sampling of industrial wastewater discharged by the user to the
wastewater collection system.
B. All industrial wastewater flow discharged from the user's facility to the
wastewater collection system shall flow through the control manhole.
C. The control manhole facilities shall consist of a manhole constructed in
line with the industrial user's building sewer, a flow meter, and a
§ 400-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-60
1:361
separate structure housing a flow recording device and an automatic
wastewater sampler. The flow recording device shall be designed to
provide instantaneous and totalized flow readings and shall be designed
to provide accurate readings in the flow range anticipated. The sampler
shall be designed to provide automatic, flow and time proportional
sampling of wastewater.
D. The design, operation, and maintenance of all control manholes, flow
monitoring facilities, and wastewater sampling facilities shall be in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter as well as in
accordance with any other rules and regulations established by the
WDNR or any other agencies with applicable regulatory authority.
E. Plans and specifications for the control manhole facilities, including the
manhole structure, flow meter, flow recorder, wastewater sampler, and
any other required equipment or structures, shall be prepared and
sealed by an engineer licensed in the State of Wisconsin. The plans and
specifications shall be approved by the Village and the WDNR prior to
starting construction.
F. All costs for construction of the control manhole facilities, including but
not limited to design, permitting, construction, and regulatory review,
shall be paid for by the industrial user.
G. All costs associated with the operation and maintenance of the control
manhole facilities, including collection, time and equipment, recording,
and submittal of wastewater flow and sample analysis data, shall be
paid for by the industrial user.193
H. All costs associated with the collection and analysis of wastewater
samples shall be paid for by the industrial user.
I. The industrial user shall record totalized wastewater flow for each day
of the week. Less frequent recording of flows may be allowed by the
Village on a case-by-case basis. Where required by the Village, a flow
chart recorder shall be provided to record instantaneous flow as a
function of time. All flow monitoring information shall be compiled into
a report and submitted to the Village on a monthly basis, or at a longer
time interval if approved by the Village.
J. All flow metering devices shall be calibrated by a factory-authorized
technician on an annual basis. A copy of the field calibration report shall
be submitted to the Village.
K. The Village shall determine the level of wastewater analysis, including
the parameters which shall be tested for and the frequency of sampling,
which will be required for each industrial user on a case-by-case basis.
Sample collection, preservation, and analysis shall be in accordance
with the requirements of Chapters NR 218 and NR 219 of the Wisconsin
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 400-60 EAST TROY CODE § 400-60
1:362
§ 400-61. Emergency actions regarding industrial users.
Administrative Code and shall be performed by a laboratory certified
for the applicable analysis by the State of Wisconsin. All wastewater
analysis data shall be compiled into a report and submitted to the
Village on a monthly basis, or at a longer time interval if approved
by the Village. Copies of all sample analyses issued by the testing
laboratory shall be included along with the report.
L. Changes to the quantity or characteristics of the wastewater
discharged to the sanitary sewer are subject to review and approval by
the Village in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
M. The industrial user shall grant the Village access to the control manhole
and all associated flow metering and wastewater sampling equipment
at all times. Said facilities shall be located in an area accessible to the
Village at all times.
N. The Village may require that all sample collection, sample analysis, and
flow recording activities be conducted by Village personnel or an
authorized agent of the Village. In this case, the Village shall submit a
bill to the industrial user for said services on a monthly basis.
O. All costs associated with the design, construction, and operation of the
control manholes, flow monitoring facilities, and wastewater sampling
facilities shall be separate from, and in addition to, the sewer service
charge.
A. The Village may suspend wastewater service to any industrial user
whenever it appears to the Village that any of the following conditions
exist:
(1) A discharge presents an imminent or substantial danger to the
public health, safety, or welfare.
(2) A discharge presents a substantial danger to the environment.
(3) A discharge is resulting in interference with, or impairment of, the
wastewater facilities.
(4) A discharge is in violation of any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
B. The Village will notify such a user in the event of a determination to
suspend wastewater service and such user shall cease all discharges
immediately.
§ 400-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-61
1:363

ARTICLE VIII
Septage, Holding Tank Waste and Other Hauled Wastes
§ 400-62. Acceptance of septage, holding tank waste or other
hauled wastes.
Septage, holding tank waste, or any other hauled wastes, herein generally
referred to as "hauled wastes," shall only be discharged to the wastewater
facilities when an application for hauled wastes disposal has been filed
with the Village and the Village has approved said application and issued a
permit for hauled waste disposal to the applicant. The Village shall have the
right to refuse discharge of hauled wastes to the wastewater facilities and
to deny any and all applications for such discharge.
§ 400-63. Application for disposal permits.
§ 400-64. Hauler requirements, prohibitions and limitations.
A. Between August 1 and September 1 of every year, any licensed hauler
wishing to discharge to the wastewater facilities shall file an application
with the Village. Application forms will be available from the Village
office. The application shall state truly and fully the anticipated type,
frequency, quantity, quality, and origin of generated waste to be
disposed of in the wastewater facilities.
B. A nonrefundable application filing fee, the amount as determined by the
Village and subject to periodic revision, shall be submitted with the
application. Applications filed without the required fee will not be
reviewed by the Village.
C. The Village will review all properly submitted applications by October 1
of each year and will notify the applicant of approval or denial of the
application. Approved applicants will be issued a permit for disposal.
The Village may include such limitations and conditions as it deems
necessary on any permit granted.
D. All approved applicants shall furnish a bond to the Village in the amount
of $5,000 to guarantee performance. The bond shall be furnished to the
Village before the permit will be issued to the applicant.
A. Permits shall be nontransferable except in case of replacement of the
disposal unit for which a permit shall have been originally issued.
B. All haulers permitted by the Village shall agree to carry public liability
insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000 to protect any and all
persons or property from injury and/or damage caused in any way or
manner by any act, or failure to act, by any of their employees. A
certificate certifying such insurance to be in full force and effect shall
be furnished to the Village. Said certificate shall name the Village as an
additional insured and shall contain the following language: "Should
any of the above-described policies be canceled, materially changed or
§ 400-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-64
1:365
renewal refused before the expiration date thereof, the issuing
company will mail 30 days' written notice to all named additional
insured."
C. All haulers permitted by the Village shall agree to indemnify and save
harmless the Village from any and all liability and claims for damage
arising out of or resulting from work and labor performed.
D. All haulers shall have a current, valid septage business license issued
by the State of Wisconsin and shall employ only state-certified
operators. All haulers shall be in conformance with the rules and
regulations stated in Chapters NR 113 and NR 114 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
E. The locations where hauled wastes will be discharged into the
wastewater facilities, the time of day when such discharge will be
allowed, and the maximum volume and strength of hauled wastes which
may be discharged to the wastewater facilities will be as designated by
the Village. Failure to comply with these conditions shall be cause for
suspension or revocation of the permit.
F. Any wastes discharged into the treatment system shall be of domestic
origin and shall comply with the rules and regulations of this chapter as
well as any and all other applicable rules and regulations of the Village.
A hauler shall not discharge any gasoline, oil, acid, alkali, grease, rags,
waste, volatile or inflammable liquids or other deleterious substances
into the wastewater facilities nor allow any earth, sand, gravel, stones,
or other solid material to pass into any part of the wastewater facilities.
G. Hauled waste discharge forms shall be completed by all permitted
haulers each time they discharge to the wastewater facilities. The
completed and signed forms shall be submitted to the Village within 24
hours of discharge to the wastewater facilities. Hauled waste discharge
forms will be furnished by the Village and will include the following:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the hauler.
(2) License number.
(3) Type of hauled wastes.
(4) Quantity of hauled wastes.
(5) Estimated quality of hauled wastes.
(6) Location, date, time and feed rate of discharge to the wastewater
facilities.
(7) Origin of hauled wastes.
(8) Name and address of hauled wastes generator.
(9) Other information.
§ 400-64 EAST TROY CODE § 400-64
1:366
H. All permits issued by the Village for hauled wastes disposal will have
the condition that any time the wastewater facilities have operational
problems, maintenance problems, or threat of WPDES permit violations
that are directly or indirectly related to hauled wastes disposal, the
Village may immediately restrict hauled wastes disposal until such time
as corrective action or mitigative measures have been taken.
I. Any hauler permitted by the Village found to be in violation of any rules
and regulations of this chapter or of any conditions or limitations of the
Village approval for hauled wastes disposal, or of any and all other
applicable rules and regulations of the Village, may have its permit
immediately suspended or revoked. This suspension or revocation shall
be made in writing and shall state the reason for suspending or
revoking the permit. The Village may additionally levy fines against the
hauler as allowed under the penalty provision of this chapter.
J. Charges for hauled wastes disposal shall be based on the charge
determination methodology as stated in Article XIV of this chapter.
Such charges are subject to periodic revision by the Village. Disposal
privileges shall be suspended or revoked by the Village if bills are not
paid within 30 days from the time the bill is issued by the Village.
§ 400-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-64
1:367

ARTICLE IX
Right of Entry, Safety and Identification
§ 400-65. Right of entry.
Any duly authorized representative of the Village bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter a user's premises for the
purpose of observation, verification, measurement, sampling, and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state statutes.
Duly authorized representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any
process beyond that point having a direct bearing on the characteristics and
source of wastewater being discharged to the sanitary sewer.
§ 400-66. Safety rules.
While performing necessary work on any user's property, all duly authorized
representatives of the Village shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises as established by the user. The Village shall indemnify the
user against loss or damage to its property by said duly authorized
representatives and against liability claims and demands arising out of
alleged personal injury or property damage asserted against the user and
arising out of the Village's activities on the premises, except for damages
caused by negligence of persons not employed by the Village or by failure
of the user to maintain safe conditions.
§ 400-67. Right to enter easements.
Any duly authorized representative of the Village bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the Village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of,
but not limited to, inspection, observation, verification, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater
facilities lying within said easement, all subject to the terms, if any, of the
easement.
§ 400-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-67
1:369

ARTICLE X
Damaging or Tampering with Wastewater Facilities
§ 400-68. Willful, negligent or malicious damage or tampering.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment
which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest and criminal prosecution
under Wisconsin law.
§ 400-69. Liability for damages.
Any person who intentionally, negligently, or accidentally violates any
provision of this chapter shall be financially responsible to pay the Village
and any downstream user for the amount of any expense, loss or damage
suffered by the Village or any downstream user as a result of such violation.
This section shall be applicable whether or not a written notice of the
violation was given and regardless of any other penalty which may be
imposed for violation of this chapter.
§ 400-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-69
1:371

ARTICLE XI
Violations and Penalties
§ 400-70. Written notice of violation.
Any person reasonably suspect of violating any rule, regulation, or other
provision of this chapter shall be served by the Village with a written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time specified in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
§ 400-71. Continued violation.
Any person who violates this chapter and who fails to comply with the notice
of violation shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a forfeiture, together with the
costs of prosecution. In establishing its recommendation as to the amount
of any forfeiture, the Village shall consider the type of violation, previous
violations, and whether or not the violation was knowingly committed. In
the event that a person convicted of an ordinance violation fails to comply
with a judgment or order of the court responsible for adjudication, such
person may be imprisoned in the county jail at the discretion of the court for
a period of up to 90 days. Each day in which any violation is continued shall
be deemed a separate offense. The Village shall have the right to remove
or close wastewater facilities connections if the user refuses to correct any
violation to the satisfaction of the Village. All costs for removing or closing
the connection, as well as the costs for restoring the connection, shall be
charged to the user. Wastewater facilities connections shall not be restored
until all charges and penalties, including the expense of removing or closing
the connection and the costs for restoring the connection, have been paid
in full. Unpaid expenses may be taxed as a special assessment against the
property on which the violation finds its source.
§ 400-72. Repeated violations.
Any person who is issued a notice of violation, corrects the violation, and
then repeats the same violation, or violates another rule, regulation, or
provision of this chapter, shall be issued a notice of second violation and
prosecuted for violation of this chapter; correction of the violation shall be
required but shall not relieve the user from prosecution.
§ 400-73. Accidental discharge.
Any person found to be responsible for an accidental discharge of any
deleterious substance to the wastewater facilities, as prohibited in this
chapter, in addition to a forfeiture, shall pay to the Village an amount
sufficient to pay for any and all damages to the wastewater facilities. In
establishing its recommendation as to the amount of any forfeiture, the
Village shall consider the risks posed to the public health, safety, and
welfare by the discharge, the risks posed to the environment by the
discharge, the risks posed to wastewater facilities workers by the
§ 400-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-73
1:373
discharge, any adverse impacts on the wastewater facilities, and previous
violations.
§ 400-74. Liability to Village for losses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall become liable to
the Village for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by reason of such
violation which the Village suffers as a result thereof.
§ 400-75. Falsification of information or tampering with facilities.
No person shall knowingly make any false statement, representation,
record, report, plan, or affirmation in any document filed with the Village,
nor falsify, tamper with, or knowingly render inaccurate any flow metering
device, collected sample, or other instrument or sampling method utilized
under this chapter. The Village may levy a forfeiture for each violation
of this provision, together with the costs of prosecution. In establishing
its recommendation as to the amount of any forfeiture, the Village shall
consider the type of violation, potential consequences of the violation,
potential impacts of the violation on the wastewater facilities, and previous
violations. Criminal action may also be taken against any person violating
this provision as allowed by law.
§ 400-76. Forfeitures.
The Village may levy a forfeiture of not less $100 and not more than $10,000
for each violation of this chapter, together with the costs of prosecution.
Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be considered a
separate offense. In establishing its recommendation as to the amount of
any forfeiture, the Village shall consider the type of violation, potential
consequences of the violation, potential impacts of the violation, and
previous violations.
§ 400-77. Abatement of nuisance without notice.
If the Village determines that a public nuisance exists in the Village which
presents an imminent or substantial danger to the public health, safety,
or welfare, or presents a substantial danger to the environment, then
the Village may cause said public nuisance to be abated and charge the
costs thereof to the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or
maintaining the nuisance.
§ 400-78. Penalties for exceeding agreement wastewater limits.
Outside users and industrial users, with executed agreements with the
Village, shall control their wastewater discharge, at all times, such that the
wastewater flows, loads, and characteristic limits stated in the agreement
and/or in this chapter are not exceeded. Failure to comply with the
wastewater flows, loads, and characteristic limits stated in the agreement
and/or in this chapter shall be a violation of this chapter. In the event that
§ 400-73 EAST TROY CODE § 400-78
1:374
any limit on wastewater flows, loads, or characteristics, as stated in the
agreement and/or in this chapter, is exceeded, the following shall apply:
A. The user shall take immediate action to bring the wastewater discharge
within the limits set in the agreement.
B. The user shall submit, to the Village, a written statement describing the
cause of the violation and describing all actions being taken to reduce
the wastewater flows, loads, or characteristics to below the specified
limits.
C. The Village shall apply additional costs for the additional flows and/or
loads discharged above the agreement limits.
D. Where the current agreement between the Village and the user
specifies penalties for violations of the agreement, then said penalties
shall apply.
E. Where the current agreement between the user and the Village does
not specify penalties, then the Village may levy a forfeiture of not less
than $100 and not more than $10,000 for each limit violation and for
each day that a limit violation occurs.
F. In the event that said violation results in damage to, impairment of, or
interference with the wastewater facilities, then the user, in addition to
any surcharge costs or penalties, shall be liable to the Village for any
expense, loss, or damage occasioned by reason of such violation which
the Village suffers as a result thereof.
§ 400-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-78
1:375

ARTICLE XII
Appeals
§ 400-79. Right of appeal.
§ 400-80. Appeal fee.194
A fee set by the Village Board shall accompany any appeal to the Village
Board for a ruling. This fee may be refunded if the appeal is sustained in
favor of the appellant.
§ 400-81. Appeal hearing.
If the Village Board agrees to hear the appeal, a Village Board meeting shall
be held to consider the appeal within 60 days from the date of the filing.
The Village Board shall allow the appellant or his representative to address
the Village Board at that meeting. Other evidence may be heard, in the
discretion of the Village Board. The Village Board shall make a final ruling
on the appeal within 30 days from the date of the hearing.
A. Any user, permit applicant, or permit holder affected by any decision,
action, or determination, including any cease and desist order, made or
issued by the Village Board interpreting or implementing any provision
of this chapter or set forth in any permit issued hereunder may file with
the Village Board a written request for reconsideration within 30 days
of the decision or order, setting forth in detail the basis of the user's
request for reconsideration and setting forth in detail the relief sought
by the appellant.
B. The Village Board shall render a decision on the request for
reconsideration to the user, in writing, within 30 days of receipt of the
appeal request.
194. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 400-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-81
1:377

ARTICLE XIII
Audit, Notification and Records
§ 400-82. Audit.
The Village shall annually review the wastewater contribution of its users,
the operation and maintenance costs for the wastewater facilities, and the
sewer service charge system. Based on the review, the Village may revise
the sewer service charge system to accomplish the following:
§ 400-83. Notification.
The Village shall provide reasonable notification whenever changes occur in
the sewer service charge rates.
§ 400-84. Records.
The Village shall maintain records regarding the administration,
construction, modification, financing, and operation and maintenance of the
wastewater facilities in accordance with all applicable state and federal
rules and regulations.
§ 400-85. Public access to records.
A. Maintain a proportionate distribution of the user charge and debt
service charge costs to the various users based on the wastewater
volumes and loads discharged by the users.
B. Generate sufficient revenue to pay the user charge and debt service
charge costs.
A. The Village will allow any person to inspect or receive copies of any
Village record in accordance with the presumption of complete public
access, consistent with the conduct of governmental business, unless a
clear statutory or court-recognized exception requires otherwise, or
unless there is an overriding public interest in keeping the record
confidential.
B. The Village will respond to all record requests as soon as practicable
and without delay, either providing access to records or providing
copies of records or notifying the requestor of the Village's
determination to deny the request, either wholly or in part, and the
reason for the denial.
C. Where a request for review of records is approved by the Village,
review of records shall be allowed at the Village offices during normal
business hours. Removal of original records from the Village offices is
prohibited, and the Village may impose reasonable restrictions on the
manner of access to original records if the record is irreplaceable or
easily damaged.
§ 400-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-85
1:379
D. When a request is made for copies of records, all such copies shall be
made by the Village and provided to the requestor. Persons requesting
copies shall be charged for the actual cost to the Village to locate, copy,
and mail said records. Payment of charges shall be made before the
copies are provided to the requestor. If providing a copy of a record is in
the best interest of the Village or if there is, or will be, a direct benefit to
the Village, charges may be waived.
§ 400-85 EAST TROY CODE § 400-85
1:380
ARTICLE XIV
Basis for Sewer Service Charges
§ 400-86. Charges levied and assessed.
There is hereby levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building,
premises, unit, or user having a connection with the wastewater facilities
a sewer service charge pursuant to § 66.0821, Wis. Stats., as amended
from time to time. The sewer service charge shall consist of a fixed debt
service charge and a variable user charge. The debt service charge shall be
based on the annual payment of principal and interest for the retirement of
debt issued to finance the cost of capital improvements to the wastewater
facilities and the cost associated with the administration of said debt. The
user charge shall be based on the costs of the operation and maintenance
of the wastewater facilities and on the cost of the annual contribution to the
replacement fund.
§ 400-87. General methodology for allocation of sewer service
charges.
A. It is the intent of the Village of East Troy to provide equitable
distribution of sewer service charge costs to all users of the wastewater
facilities. The following general methodology will be applied in
determining the allocation of the debt service costs and the user charge
costs to the users within the Village of East Troy sewer service area and
to all outside users:
(1) The total debt service cost associated with the wastewater
treatment plant shall be distributed to the Village of East Troy and
to outside users in direct proportion to the allocation of the
wastewater treatment plant total flow capacity among said entities.
Said debt service cost allocation to outside users shall be in
accordance with the methodology provided in § 400-89A of this
chapter.
(2) The total debt service cost associated with the Village of East Troy
wastewater collection system shall be allocated to the Village of
East Troy, with the exception that the Village may allocate a portion
of said cost to outside users when the wastewater flow from an
outside user is conveyed through any part of the Village of East
Troy wastewater collection system in route to the wastewater
treatment plant. Said debt service cost allocation to outside users
shall be in accordance with the methodology provided in § 400-89A
of this chapter.
(3) The total user charge cost associated with the wastewater
treatment plant shall be distributed to the Village of East Troy and
to outside users in direct proportion to metered wastewater flow.
Said user charge cost allocation to outside users shall be in
accordance with the methodology provided in § 400-89B of this
chapter.
§ 400-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-87
1:381
§ 400-88. Sewer service charges for users in Village sewer service
area.
(4) The total user charge cost associated with the Village of East Troy
wastewater collection system shall be allocated to the Village of
East Troy, with the exception that the Village may allocate a portion
of said costs to outside users where the wastewater flow from an
outside user is conveyed through any part of the Village of East
Troy wastewater collection system in route to the wastewater
treatment plant. Said user charge cost allocation to outside users
shall be in accordance with the methodology provided in § 400-89B
of this chapter.
B. Section 400-88 of this chapter describes the methodology to be applied
in calculating the sewer service charges for users located in the Village
of East Troy sanitary sewer service area with the exception of users
classified as outside users by the Village. Section 400-89 of this chapter
describes the methodology to be applied in calculating the sewer
service charges for outside users.
A. Applicable users. This section applies to all users within the Village of
East Troy sewer service area with the exception of users defined in this
chapter as, or classified by the Village as, outside users.
B. Users served by Water Utility meters. Where users procure all of their
water solely from the Water Utility, the debt service component of the
sewer service charge shall be based on the size of the user's Water
Utility water meter and the user charge component of the sewer service
charge shall be based on the quantity of water usage as measured by
the Water Utility water meter(s) installed on the user's premises.
C. Users served by private wells.
(1) If any person discharging wastewater to the wastewater facilities
procures part, or all, of his water from sources other than the Water
Utility, all or part of which is discharged to the wastewater
facilities, the person shall have water meters installed on all
sources, by the Village, at the person's expense, for the purpose of
determining the volume of water used for assessing the user
charge component of the sewer service charge. Where required,
for the purposes of determining the debt service charge applicable
to the user, the Village shall assign an equivalent meter factor to
said user, based on the average daily total metered water usage by
the user relative to one residential user flow equivalent.
(2) Where water meters are required to be installed, the water meters
shall be furnished and installed by the Village. All costs for the
installation of the water meters shall be at the expense of the
person requiring the water meter. The Water Utility will charge for
each meter a rental charge as set by the Public Service Commission
§ 400-87 EAST TROY CODE § 400-88
1:382
to compensate for the cost of furnishing the meter and servicing
the meter.
(3) Where the installation of building sewer flow meters is approved by
the Village, the Village will allow the use of readings from such
meters for the purpose of assessing the user charge to said user
and will waive the requirement to install water meters on sources
other than the Water Utility. For the purposes of assessing the user
charge to said users, the metered wastewater flow shall be
assumed to be equivalent to metered water usage. Where required,
for the purposes of determining the debt service charge applicable
to the user, the Village shall assign an equivalent meter factor to
said user, based on the average daily total metered wastewater
discharged by the user relative to one residential user flow
equivalent. All building sewer meters shall be installed by a
licensed plumber while a representative of the Village is present to
observe and inspect said installation. Only Village-approved
building sewer meters will be allowed. All building sewer flow
meters shall be installed and maintained at the expense of the user,
or at the expense of the Sewer Utility with approval by the Director
of Public Works.195
D. Deduct meters.
(1) If a commercial, industrial, institutional, or governmental user
believes that a significant volume of metered water is not
discharged to the wastewater facilities, said user can, at its own
expense, with approval from the Village, install such additional
meters, metered services, or building sewer flow meters as
required to establish the volume of metered water not discharged
to the wastewater facilities or the actual volume of wastewater
discharged to the wastewater facilities. Metered water that is not
discharged to the wastewater facilities shall not be subject to sewer
service charges.
(2) All requests to install additional water meters, meter services, or
building sewer meters shall be made in writing to the Village. The
request shall clearly state the reasons why the user believes these
facilities are needed and shall include a detailed description of the
facilities proposed. No water meters, meter services, or building
sewer meters may be installed without written approval from the
Village.
(3) All building sewer meters shall be installed by a licensed plumber
while a representative of the Village is present to observe and
inspect said installation. Only Village-approved building sewer
meters will be allowed. All deduct water meters shall be furnished
and installed by the Village. The user shall be charged for each
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 400-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-88
1:383
deduct meter a rental charge as approved by the Public Service
Commission to compensate for the cost of furnishing the meter and
servicing the meter. All costs for the installation of the meters shall
be at the expense of the user requiring the meter.
E. Residential summer irrigation allowance. The user charge for all
residential users, with metered water service, shall be calculated to
provide an allowance for metered water that is used for outside
purposes (watering lawns, washing cars, etc.) and that is, consequently,
not discharged to the sanitary sewer. The irrigation allowance will be
applied for the second and third quarters of the year. The irrigation
allowance will be calculated as follows:
(1) For each individual residential user, the metered water use for the
fourth quarter of the previous year and the first quarter of the
current year will be averaged ("first/fourth quarter average").
(2) For the second and third quarters of the year, the metered water
usage, for the purposes of calculating the user charge, shall be
based on the lesser of the actual metered water usage or 110% of
the calculated first/fourth quarter average usage; the user charge
will not apply to any metered water usage exceeding 110% of the
calculated "first/fourth quarter average usage.
(3) For the first and fourth quarters of each year, the user charge for
each residential user shall be based on actual metered water
usage.
F. Sewer service charge methodology.
(1) The debt service charge rate (RDS) shall be calculated as the
Village of East Troy's allocation of the total annual debt service cost
divided by the total number of equivalent meters in the Village of
East Troy sewer service area, as follows:
RDS
=
(CVDS)
(NEM)
Where:
RDS = Annual debt service charge rate for users within
the Village of East Troy, dollars per year per
equivalent meter
CVDS = Village of East Troy's allocation of the total annual
debt service cost, dollars per year
NEM = Total number of equivalent meters in the Village
of East Troy
§ 400-88 EAST TROY CODE § 400-88
1:384
(a) The debt service charge (SDS), for each user, shall be
calculated as the debt service charge rate (RDS) multiplied by
the equivalent meter factor (FEM) applicable for each user
based on the size of each user's water meter, as follows:
SDS = (RDS) x (FEM)
(b) Determination of the number of equivalent meters (NEM) and
the equivalent meter factors (FEM) shall be based on the
following schedule:
Equivalent Water Meter Factor Schedule
Water Meter Size
(inches)
Equivalent Meter Factor
(FEM)
5/8 1.0
3/4 1.0
1 1.7
1 1/4 3.3
2 5.3
3 10.0
4 16.7
6 33.3
8 53.3
(2) The user charge rate (RUC) shall be calculated as the Village of
East Troy's allocation of the total annual costs for administration,
management, operation, and maintenance of the wastewater
facilities (COM), and the Village of East Troy's allocation of the
annual contribution to the replacement fund (CRF), divided by the
total annual billed water volume (VT) in thousands of gallons. The
value of VT shall be defined as the total annual volume of water
invoiced by the Water Utility (VI) minus the water volume
discounted for all deduct meters (VDM) and minus the water
volume discounted through the summer irrigation allowance
(VSIA). In equation form, the user charge rate calculation is as
follows:
RUC =
(COM) +
(CRF)
(VT)
VT = VI - VDM - VSIA
§ 400-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-88
1:385
Where:
RUC = Annual user charge rate for users within the Village
of East Troy, dollars per thousand gallons of
metered water
COM = Village of East Troy's allocation of the total annual
cost for administration, management, operation,
and maintenance of the wastewater facilities,
dollars
CRF = Village of East Troy's allocation of the total annual
contribution to the replacement fund, dollars
VT = Annual billed water volume, in thousands of gallons
of metered water
VI = Annual volume of water invoiced by the Water
Utility, thousand gallons per year
VDM = Annual volume of water discounted for all deduct
meters, thousand gallons per year
VSIA = Annual volume of water discounted for the summer
residential irrigation allowance, thousand gallons
per year
(a) The user charge (SUC), for each user, shall be calculated as the
user charge rate (RUC) multiplied by the volume of metered
water (VM) recorded for the user, as follows:
SUC = (RUC) x (VM)
Where:
VM = Metered water volume in thousands of gallons
(b) For residential users, the metered water volume (VM) shall be
calculated as follows:
[1] For the first and fourth quarters of the year, VM shall equal
the actual metered water volume for the user.
[2] For the second and third quarters of the year, VM shall be
the lesser of the actual metered water volume for the
quarter or 110% of the average metered water volume, for
the user, for the fourth quarter of the previous year and
the first quarter of the current year ("first/fourth quarter
average").
(c) For users with Village-approved deduct meters, the metered
water volume (VM) shall be calculated as the total volume of
water metered for the user by all water meters in operation
minus the water volume measured by the deduct meter(s).
§ 400-88 EAST TROY CODE § 400-88
1:386
§ 400-89. Sewer service charges for outside users.
(d) For users with Village-approved wastewater building sewer
flow meters, the metered wastewater volume shall be used as
for billing purposes (VM).
(e) For all other metered users, the metered water volume (VM)
shall be equal to the actual metered water volume.
(3) The sewer service charge (SSC) for each user shall equal the sum
of the debt service charge (SUC) and the user charge (SUC):
SSC = (SDS) + (SUC)
(4) There shall be a minimum sewer service charge (SM) which shall
be paid by all users connected to the wastewater facilities whether
the user discharges wastewater to the wastewater facilities during
the current billing cycle or not. The purpose of the minimum sewer
service charge is to ensure collection of sufficient funds for
financing of the debt service charge. The minimum charge shall be
calculated as follows:
SM = SDS
Where:
SM = Minimum service sewer charge, in dollars
SDS = Debt service charge, in dollars
(5) Current debt service charge rates and user charge rates, for the
users within the Village of East Troy, are published in the Schedule
of Sewer Service Charge Rates. This schedule is on file, and
available for public viewing, in the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office.
A. Debt service charges.
(1) All outside users shall be required to pay an equitable portion of
the debt service cost. The Village may, at its discretion, require
outside users to pay their allocation of any debt service cost as a
single lump sum payable at the time the wastewater facilities
upgrade or modifications, resulting in said debt service costs, are
constructed, or at such time thereafter that said user connects to
the wastewater facilities. Alternately, the Village may, at its
discretion, finance the outside user's allocation of the debt service
cost jointly with the Village's allocation of the debt service cost and
bill the outside user on a monthly or quarterly basis for said outside
user's share of the debt service cost, including any applicable
finance charges and administration costs.
(2) The debt service cost, associated with the wastewater treatment
plant, shall be allocated to each outside user in the direct
proportion of the wastewater treatment plant flow capacity
§ 400-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-89
1:387
allocated to the outside user to the total wastewater treatment
plant flow capacity. The flow allocation for each outside user shall
be based on the maximum month flow allocation as stated in the
current agreement between the Village and said outside user. The
total flow capacity of the wastewater treatment plant shall be
based on the maximum month design flow, as approved by the
WDNR, for the most current wastewater treatment plant upgrade
or modification.
(3) In cases where the wastewater flow from an outside user is
conveyed through any part of the Village of East Troy wastewater
collection system in route to the wastewater treatment plant, then
the Village may allocate a portion of the debt service cost,
associated with said portion of the wastewater collection system, to
the outside user. The allocation of said debt service cost to the
outside user shall be in the direct proportion of the outside user's
allocated flow capacity, with a peaking factor applied, to the total
design peak flow capacity of said part of the wastewater collection
system. The design peak flow capacity of said part of the
wastewater collection system shall be as stated in the design basis
as approved by the WDNR; where a documented design basis is not
available, the peak flow design capacity of said section of the
wastewater collection system shall be calculated based on the
Manning Formula method as published in Gravity Sanitary Sewer
Design and Construction (ASCE Manual of Practice No. 60). The
outside user's allocated flow capacity shall be the maximum month
flow capacity, as stated in the current agreement between the
Village and the outside user, with a peaking factor of 4.0 applied.
(4) With regard to the allocation of debt service costs associated with
upgrade or modification of the wastewater treatment plant and/or
the wastewater collection system, outside users shall be required
to contribute to the cost of any such upgrades or modifications as
associated with permit compliance, replacement of aging
structures or equipment, or any other upgrades which the outside
user, directly or indirectly, benefits from. Outside users shall not be
required to contribute to any costs associated with those portions
of wastewater treatment plant or wastewater collection system
upgrades or modifications which are solely associated with
provision of additional treatment capacity for users located in the
Village of East Troy and from which said outside users receive no
direct or indirect benefit.
B. User charge.
(1) All outside users shall be required to pay an equitable portion of
the user charge cost. The user charge for outside users shall be
based on a volume charge rate (RVC) established by the Village and
on the metered volume of wastewater discharged by said user to
the wastewater facilities. The volume of metered wastewater flow
§ 400-89 EAST TROY CODE § 400-89
1:388
for outside users shall be based on readings from Village-approved
flow metering facilities.
(2) The Village shall establish the volume charge rate (RVC), in dollars
per thousand gallons of wastewater, based on the total annual user
charge costs for the wastewater treatment plant divided by total
annual wastewater flow to the wastewater treatment plant in
thousands of gallons.
(3) The volume charge rate (RVC) for outside users is published in the
Schedule of Sewer Service Charge Rates. This schedule is on file,
and available for public viewing, in the Village Clerk-Treasurer's
office. The Village may adjust the volume charge rate, from time to
time, as required to generate sufficient revenue to cover the user
charge costs. Such rate adjustment shall be consistent with the
methodology described herein.
(4) Outside user allocation.
(a) The Village may allocate a portion of the user charge costs for
the Village of East Troy wastewater collection system to
outside users when the wastewater flow from an outside user is
conveyed through any part of the Village of East Troy
wastewater collection system in route to the wastewater
treatment plant. In such cases, the Village may allocate a
portion of the collection system operation and maintenance
cost to the outside user based on the length of the section of
the wastewater collection system through which the outside
user's wastewater flows in route to the wastewater treatment
plant and based on the ratio of the outside user's allocated
flow, with a peaking factor applied, to the total design peak
flow capacity of said section of the wastewater collection
system.
(b) The outside user's allocation of the collection system operation
and maintenance costs shall be in the direct proportion of the
total length-diameter value for the section of the wastewater
collection system through which the outside user's flow is
routed relative to the total length-diameter value for the entire
Village of East Troy wastewater collection system. The lengthdiameter
values shall be calculated as the pipe length, in miles,
times the pipe diameter, in inches. The length-diameter value
for the Village shall be calculated based on sewer mains only;
building sewers shall not be included.
(c) Additionally, the outside user's allocation of the collection
system operation and maintenance costs shall be in the direct
proportion of the ratio of the outside user's total allocated flow
capacity, with a peaking factor applied, to the total peak design
capacity of said part of the wastewater collection system
through which the outside user's wastewater is conveyed. The
§ 400-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-89
1:389
§ 400-90. Surcharges for high-strength wastewater.
outside user's allocated flow capacity shall be the maximum
month flow as stated in the current agreement between the
Village and said outside user, with a peaking factor of 4.0
applied. The peak flow design capacity of the section of the
wastewater collection system through which the outside user's
wastewater flows shall be as stated in the design basis as
approved by the WDNR; where a documented design basis
is not available, the design capacity of said section of the
wastewater collection system shall be calculated based on the
Manning Formula method as published in Gravity Sanitary
Sewer Design and Construction (ASCE Manual of Practice No.
60).
A. The sewer service charge for users discharging wastewater with BOD5,
TSS, TKN, or total phosphorus concentrations in excess of the values for
domestic wastewater (high-strength wastewater), as defined in § 400-2
of this chapter, shall include surcharges for BOD5, TSS, total nitrogen,
and/or total phosphorus in addition to the applicable debt service
charges and user charges.
B. Wastewater flows, for the purposes of calculating the wastewater loads
discharged by the user, shall be based on wastewater flow meter
readings if a flow meter is installed on the building sewer or on water
meter readings if a wastewater flow meter is not installed. Wastewater
concentrations, for the purposes of calculating the wastewater loads
discharged by the user, shall be based on routine wastewater sample
analysis as required by the Village in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
C. The Village may apply surcharges to any residential, commercial,
industrial, governmental, institutional, or outside user discharging
high-strength wastewater to the wastewater facilities. The Village may
apply surcharges to any user discharging high-strength wastewater for
one or more days in any month.
D. The sewer service charge (SSC2) for users discharging high-strength
wastewater shall be calculated as follows:
SSC2 = (SUC2) + (SDS2) + (SSR)
SSR
=
[(B - 220) x (VM/1,000) x (8.34) x (SCBOD)]+
[(T - 220) x (VM/1,000) x (8.34) x (SCTSS)]+
[(N - 40) x (VM/1,000) x (8.34) x (SCTN)]+
[(P - 8) x (VM/1,000) x (8.34) x (SCPHO)]+
§ 400-89 EAST TROY CODE § 400-90
1:390
Where:
SSC2 = Sewer service charge for users discharging highstrength
wastewater, in dollars
SUC2 = User charge, calculated per the methodologies
described in § 400-88F or 400-89B as applicable, in
dollars
SDS2 = Debt service charge, calculated per the methodologies
described in § 400-88F or 400-89A as applicable, in
dollars
SSR = Surcharge for wastewater with BOD5, TSS, TKN, and
total phosphorus concentrations in excess of domestic
strength wastewater, dollars
VM = Volume of metered wastewater or water, in thousand
gallons
B = Concentration of BOD5, in milligrams per liter (mg/l), in
the wastewater
T = Concentration of TSS, in milligrams per liter (mg/l), in
the wastewater
P = Concentration of total phosphorus, as phosphorus, in
milligrams per liter (mg/l), in the wastewater
N = Concentration of total nitrogen, as nitrogen, in
milligrams per liter (mg/l), in the wastewater
SCBOD= Surcharge per pound of BOD5 for wastewater with
BOD5 concentrations above 220 mg/l, in dollars per
pound
SCTSS = Surcharge per pound of TSS for wastewater with TSS
concentrations above 220 mg/l, in dollars per pound
SCPHO= Surcharge per pound of total phosphorus for
wastewater with total phosphorus concentrations above
8.0 mg/l, in dollars per pound
SCTN = Surcharge per pound of total nitrogen for wastewater
with total nitrogen concentrations above 40 mg/l, in
dollars per pound
(1) The surcharge (SSR) shall be calculated based on concentrations
determined from laboratory analysis of wastewater samples and on
metered water or wastewater volumes. In the case where a single
sample is collected in a given month, the surcharge shall be
calculated based on the metered wastewater volume for that month
and the analytical results of the single sample taken in that month.
In the case where multiple samples are collected and analyzed in a
given month, the concentration used in the surcharge calculation
shall be based on the average value of each two successive samples
and the volume of wastewater metered in the time interval between
the collection of the two samples. The Village may modify the
§ 400-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-90
1:391
§ 400-91. Charges for hauled waste disposal.
method of calculating the surcharge, at its discretion, on a case-bycase
basis, as required to ensure the surcharges reasonably reflect
the strength of the wastewater discharged.
(2) The surcharge rates are published in the Schedule of Sewer
Service Charge Rates. This schedule is on file, and available for
public viewing, in the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office.
A. The charge levied on septage, holding tank wastes, or other hauled
wastes (SSH) shall be determined using the following equation:
SSH = [(RVC2) x (VSH)]+
[(B - 220) x (VSH/1,000) x (8.34) x (SCBOD)]+
[(T - 220) x (VSH/1,000) x (8.34) x (SCTSS)]+
[(N - 40) x (VSH/1,000) x (8.34) x (SCTN)]+
[(P - 8) x (VSH/1,000) x (8.34) x (SCPHO)]+
[CADM]
Where:
SSH = Charge for disposal of hauled wastes, in dollars
RVC2 = Volume charge rate for hauled wastes, in dollars per
thousand gallons of hauled wastes
VSH = Volume of hauled wastes, in thousands of gallons
B = Concentration of BOD5, in milligrams per liter (mg/l),
in the hauled wastes
T = Concentration of TSS, in milligrams per liter (mg/l), in
the hauled wastes
P = Concentration of total phosphorus, as phosphorus, in
milligrams per liter (mg/l), in the hauled wastes
N = Concentration of total nitrogen, as nitrogen, in
milligrams per liter (mg/l), in the hauled wastes
SCBOD= Surcharge per pound of BOD5 for wastewater with
BOD5 concentrations above 220 mg/l, in dollars per
pound
SCTSS = Surcharge per pound of TSS for wastewater with TSS
concentrations above 220 mg/l, in dollars per pound
SCPHO= Surcharge per pound of total phosphorus for
wastewater with total phosphorus concentrations
above 8.0 mg/l, in dollars per pound
SCTN = Surcharge per pound of total nitrogen for wastewater
with total nitrogen concentrations above 40 mg/l, in
dollars per pound
§ 400-90 EAST TROY CODE § 400-91
1:392
§ 400-92. Replacement fund account.
All sewer service charge revenues collected for the annual contribution to
the replacement fund shall be deposited in a separate and distinct fund. The
annual revenue required to ensure an adequate replacement fund shall be
determined by the Village based on estimated costs to furnish and install
CADM = Administrative charge, dollars per load
B. Surcharge rates for hauled waste BOD5, TSS, total nitrogen, and total
phosphorus are published in the Schedule of Sewer Service Charge
Rates. This schedule is on file, and available for public viewing, in the
Village Clerk-Treasurer's office.
C. For hauled wastes charge determinations, it will be assumed that
holding tank wastes have the following average characteristics:
(1) Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) concentration of 400 mg/l.
(2) Total suspended solids (TSS) concentration of 350 mg/l.
(3) Total phosphorus concentration of 15 mg/l.
(4) Total nitrogen concentration of 85 mg/l.
D. For hauled wastes charge determinations, it will be assumed that
septage has the following average characteristics:
(1) Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) concentration of 4,000 mg/l.
(2) Total suspended solids (TSS) concentration of 9,500 mg/l.
(3) Total phosphorus concentration of 150 mg/l.
(4) Total nitrogen concentration of 400 mg/l.
E. Where required by the Village, or requested by the hauler with approval
from the Village, composite samples of the hauled wastes may be
collected and analyzed for the purposes of determining hauled wastes
disposal charges. All costs for sample collection and analysis shall be
paid by the hauler. Samples shall be analyzed at a laboratory certified
by the State of Wisconsin. The number of samples and the method for
collecting the samples shall be as directed by the Village. Where
required by the Village, samples shall be collected in the presence of a
representative of the Village.
F. The disposal costs for hauled wastes other than septage and holding
tank wastes, if such hauled wastes are approved by the Village for
discharge to the wastewater facilities, shall be determined on a case-bycase
basis. Sampling and analysis of such wastes may be required by
the Village in order to determine the characteristics of the wastes. All
costs associated with sampling and analysis of the wastes shall be
borne by the hauler.
§ 400-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-92
1:393
equipment, accessories, and appurtenances which are anticipated to have a
service life less than the design life of the wastewater facilities.
§ 400-93. Connection fee.
A. Introduction.
(1) It shall be the general policy of the Village of East Troy that new
users connecting to the wastewater collection system reasonably
participate in the cost of the Village's existing wastewater facilities
at the time their properties actually receive sanitary sewer service.
In determining what constitutes reasonable participation toward
such cost, the Village shall be guided by the principle that the area
to be served shall bear its proportionate share of such costs. The
costs of the wastewater facilities in which new users are required
to participate are:
(a) Costs incurred that are reasonable and necessary to construct
the wastewater facilities to serve the new areas; and
(b) Costs of providing excess capacity in the wastewater facilities
until such time as the future users in the new areas connect to
the sanitary sewer system.
(2) Wastewater facilities have a significant physical life. This requires
that they be constructed with sufficient capacity to serve present
users and future users. It is economical to construct wastewater
facilities with excess capacity. Therefore, it is reasonable that
future users, as well as present users, pay the total cost of the
wastewater facilities that serve them. The investment in excess
capacity is made for the future users' benefit and is not available
for other uses by the Village. Because future users make no
payment until they connect to the sanitary sewer, only a part of the
total cost of the wastewater facilities can be collected when said
facilities are first placed in service. Accordingly, the cost incurred
at the time of initial construction of the wastewater facilities,
associated with provision of capacity for future users, should be
recovered from said users through a connection fee.
(3) This connection fee is enacted pursuant to § 66.0821(4) of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Amount of connection fee.
(1) The connection fee is published in the Schedule of Sewer Service
Charge Rates. This schedule is on file, and available for public
viewing, in the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office.
(2) The connection fee shall be calculated on an equivalent meter basis
as follows:
SCC = (Ccc)*(FEM)
§ 400-92 EAST TROY CODE § 400-93
1:394
Where:
SCC = Connection fee, in dollars
CCC = Connection fee per equivalent meter, dollars per
equivalent meter
FEM = Equivalent water meter factor in accordance with
the schedule provided in § 400-88 of this chapter
(3) The equivalent meter factor shall be based on the size of the user's
water meter and shall be determined in accordance with the
equivalent water meter factor schedule provided in § 400-88F of
this chapter. Payment of the connection fee is a condition precedent
to the provision of sanitary sewer service to the property in
question.
C. Annual adjustment to connection fees. Effective as of January 1, 2009,
and each calendar year thereafter, the connection fee shall be increased
by $50. The connection fee shall be in the amount so determined for the
calendar year within which a sewer permit is issued. [Amended
8-20-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06]
D. Application of connection fee to existing users. The connection fee shall
also be applicable to existing commercial, industrial, governmental, and
institutional users which increase their wastewater discharges to the
wastewater facilities. For said existing users, an additional connection
fee is due when the average daily flow from such user increases by one
residential user flow equivalent or more over an average twenty-fourmonth
period, determined on a January 1 through December 31 period.
At the end of the first twelve-month period, the Village shall reasonably
notify the user in writing that the average daily flow from such existing
user exceeds the foregoing baseline. If the flow is not subsequently
reduced during the remaining 12 months, then the Village shall bill the
user for the connection fee.
E. Special circumstances. The Village Board may but is not required to
adjust any industrial sewer connection fees when special circumstances
allow for fair and reasonable fees suggested by either the Director of
Public Works or the Village Engineer. [Added 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-15]
F. Payment of connection fee.
(1) The connection fee shall be paid in full before the Village will issue
a building permit for any building or structure. Occupancy of any
building or structure prior to payment of the connection fee shall
be a violation of this chapter.
(2) For existing users who are required to pay a connection fee, or an
additional connection fee, based on increased flows, as described in
Subsection D of this section, the connection fee shall be paid to the
Village within 30 days of notification by the Village that said
§ 400-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-93
1:395
connection fee is due. A penalty of 3% per month shall be assessed
on all connection fees not paid within the thirty-day period. If a
connection fee remains delinquent for 90 days, the charges and
penalties shall constitute a lien upon the property and shall be
recorded on the tax roll and collected as other taxes are collected.
§ 400-93 EAST TROY CODE § 400-93
1:396
ARTICLE XV
Billing Practices
§ 400-94. Billing period.
§ 400-95. Payment of sewer service charges.
§ 400-96. Penalties.
A. Sewer service charges shall be billed by the Village to the users on a
quarterly or monthly basis if utility billing determines it is justified.196
B. Where the Village has a service agreement or contract with an outside
user or an industrial user, the charges shall be billed on a quarterly or
monthly basis unless otherwise established in the agreement or
contract.197
C. Charges for hauled wastes disposal shall be billed on a monthly basis.
A. Sewer services charges shall be payable at the Village office, or at any
other officially designated location, within 20 days of the billing date.
B. Property owners shall be held responsible under this chapter for bills
generated by sewer service to properties that they own.
A. Sewer service charges or any other charges due from any user or other
customer of the Village, levied in accordance with this chapter, shall be
a debt due to the Village.
B. If the debt is not paid within 20 days after it is due and payable, it shall
be deemed delinquent. Penalty interest shall be paid on any such
amounts that are delinquent at the rate of 3% per month until paid.
Penalties shall not be compounded. If sewer service charges or any
other charges remain delinquent for 90 days, the charges and penalties
shall constitute a lien upon the property and shall be recorded on the
tax roll and collected as other taxes are collected.
C. The Village shall have the right to remove or close sanitary sewer
connections if the user refuses to pay delinquent charges and to enter
on the user's property for such purpose. The costs for removing or
closing the connection, as well as the costs for restoring the connection,
shall be a debt to the Village. Sanitary sewer connections shall not be
restored until all charges and penalties, including the costs for
removing or closing the connection and the costs for restoring the
connection, have been paid in full.
D. Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall
not be cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties or charges.
196. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 400-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-96
1:397
§ 400-97. Notification of rate changes.
The Village shall provide reasonable notification whenever changes occur in
the sewer service charge rates.
E. Reasonable care will be exercised by the Village in the proper delivery
of bills. Failure to receive a bill, however, shall not relieve any person of
the responsibility for payment of sewer service charges within the
prescribed period, nor exempt any person from any penalty imposed for
delinquency in the payment thereof. It is the responsibility of each user
to provide the Village with a current mailing address. If property is sold,
it is the responsibility of the seller to promptly notify the Village of the
change of name and mailing address, for billing purposes, resulting
from such sale.
§ 400-96 EAST TROY CODE § 400-97
1:398
ARTICLE XVI
Outside User Dispute Resolution
§ 400-98. Methods of dispute resolution.
In the event a dispute arises between an outside user and the Village of East
Troy regarding interpretation or implementation of the service agreement
between the outside user and the Village of East Troy, or regarding
interpretation or implementation of any provisions or conditions of this
chapter, and the parties cannot resolve the dispute to their mutual
satisfaction by the efforts of their respective employees and/or
representatives, including engineers and other experts, then a meeting(s)
shall be held to discuss the issues of the dispute. The meeting(s) shall
be attended by no less than a majority of the Village Board and by an
no less than a majority of the governing body of the outside user, in the
case where the outside user is a municipality, or by a principal executive
officer, a general partner, or the proprietor in the case where the outside
user is a private enterprise. Either party may file a written request for
scheduling of said meeting. The meeting shall be held within 60 days of
filing of the request. Both parties shall participate in the meeting(s) in good
faith. If the dispute cannot be resolved through discussion and compromise
at said meeting(s), then the following means of dispute resolution shall be
available:
A. Mediation.
B. Arbitration.
C. Alternate method of dispute resolution.
D. Submittal of dispute to a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 400-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-98
1:399
Chapter 410
SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 362. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 458.
§ 410-1. State snowmobile laws adopted.198
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to
snowmobiles in the following enumerated sections of the Wisconsin
Statutes are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this chapter
as if fully set forth herein. Acts required to be performed or prohibited
by such statutes are required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future
amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated
herein by reference are intended to be made part of this Code.
(1) Section 350.01, Definitions.
(2) Section 350.02, Operation of snowmobiles on or in the vicinity of
highways.
(3) Section 350.03, Right-of-way.
(4) Section 350.04, Snowmobile races, derbies and routes.
(5) Section 350.045, Public utility exemption.
(6) Section 350.047, Local ordinance to be filed.
(7) Section 350.05, Operation by youthful operators restricted.
(8) Section 350.055, Safety certification program established.
(9) Section 350.07, Driving animals.
(10) Section 350.08, Owner permitting operation.
(11) Section 350.09, Head lamps, tail lamps, and brakes, etc.
(12) Section 350.10, Miscellaneous provisions for snowmobile
operation.
(13) Section 350.101, Intoxicated snowmobiling.
(14) Section 350.102, Preliminary breath screening test.
(15) Section 350.1025, Application of intoxicated snowmobiling law.
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 400-98 EAST TROY CODE § 410-1
1:400
§ 410-2. State all-terrain vehicle laws adopted.199
The provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to allterrain
vehicles in the following enumerated subsections of § 23.33, Wis.
Stats., and any future amendments or revisions, are hereby adopted by
reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any acts
required to be performed by the following statutory subsections or which
are prohibited by such statutory subsections are required to be performed
by this section or are prohibited by this section.
(16) Section 350.104, Chemical tests.
(17) Section 350.106, Report arrest to Department.
(18) Section 350.107, Officer's action after arrest for operating a
snowmobile while under influence of intoxicant.
(19) Section 350.12, Registration of snowmobiles; trail use stickers.
(20) Section 350.125, Completion of application for registration by
snowmobile dealers.
(21) Section 350.13, Uniform trail signs and standards.
(22) Section 350.15, Accidents and accident reports.
(23) Section 350.17, Enforcement.
(24) Section 350.18, Local ordinances.
(25) Section 350.19, Liability of landowners.
(26) Section 350.99, Parties to a violation.
A. Section 23.33(1), Definitions [including Subsections (a) through (n)].
B. Section 23.33(2), Registration.
C. Section 23.33(3), Rules of operating [including Subsections (a) through
(i)].
D. Section 23.33(4), Operation on or near highways [including Subsections
(a) through (e)].
E. Section 23.33(5)(a) and (c), Age restrictions.
F. Section 23.33(6), Equipment requirements [including Subsections (a)
through (e)].
G. Section 23.33(7), Accidents [including Subsections (a) and (b)].
199. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 410-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3
1:401
§ 410-3. Applicability of rules of the road to snowmobiles.200
The operator of a snowmobile upon a roadway shall, in addition to the
provisions of Ch. 350, Wis. Stats., be subject to §§ 346.04, 346.06, 346.11,
346.14(1), 346.18, 346.19, 346.20, 346.21, 346.215(3), 346.26, 346.27,
346.33, 346.35, 346.37, 346.39, 346.40, 346.44, 346.46, 346.47, 346.48,
346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52, 346.53, 346.54, 346.55, 346.87, 346.88,
346.89, 346.90, 346.91, 346.92(1) and 346.94(1) and (9), Wis. Stats.
§ 410-4. Prohibition of operation within Village.201
No person shall operate a snowmobile or ATV upon any street, highway or
alley within the Village of East Troy outside of the prescribed snowmobile/
ATV trail(s) placed, signed and cared for by an entity approved by the
Village Board. The trail(s) placement shall adhere to the appropriate state
statutes and Village ordinances and shall meet with the approval of the
Village Director of Public Works and the Chief of Police.
§ 410-5. Operation on sidewalks prohibited.
No person shall operate a snowmobile or ATV upon any sidewalk,
pedestrianway or upon the area between the sidewalk and the curbline of
any street in the Village.
§ 410-6. Operation in Village parks prohibited.
No person shall operate a snowmobile or ATV upon any Village park.
§ 410-7. Violations and penalties.202
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code,
provided that no person shall forfeit an amount in excess of the maximum
fine or forfeiture allowed in the Wisconsin Statutes for the same offense,
and further provided that the penalty and forfeiture for parking violations
on highways shall be the amount applicable to such violations by owners or
operators of motor vehicles under Chapter 458, Vehicles and Traffic, of this
Code.
§ 410-8. Enforcement.
A. Uniform citation for highway violations. The uniform traffic citation
promulgated under § 345.11, Wis. Stats., shall be used for violations of
this chapter relating to highway use, except as follows.
200. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-3 EAST TROY CODE § 410-8
1:402
Chapter 416
SPECIAL COMMUNITY EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fireworks — See Ch. 273.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 305.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 362.
§ 416-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to:
§ 416-2. Permit procedure.
B. Parking violations. The special traffic citation described and defined in
Chapter 458, Vehicles and Traffic, of the Code of the Village of East
Troy shall be used for enforcement of violations of rules of the road
relating to parking of vehicles adopted by reference in § 410-3 of this
chapter.
C. Other violations. All violations of this chapter not described in
Subsection A or B shall be enforced in accordance with §§ 66.0111 and
66.0114, Wis. Stats. Stipulations of guilty or no contest may be made as
provided in § 66.0114(1)(b), Wis. Stats., in substantially the form
provided in the uniform traffic citation, within five days of the date of
the citation for such violation. Bail deposit may also be made under
§ 66.0114, Wis. Stats.
D. Police Department to receive stipulations and penalties. Stipulations,
forfeited penalties and deposits for obtaining release from arrest
authorized under this chapter may be accepted at the Police
Department offices.
E. Forfeited penalties and deposits. Except as otherwise provided in
§ 345.26, Wis. Stats., and the deposit schedule adopted by the
Wisconsin Judicial Conference thereunder, required penalties and
deposits or bail not including costs or fees for violations of this chapter
shall be as established by the schedule adopted by the Village Board.203
A. Persons, firms or other groups conducting parades or any other event
or activity for which a permit is otherwise required by the Village.
B. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 416-2
1:403
A. Permit required. No person, firm, corporation, association, company or
organization of any kind shall engage or participate in, conduct, exhibit,
operate or maintain any special community event or activity, such as a
circus, menagerie, street carnival, exhibition, contest or theatrical
performance of any nature, whether or not admission is charged, upon
any street, square, park or other public place or way within the Village
unless a permit is obtained therefor. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02]
B. Forms. Any person desiring to procure a permit as required by this
chapter shall file with the Village Clerk a written application on forms
provided by said Clerk. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
C. Application. An application for a special community event or activity
permit shall be filed with the Village Clerk not less than 45 days nor
more than 12 months before the date on which it is proposed to conduct
the event or activity. This provision may be waived by the Village Board.
If the Village Board waives the forty-five-day requirement, then the
applicant shall be assessed a charge set by the Village Board payable at
the time the permit is issued. If an applicant proposes to conduct a
number of identical events, such as a series of baseball games or the
like, it is permissible for said applicant to include in his/her application
a listing of all proposed event dates which would take place within the
twelve-month period following the filing of the application. [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
D. Application contents. The application for a special community event or
activity permit shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person,
organization, firm, partnership, corporation or association seeking
to conduct such event, referred to in this chapter as the
"applicant."
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the event chairperson and who will be responsible for the conduct
of the event.
(3) Dates when the event is to be conducted.
(4) The public place where the event is to be located or conducted.
(5) The daily hours when such event or activity will start and
terminate.
(6) The specific nature of the event or activity for which the permit is
sought.
(7) A statement as to whether any vehicle, machinery, device, shelter,
building or other structure, whether portable, temporary or
permanent, or whether publicly or privately owned, will be utilized
in conjunction with the event, giving a brief description of the
§ 416-2 EAST TROY CODE § 416-2
1:404
nature and function of each vehicle, piece of machinery, device,
shelter, building or other structure.
(8) A statement as to whether any animals will be employed, displayed
or utilized in any way in conjunction with the event, giving the
name and number of such animals and a brief statement as to how
they will be used.
(9) A statement as to whether the event chairperson has, either alone
or with someone else, previously conducted any public event or
activity, when and where, and the nature of that event or activity.
(10) A statement as to whether the applicant and/or event chairperson
has previously been convicted of violating any law regulating the
conduct of any public event or activity and, if so, the specific
offense, date of conviction, and in what court.
(11) Such other information as either the Village Clerk, Village Board,
any individual member of the Village Board, Chief of Police, East
Troy Emergency Services or Village Attorney may, from time to
time, require. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
E. Referral; investigation; report. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(1) The Village Clerk shall note the date on which the application was
filed and shall refer copies of such application to the Village
President and members of the Village Board at the next regularly
scheduled Village Board meeting. The Village Board may refer
copies of said application to the Chief of Police, East Troy
Emergency Services and/or Building Inspector, who, in the event of
a referral, shall inspect or cause to be inspected the application to
make a determination as to whether the event which is the subject
of the application would comply with all applicable laws,
ordinances, and health and fire regulations and whether, in his/her
or its opinion, it would be a safe and proper event.
(2) These officials shall, within eight days of the date on which the
application was referred to them, separately furnish to the
Village Clerk, in writing, the information derived from their
investigation, accompanied by a recommendation as to whether a
permit should be granted or refused. These reports shall remain on
file with the Village Clerk and shall be available to any interested
person.
F. Hold harmless agreement and certificate of insurance.
(1) A properly executed hold harmless and indemnity agreement
running to the Village, which agreement shall provide, among other
things, that the Village will be indemnified and held safe and
harmless from any and all damages which may be asserted against
the Village by reason of any damages or injuries sustained by any
§ 416-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 416-2
1:405
person or to any property by the event or activity itself, or by
the participants therein, shall be required of each applicant. The
agreement shall also provide that the Village be reimbursed for any
damage or injuries which are sustained by reason of said event or
activity or by the acts of any participants therein.
(2) The applicant may also be required by the Village Board to submit a
certificate of insurance evidencing contractual coverage for such
hold harmless and indemnity agreement. In the event such a
certificate is required, the aggregate amount of contractual
coverage shall be either $250,000, $500,000, $750,000, or
$1,000,000, as determined by the Village Board, depending upon
such factors as the public place at which the event is to be
conducted, the nature of the event, the nature and number of any
animals, experience, if any, of the event chairperson in conducting
a special event, and other like considerations relating to the event
for which the permit application has been filed.
(3) The hold harmless and indemnity agreement and certificate of
insurance, if one has been required, shall be subject to the approval
of the Village Attorney.
G. Permit issuance.
(1) A permit shall be issued by the Village Board if it is found that all of
the persons named in the application are of good moral character,
that the proposed event would comply and conform to all laws,
ordinances and health and fire regulations applicable thereto, and
that it would be a reasonable, safe and proper event.
(2) No permit shall be refused except for a specific reason and for the
protection of the public's safety, health, morals or general welfare.
(3) The Village Board shall act upon each application within 30 days
after the filing thereof.
(4) In the event the Village Board approves the application
unconditionally, the Village Clerk shall issue a special event permit
in accord with the direction of the Village Board and with the
provisions of Subsection J. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
(5) If the Village Board disapproves the application, the applicant shall
be so notified. Such notice shall be given by certified mail and shall
state the reasons for disapproval. Notice shall be deemed given
when mailed.
(6) Conditional approval of a permit may be given by the Village Board,
subject to the submittal by the applicant of its hold harmless
agreement and certificate of insurance, if one is required.
§ 416-2 EAST TROY CODE § 416-2
1:406
§ 416-3. Duties of permittee.
H. Notice to Village officials. Immediately upon the issuance by the Village
Board of a special community event or activity permit, the
Village Clerk shall send a copy thereof to the following: [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(1) East Troy Emergency Services.
(2) The Village Chief of Police.
(3) The Village Director of Public Works.
I. Alternative permit. The Village Board, in disapproving an application or
certain portions of an application, may, in its notice of disapproval,
authorize the conduct of the event or activity on a date, at a time or
under different circumstances from that named by the applicant. An
applicant desiring to accept an alternative permit shall, within seven
days of the notice of disapproval, as provided in Subsection G, file a
written notice of acceptance of the alternative date, time, etc., with the
Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall then issue a permit conforming to
these alternative provisions. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
J. Permit contents. Each permit shall state the following:
(1) Dates of the event or activity.
(2) The daily hours when such event or activity will start and
terminate.
(3) The location where such event or activity is to be conducted.
(4) The exact nature of the event or activity, including a description of
the vehicles, machinery, animals, devices, shelters, buildings, etc.,
which are to be used in conjunction with the event.
(5) Such other information as the Village Board finds necessary for the
enforcement of this chapter.
K. Fees required. Permit fees are included on the most recent fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Village Board. In addition to permit fees
there may be fees charged that reasonably relate to the cost of
providing additional services in relation to the special event. These fees
are also included on the fee schedule. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02]
L. Permit nontransferability. Any and all permits granted under the
provisions of this chapter shall be nontransferable.
A. A permittee under this chapter shall comply with all permit directions
and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
§ 416-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 416-3
1:407
§ 416-4. Disorderly conduct; intoxicating liquor. [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
No recipient of a permit under this chapter shall allow any disorderly
conduct, or the use of any immoral, profane or indecent language, or allow
the sale, giving away, delivering or use therein of any drugs, or allow such
place of event or activity to become and be a place or resort of thieves,
prostitutes, gamblers or other disorderly persons. No intoxicating liquors
may be sold or dispensed at such special community activity or event unless
a license has been obtained therefor, as provided in § 305-16 of this Code.
§ 416-5. Sanitary and lighting requirements.
All special community activity and event places and facilities appertaining
thereto shall be kept at all times in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition.
All stairways and other passages and all rooms connected with the public
activity or event shall be kept open and well lighted during public use.
§ 416-6. Permit revocation or cancellation.
B. The event chairperson shall immediately post such permit and keep the
same posted while in force in a conspicuous place on the location
mentioned in the application for such permit. It shall be unlawful for
any person to post such permit or to be permitted to post it upon
premises other than those mentioned in the application or knowingly to
deface or destroy such permit.
C. Whenever a permit is lost or destroyed without fault on the part of the
holder or his/her agent or employees, a duplicate permit in lieu thereof,
under the original application, may be issued by the Village Clerk at his/
her discretion. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
A. Revocation. The Village Board may, at any time after giving the
applicant notice and an opportunity to be heard, revoke any permit
granted under the provisions of this chapter for the violation of any of
the rules, regulations, ordinances or laws governing or applying to the
public activities or events or for the protection of the public health,
safety, morals or general welfare. Notice of such hearing and the
reasons therefor, in writing, shall be served by the Village Board upon
the applicant by mailing the same by certified mail to the address given
on the application.
B. Cancellation. If, after issuing a permit, an emergency arises which may
threaten the health, comfort or safety of the general public or of the
participants of the activity or event, the Village President or his/her
designee may cancel the permit forthwith and prohibit the proposed
activity or event.
§ 416-3 EAST TROY CODE § 416-6
1:408
Chapter 423
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways and culverts — See Ch. 244.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 458.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 495.
§ 416-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 416-6
1:409

ARTICLE I
Grades
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 6, Ch. 1, of the 2000
Code]
§ 423-1. Establishment of grades.
§ 423-2. Alteration of grade. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public
ground, or any part thereof, in the Village of East Troy, by any means
whatsoever, unless authorized or instructed to do so by the Village Board or
Director of Public Works. All such alterations of grade shall be recorded in
the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 423-3. Underground utilities.
A. Grade to be established. The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks
shall be established by the Village Board and the same recorded by the
Village Clerk in his/her office. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be
worked until the grade thereof is established. In all cases where the
grade of sidewalks shall not have been specifically set by ordinance, the
sidewalks shall be laid to the established grade of the street. All such
grades heretofore established are hereby confirmed. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. New sidewalk grade. Whenever a street shall be improved for the first
time, or the grade thereof changed and the street improved so as to
conform to the new grade, the grading of the sidewalk shall be
considered a part of the improvements and shall be let by contract with
the other work of improving such street, and the expense thereof shall
be provided for and borne in all respects like that of improving the
street, but the construction shall be done by the owners of the abutting
lots or parcels of land or at their expense as hereinafter provided.
Before such construction is commenced by the owners of the abutting
lots or parcels of land, the Village Board shall, upon application by the
respective owners for a sidewalk grade, cause such sidewalk grade to
be established.
A. Elevation. The grade or elevation of all underground construction shall
be a minimum of three feet below the established grade of the street,
alley, park, public property or easement. The three feet shall be
measured between the top of the established grade and the top of the
underground construction.
B. Approval of location. The location of any and all such underground
construction must have the approval of the Director of Public Works.
§ 423-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-3
1:411
C. Filing plans. Complete plans for any such construction must be filed
with and be approved by the Director of Public Works before
construction can begin.
D. Inspection. On request of the Director of Public Works, the utility
company must provide opportunity for him/her to check any
construction before it may be covered.
E. Conflict with other utilities. If the grade or elevation herein set for the
underground construction of utilities shall, in any instance, conflict with
other existing utilities, the utility shall be required to lower the
elevation of its underground construction, or of the storm sewer, at the
election of the Director of Public Works, and in accordance with his/her
directions and specifications.
F. Establishment of grade. At the request of the utility company, the
Village Engineer shall give the utility company an established grade on
any streets, alleys, public parks or easements where it proposes to
install underground utilities.
G. Emergency. In case of an emergency, when immediate action is
necessary in order to protect life or property, the utility company may
proceed with underground construction subject to obtaining the
approval of such work by the Director of Public Works as soon
thereafter as is reasonably possible.
H. Restoration of surface. In the event of any such underground
construction, the utility company shall leave the surface of the ground,
or road, in the same condition as before said work was commenced, and
in the event of its failure to do so, the Village may proceed to place the
surface of the ground or street in such condition at the utility company's
expense. Such work shall comply with the provisions of §§ 423-6 and
423-7.
I. Nonrelief from obligation. Compliance with this section does not relieve
the utility company from any responsibility of any kind whatsoever by
reason of the widening of the travel way or any other improvements
which may become necessary, nor does it relieve it from any liability of
any kind or nature whatsoever. Compliance with this section shall not
relieve the utility company from the responsibility or obligation of
removing, relocating or moving any of its mains, pipes or property due
to the opening, widening or improving of streets or due to any other
changes which may occur by reason of which such moving, relocation
or removing may be necessary.
§ 423-3 EAST TROY CODE § 423-3
1:412
ARTICLE II
General Regulations
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 6, Ch. 2, of the 2000
Code]
§ 423-4. Removal of rubbish and dirt from sidewalks. [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
No owner or occupant shall allow the sidewalk abutting on his/her premises
to be littered with rubbish or dirt. If such owner or occupant shall refuse or
fail to remove any such rubbish or dirt when notified to do so by the Village
Board or its designee, the Village Board or its designee may cause the same
to be done and report the cost thereof to the Village Clerk, who shall spread
the cost on the tax roll as a special charge against the premises, pursuant
to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., or such cost may be recovered in an action against
the owner or occupant.
§ 423-5. Construction and repair of sidewalks.
A. State statute adopted. Section 66.0907, Wis. Stats., is adopted by
reference and made a part of this section as if fully set forth in this
section. The Village Board or Director of Public Works shall perform the
duties of the Board of Public Works as that term is used in the statute
designated in this section. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
B. Board may order. The Village Board may determine that sidewalks may
be constructed, laid, rebuilt or repaired along or upon any public street,
right-of-way or highway within the Village. The Village Board may
determine or change the width or grade of any street or sidewalk.
C. Apportionment of sidewalk costs.
(1) Sidewalks which are new shall be paid for by the Village.
(2) Sidewalk repair and/or replacement shall be paid 50% by the
abutting property owner and the Village shall pay the other 50%.
(3) The Village Board may provide, by resolution, that the expense be
paid in up to five annual installments, all as specified in § 66.0907,
Wis. Stats.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection C(1) and (2) of this
section, the Village shall pay for sidewalk construction,
reconstruction and/or repair for sidewalks located in street
intersections. This subsection shall not apply to new sidewalks in
new subdivisions.
(5) Sidewalks in new subdivisions shall be installed by the developer
pursuant to Chapter 495, Subdivision of Land, of this Code.
§ 423-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-5
1:413
D. Permit required. No person shall hereafter lay, remove, replace or
repair any public sidewalk within the Village of East Troy unless he/she
is under contract with the Village to do such work or has obtained a
permit therefor from the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector
at least seven days before work is proposed to be undertaken.204
E. Standard specifications for sidewalk.
(1) General. Concrete sidewalk construction shall meet the
specifications and provisions set forth in this section and shall be
constructed in locations and to line and grade as established by the
Village.
(2) Grading. Prior to construction, ground on which sidewalks are to
be placed shall be brought to within three inches of subgrade by
the contractor.
(3) Subgrade. Subgrade shall be four inches of sand, gravel or crushed
stone and fill, thoroughly and uniformly compacted and brought to
correct grade before placing of concrete, and thoroughly wet down
immediately before concrete is placed. Soft and unsuitable
subgrade material shall be removed and replaced with sand or
other satisfactory material, and the subgrade shall be thoroughly
and uniformly compacted and moistened immediately before the
concrete is placed.
(4) Concrete. All sidewalks shall be of one course air-entrained
concrete, four inches in thickness, composed of six sacks (94
pounds each) of cement per cubic yard of concrete. All sidewalks
which are used as a driveway shall be constructed as described in
this section, except that they shall have a minimum thickness of six
inches. Concrete shall test 2,000 pounds compression in 28 days.
Bituminous sidewalks are prohibited.
(5) Jointing. Expansion joints 1/2 inch thick and four feet wide shall be
placed at fifty-foot maximum intervals. At all places where a walk
intersects another walk or curbline, a one-half-inch expansion joint
shall be placed.
(6) Slope.
(a) All sidewalks constructed or repaired in the Village shall
conform to the line and grade established by the ordinances of
the Village. The minimum slope from the top of the curb (either
existing or established by ordinance) to the street side of the
sidewalk shall be 1/4 inch per foot. The maximum slope from
the top of the curb as described in this subsection to the street
side of the sidewalk shall be one inch per foot. The sidewalk
grade shall, in all cases, be parallel to the grade of the top of
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 423-5 EAST TROY CODE § 423-5
1:414
the curb. The slope of the sidewalk from the street side to the
property side shall be 1/4 inch per foot.
(b) In cases where the grade exceeds 15%, steps or special
construction shall be required to fit the existing conditions.
Such details shall be prepared by the Village Engineer and
approved by the Village Board before construction of the walk
is started.
(c) All joints and edges shall be finished with a one-fourth-inch
radius edging tool.
(d) Sidewalks shall be constructed within the limits of the street,
and, unless otherwise specifically indicated, there shall be a
six-inch strip of street property left between the property line
and the edge of the sidewalk.
(7) Width and thickness.
(a) All residential sidewalks in the Village shall be four feet in
width.
(b) The width of the sidewalks in commercial areas shall be as
determined by the Village Board.
(c) Residential walks shall be not less than four inches thick,
except within driveway approaches, where the minimum
thickness shall be six inches. Sidewalks in front of commercial
or industrial establishments shall be not less than five inches in
thickness, except within driveway approaches, where the
minimum thickness shall be seven inches.
(d) One-half-inch reinforcement rod shall be used when replacing
or repairing sidewalks over alley entrances.
(8) Curb ramping.
(a) Any curb or sidewalk constructed or repaired on each side of
any Village street or any connecting highway or town road for
which curbs and sidewalks have been prescribed by the Village
Board shall include curb ramping providing access to
crosswalks at intersections and other designated locations.
Curb ramping includes the curb opening, the ramp and that
part of the sidewalk or apron leading to and adjacent to the
curb opening.
(b) Any person constructing new curbs or sidewalks or replacing
curbs or sidewalks within five feet of a legal crosswalk in any
Village street, connecting highway or town road shall comply
with the standards for curb ramping set forth in § 66.0909,
Wis. Stats.
§ 423-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-5
1:415
(c) If any person constructs a new or replacement sidewalk or
curb, other than the Village, the Village shall inform the person
of the requirements of this section. The Village may agree to
construct, or bear the cost of constructing, curb ramping
required to provide access to sidewalks opposite the new or
replacement curb or sidewalk.
(9) Finishing. The concrete shall be struck off true to grade, finished
smooth and given a broom finish. All edges shall be rounded. No
tool marks shall be left on exposed surfaces. In case of rain, the
walk shall be covered to protect the surface from being damaged.
Walks shall be kept free from all traffic at normal temperatures for
48 hours and in cold weather (below 50° F.) for 96 hours. No
concrete shall be poured when the temperature may be expected to
fall below 35° F. in any seventy-two-hour period or upon frozen
subgrade.205
(10) Curing. As soon as any of the concrete work hereinbefore
mentioned has been finished and hardened sufficiently to prevent
excessive marring of the surface, it shall be cured and protected
against rapid drying. Failure to comply with this requirement shall
be deemed sufficient cause for suspension of the work. Curing shall
be accomplished by the impervious coating, wet fabric or paper
methods. For impervious coating or membrane curing, only those
materials meeting requirements of ASTM Spec. C156-44T, Method
of Test for Efficiency of Materials for Curing Concrete, shall be
used. Said specifications are hereby adopted by reference as if fully
set forth herein.
(11) Higher standards. Where deemed necessary by the Village, higher
sidewalk standards may be required by the Village Board.
F. Repair or replacement of defective sidewalks.
(1) The Village Board may determine that any sidewalk which is
unsafe, defective, or insufficient be repaired or removed and
replaced with a sidewalk in accordance with this section. The
existence of any one or more of the hereinafter enumerated
characteristics shall determine whether a sidewalk is defective or
insufficient:
(a) One-half inch or more vertical differential between adjacent
sharp-edged individual sidewalk blocks (crack in slab) and
between adjacent round-edged individual sidewalk blocks
(joint).
(b) One and one-fourth inch horizontal distance between adjacent
individual sidewalk blocks.
205. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 423-5 EAST TROY CODE § 423-5
1:416
§ 423-6. Excavations of streets, alleys, public ways and grounds.
(c) Deterioration of the surface to a vertical depth of 1/2 inch or
more within each individual sidewalk block.
(2) If 80% of a property owner's sidewalk blocks are determined to be
defective or insufficient, the entire sidewalk shall be replaced.
G. Illegal sidewalks. No sidewalk which shall be constructed contrary to
the provisions of this section shall be considered a legal sidewalk, and
the same may be ordered to be replaced with a legal sidewalk and with
one that is in conformity with this section, the same as if no sidewalk
whatever had been built or constructed in the place where any such
sidewalk is located.
A. Purpose. This section sets forth the permit requirements for installation
of utility mains, services and laterals or the like in, across or under
street, sidewalk and/or alley rights-of-way in the Village.
B. Permit required. No person, partnership or corporation, or his/her or its
agents or employees or contractors, shall make or cause to be made any
opening or excavation in any public street, public alley, public way,
public ground, public sidewalk or Village-owned easement within the
Village of East Troy without a permit therefor from the Director of
Public Works.206
C. Application for permit. The application for a permit shall be in writing
and signed by the applicant or his agent. The applicant shall submit to
the Village, at the time the permit is applied for, sufficient information
relating to the work to be done, including the general location and
nature of the work and the method the applicant proposes to use in
doing the work. The Director of Public Works shall determine if
sufficient information is submitted. The application shall contain an
agreement that the applicant will pay all damages to persons or
property, public or private, including any costs incurred by the Village
in defending any action brought against it for damages, as well as the
cost of any appeal, that may result from the conduct of the applicant,
his agents, contractors, subcontractors or employees in connection
with the excavation. A fee set by the Village Board shall be paid to the
Director of Public Works at the time the application is filed to help
defray administrative costs.207
D. Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to Village
excavation work done under the direction of the Village Board or
Director of Public Works.
E. Security.
206. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
207. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 423-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-6
1:417
(1) The applicant shall be required, as a condition to the granting of a
permit for the excavation and installation of a lateral, service, main
or the like, to file a cash deposit (to be refunded following proper
backfilling and resurfacing), or surety bond, in the following
amounts which have been determined as necessary to guarantee
that the contractor will leave the street, sidewalk or alley in as good
condition as the same was in when the work was commenced:208
(Perpendicular) (Parallel)
Type of Material
Lateral or
Service
Main in Street
Right-of-Way
Portland cement
concrete
$1,500 $30 (per linear
foot)
Bituminous pavement
(over portland cement
concrete)
$1,000 $20 (per linear
foot)
Three-inch bituminous
concrete pavement
$750 $15 (per linear
foot)
Crushed gravel $500 $10 (per linear
foot)
Turf $400 $8 (per linear foot)
Portland cement
concrete (sidewalk or
driveway)
$750 $15 (per linear
foot)
(2) The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of any repairs
occasioned by the settling, or the like, for a period of one year after
final resurfacing. An annual bond in the amount of $10,000 may be
submitted (in lieu of, but for the same purpose as, the periodic cash
deposit or surety bond described above), which bond shall be
applicable as to all excavation work in rights-of-way by the
principal in such bond during the term of one year from the date of
said bond. Any such annual bond must be first submitted to the
Village Attorney for approval as to form.
F. Insurance. The applicant shall also be required to submit a certificate of
insurance indicating public liability insurance with a solvent insurance
company in the sum of at least $1,000,000 for injury to one person and
$1,000,000 for one occurrence and $5,000,000 umbrella policy and
workers' compensation and/or employer's liability insurance for all
employees employed at the site of the excavation. The applicant shall
require each and every subcontractor to obtain and maintain similar
policies with the same limits as those stipulated in this subsection.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
208. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 423-6 EAST TROY CODE § 423-6
1:418
§ 423-7. Regulations governing excavations and openings.
G. Validity of permit. Permits shall be valid for a period of 30 days from the
date of approval, except as provided for under § 423-7G for pavement
replacement.
H. Renewal of permit. If operations have begun under an approved permit
and will continue beyond the thirty-day validation period, the permittee
shall apply for a thirty-day permit renewal by written request to the
Director of Public Works, and payment of a renewal permit fee set by
the Village Board shall apply. Permit renewals shall be issued with the
assistance of the Village Clerk. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
I. Village standards. All street work shall be performed in accordance
with the current standard specifications for street openings found in
this section and § 423-7. Any damaged curb and gutter, sidewalk or
grass-covered area shall be restored to the condition prior to damage.
A. Frozen ground. No openings in the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public
ways shall be permitted between November 15 and April 1, except
where it is determined by the Director of Public Works to be an
emergency excavation.
B. Protection of public.
(1) Every opening and excavation shall be enclosed with sufficient
barriers, signing, and such other traffic control devices as may be
required by the Village Board or its designee and in accordance
with Section VI of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Sufficient warning lights shall be kept on from sunset to sunrise.
No open flame warning devices shall be used. Except by special
permission from the Director of Public Works, no trench shall be
excavated more than 250 feet in advance of pipe or conduit laying
or left unfilled more than 500 feet from where pipe or conduit has
been laid.
(2) All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public
effectively from accidents or damage to persons or property
through the period of the work. Each person making such opening
shall be held liable for all damages, including costs incurred by the
Village in defending any action brought against it for damages, as
well as cost of any appeal, that may result from the neglect by such
person or his employees of any necessary precaution against injury
or damage to persons, vehicles or property of any kind.
(3) Unless otherwise approved, a minimum of one lane of traffic in
each direction shall be provided. Every effort shall be made on the
part of the permittee to provide reasonable access to all properties
adjacent to his project. In the event traffic is limited to less than
one lane in each direction, a flagman or temporary traffic control
§ 423-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-7
1:419
signal shall be provided so as to safely cycle traffic in each direction
past the work area.
(4) The permittee shall perform the work in such a manner so as not to
disrupt the flow of traffic in the area or endanger the safety of
workmen or passersby. It shall be the responsibility of the
permittee to prevent traffic backup during construction operation.
The permittee shall notify the Director of Public Works 24 hours
prior to commencement of excavation of the location and extent of
the excavation, unless the excavation is an emergency excavation
as identified in Subsection H.
(5) When the operations will result in the loss of any utility service to
private properties, the private properties shall be notified in
writing or by personal contact at least 12 hours prior to the loss of
service, unless the operations are part of an emergency excavation
as defined in Subsection H.
C. Pavement removal.
(1) Removal of existing pavement shall be to neat, straight lines. The
permittee shall make a final saw cut in the existing pavement after
backfilling. Excavations shall be kept to the minimum possible and
acceptable for the convenience and safe performance of the work
and in accordance with all applicable codes and regulations.
(2) If the pavement is damaged during excavation beyond the original
saw cut lines, it shall be saw cut again along neat, straight lines.
The finished saw cut shall leave a regular rectangular section for
pavement replacement. Should the street opening occur within,
adjacent or close to an existing patch or require more than one
opening within a short distance, the permittee shall identify and
locate the existing patches or additional openings on the permit
application form. The Director of Public Works shall, on the basis of
an on-site inspection, approximate the boundaries of the pavement
replacement area.
(3) Pavement replacement areas with the long dimension in the
direction of travel shall have the long dimension parallel to the
curbline or the direction of travel. Pavement replacement areas in
concrete pavements shall be parallel to or at right angles to the
direction of travel.
(4) The Director of Public Works may order the permittee to remove
and replace up to one full lane width of pavement along the
patched or excavated area. Special care shall be taken with
concrete pavement to produce a vertical face on the existing
concrete at the point of the saw cut to ensure a full depth of
concrete at the joint.
D. Excavation.
§ 423-7 EAST TROY CODE § 423-7
1:420
(1) All excavated material shall be piled in a manner such that
pedestrian and motor traffic is not unnecessarily disrupted. Gutters
shall be kept clear or other satisfactory provisions made for street
drainage. Storm sewers and natural watercourses shall not be
obstructed.
(2) Excavated material to be used for backfilling of the trench must be
so handled and placed as to be of as little inconvenience as
practical to public travel and adjoining tenants.
E. Backfilling.
(1) All backfill material shall be free from cinders, ashes, refuse,
vegetable or organic matter, boulders, rocks or stones greater than
eight inches in their greatest dimension, frozen lumps or other
material which, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, is
unsuitable.
(2) In refilling the excavation, if there is not sufficient material
excavated suitable for refilling, the deficiency shall be made up
with material, approved prior to use by the Director of Public
Works, hauled in.
(3) Wherever an excavation crosses an existing utility, pipe or other
structure, backfill shall be carefully compacted in stages from the
bottom of the excavation. Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water,
telephone, natural gas or other service shall not be interrupted by
the permittee. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to have the
various utilities locate and mark their facilities prior to excavation.
(4) Mechanical compaction shall be used on all materials used for
trench backfill. Each layer (12 inches maximum) shall be uniformly
compacted to a density as determined by the Modified Proctor Test
(ASTM-1557). Compaction or consolidation by flooding shall not be
permitted.
(5) All excavations shall be subject to testing by the Village. Backfilled
material not achieving the above compaction requirements shall be
removed and recompacted by the permittee. The cost of any
retesting shall be paid by the permittee.
(6) When the sides of the trench will not stand perpendicular,
sheathing and braces shall be used to prevent caving. No timber,
bracing, lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any
trench. At no time shall any street pavements be permitted to
overhang the excavation.
F. Notice. It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the Director of
Public Works and all public and private individuals, firms and
corporations affected by the work to be done at least one business day
before such work is to commence. The Director of Public Works shall
§ 423-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-7
1:421
also be notified at least four hours prior to backfilling and/or restoring
the surface.
G. Pavement replacement.
(1) Backfill material shall be left below the original surface to allow for
four inches of three-inch crushed stone and four inches of threefourths-
inch crushed stone, plus the thickness of the required
pavement structure. If paving will not occur as part of the initial
street restoration operation, the balance of the opening to the
original surface elevation shall be backfilled with compacted threefourths-
inch crushed stone.
(2) Bituminous pavement shall be placed the full depth of the existing
pavement or three inches, whichever is greater. Bituminous
pavement shall be placed in a maximum of one-and-one-half-inch
base layer and a one-inch top layer, with each layer compacted to
maximum density, and shall consist of Wisconsin Department of
Transportation Gradation No. 1 for the binder course and
Wisconsin Department of Transportation No. 3 for the surface
course. The finished surface shall be smooth and free of surface
irregularities and shall match the existing pavement and any
castings or street appurtenances. Allowable deviations shall be no
more than 1/4 inch as measured with a ten-foot straight edge.
(3) Concrete pavement shall be placed to the full depth of the existing
pavement or seven inches, whichever is greater. Concrete used
shall not contain calcium chloride. The surface shall be given a
light broom finish. The edges shall be tooled to prevent spallation
at the saw cut edge. The surface shall be evenly and completely
sealed with a white pigmented curing compound. The surface shall
be protected from traffic for a minimum of three days. The rebar
shall be installed as directed by Village officials.
(4) In emergency excavations during winter months, when it is not
possible to replace the removed pavement with a like material, the
excavation shall be temporarily resurfaced with a minimum of
three inches of cold mix bituminous material. This temporary
wearing surface shall be compacted and rolled smooth. These
temporary wearing surfaces shall be removed and replaced with
material as specified above by not later than the following June 1,
except as provided above. Permanent pavements shall be replaced
within 60 days of the date of the permit.
H. Emergency excavation. In the event of an emergency, any person, firm
or corporation owning or controlling any sewer, gas main, water main,
conduit or other utility in or under any public street, alley, easement,
way or ground and his/her or its agents and employees take immediate
proper emergency measures to remedy dangerous conditions for the
protection of property, life, health or safety without obtaining an
excavation permit, provided that such person, firm or corporation shall
§ 423-7 EAST TROY CODE § 423-7
1:422
§ 423-8. Obstructions and encroachments.
apply for an excavation permit not later than the next business day and
shall notify the Village office immediately.
I. Excavation in new streets limited. Whenever the Village Board
determines to provide for the permanent improvement or repaving of
any street, such determination shall be made not less than 30 days
before the work of improvement or repaving shall begin. Immediately
after such determination by the Village Board, the Director of Public
Works shall notify, in writing, each person, utility or other agency
owning or controlling any sewer, water main, conduit or other utility in
or under said street or any real property abutting said street that all
such excavation work in such street must be completed within 30 days.
After such permanent improvement or repaving, no permit shall be
issued to open or excavate said street for a period of five years after the
date of improvement or repaving unless, in the opinion of the Village
Board or its designee, conditions exist which make it absolutely
essential that the permit be issued. Every effort shall be made to place
gas, electric, telephone and television cable lines in street terraces.209
A. Obstruction and encroachments prohibited. No person shall encroach
upon or in any way obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk,
public grounds or land dedicated to public use, or any part thereof, or
permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on
any public way adjoining the premises of which he is the owner or
occupant, except as provided in Subsections B and C.
B. Exceptions. The prohibition of Subsection A shall not apply to the
following:
(1) Temporary encroachments or obstructions authorized by permit
under § 423-9 of this article pursuant to § 66.0425, Wis. Stats.
(2) Building materials for the period authorized by the Building
Inspector which shall not obstruct more than 1/2 of the sidewalk or
more than 1/3 of the traveled portion of the street and which do not
interfere with the flow in the gutters.
(3) Excavations and openings permitted under §§ 423-6 and 423-7 of
this article.
(4) Signs or clocks attached to buildings which project no more than
six feet from the face of such building and which do not extend
below any point 10 feet above the sidewalk, street or alley.
(5) Awnings which do not extend below any point seven feet above the
sidewalk, street or alley.
209. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 423-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-8
1:423
(6) Public utility encroachments duly authorized by state law or by the
Village Board.
(7) Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded
which do not extend more than three feet on a sidewalk, provided
that such goods, wares, etc., do not remain thereon for more than
three hours.
(8) Flower boxes, planters or other landscaping, provided that such
flower boxes, planters or landscaping still allows for a minimum of
five feet of free access by the public to any such street, alley,
sidewalk, public grounds or lands.
C. Standards. Property owners may place certain fixtures on sidewalks
which immediately adjoin their property, if the following requirements
are met:
(1) The property must be located in an area used for commercial uses.
(2) The fixture(s) shall not be physically attached to the sidewalk, any
street fixture or any adjacent building and shall be of a temporary
design.
(3) The placement of the fixture shall not significantly impede the flow
of pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk. In no event shall the fixture
reduce the unobstructed sidewalk width to less than three feet at
any point.
D. Removal by Village for sidewalk obstructions and encroachments. In
addition to any other penalty imposed, if any Village enforcement
official determines that a sidewalk is unlawfully obstructed in violation
of this section, he/she shall issue a written notice to the owner or
occupant of the premises which adjoins the obstructed sidewalk
directing that the obstruction be removed within 24 hours.
E. Removal by Village for obstructions and encroachments located in the
Village streets, alleys, public grounds or lands dedicated for public use.
In addition to any other penalty imposed, if any Village enforcement
official determines that a Village street, alley, public grounds or land
dedicated for public use is obstructed or encumbered, he/she shall
issue a written notice to the property owner of the premises which
adjoins the obstructed public area directing that the obstruction be
removed within 24 hours.
F. Failure to remove obstruction. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
(1) If the owner or occupant fails to remove the obstruction within the
time period established in Subsections D and E respectively, any
Village enforcement official shall cause the removal of the
obstruction, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement,
and such expenses shall be charged to and paid by such property
§ 423-8 EAST TROY CODE § 423-8
1:424
§ 423-9. Street privilege permit.210
owner. Notice of the bill for abatement of the obstruction shall
be mailed to the owner of the premises and shall be payable
within 10 calendar days from receipt thereof. Within 60 days after
such costs and expenses are incurred and remain unpaid, the
Village Clerk shall enter those charges onto the tax roll as a special
tax, as provided by the state statutes.
(2) The failure of the Village Clerk to record such claim or to mail such
notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not
affect the right to place the Village expense on the tax rolls for
unpaid bills for abating the obstruction, as provided for in this
section.
A. When required. Permits for the use of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
other public ways or places of the Village may be granted to applicants
by the Village Clerk for the purpose of encumbering the street, alley,
sidewalk or way with materials necessary in and about the construction
or demolition of any building or structure, provided that such applicant
has complied with the other requirements of this section and has
obtained a building permit if required by this Code of Ordinances.
The Clerk shall request advisory recommendations from the Director of
Public Works, Chief of Police and/or Building Inspector prior to issuance
of the permit. Village officials may attach conditions to the permit,
including proof of liability insurance. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Bond. No street privilege permit shall be issued until the applicant shall
execute and file with the Village Clerk a bond in an amount determined
by the Director of Public Works, not exceeding $10,000, conditioned
that the applicant will indemnify and hold harmless the Village from all
liability for accidents or damage caused by reason of operations under
said permit and will remove such encumbrance upon termination of the
operations and will leave the vacated premises in a clean and sanitary
condition and repair any and all damage to the streets, alleys, sidewalks
or public property of the Village resulting from such building
operations. Upon request, the Village Board may waive this
requirement. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
C. Fee. The fee for a street privilege permit shall be as approved by the
Village Board on the most recent fee schedule, plus any actual Village
costs incurred. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
D. Conditions of occupancy. The permission to occupy or obstruct the
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds is intended only for use in
connection with the actual erection, alteration, repair or removal of
buildings or structures and shall be given upon the following terms and
210. Editor's Note: For provisions regarding moving buildings see § 210-14.
§ 423-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-9
1:425
§ 423-10. Snow and ice removal.
conditions and subject to revocation without notice by the Director of
Public Works, Chief of Police or Building Inspector for violation thereof:
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
(1) Such temporary obstruction shall cover not more than 1/3 of any
street or alley.
(2) Obstruction shall be sufficiently lighted at night so as to be in full
view of the public from all directions.
(3) Sidewalk traffic shall not be interrupted, but temporary sidewalks
of not less than four feet in width guarded by a closed fence at least
four feet high on both sides may be maintained during the period of
occupancy.
(4) Upon termination of the work necessitating such obstruction, all
parts of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds occupied
under the permit shall be vacated, cleaned of all rubbish and
obstructions and placed in a safe condition for public travel at the
expense of the permittee.
E. Termination. All street privilege permits shall automatically terminate
at the end of three months from the date of issuance unless an earlier
termination date is specified thereon at the discretion of the Director of
Public Works, Chief of Police or Building Inspector. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
F. Removal by Village. In addition to any other penalty imposed, if the
owner or occupant of the premises adjoining any lawfully obstructed
sidewalk shall fail or neglect to remove such obstruction within 48
hours after such notice from the Village Board to do so, it shall be the
duty of the Director of Public Works to remove such obstruction and
make return of the costs and expenses thereof to the Village Clerk, who
shall enter such cost on the next annual tax roll as a special charge
against the property abutting such obstructed sidewalk, and such sum
shall be levied and collected as other special taxes against real estate.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
A. Removal from sidewalks. The owner, occupant or person in charge of
any parcel or lot which fronts upon or abuts any sidewalk shall keep
said sidewalk clear of all snow and ice. In the event of snow
accumulating on said sidewalk due to natural means and/or by any
other means, said sidewalks shall be cleared of all accumulated snow
and/or ice within 48 hours from the time the snow ceases to accumulate
on said sidewalk. Sidewalks are to be kept clear of snow and ice to a
minimum of four feet in width. In the event that ice has formed on any
sidewalk in such a manner that it cannot be removed, the owner,
§ 423-9 EAST TROY CODE § 423-10
1:426
occupant or person in charge of the parcel or lot which fronts upon or
adjoins said sidewalk shall keep the sidewalk sprinkled with sand and/
or salt to permit safe travel by pedestrians. [Amended 10-24-2011]
B. Notice and removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. If the owner,
occupant or person in charge of any parcel or lot which fronts upon or
adjoins any sidewalk shall fail to keep said sidewalk clear of snow and
ice as set forth in Subsection A, Village law enforcement officers and
other designated Village officials and employees shall take the following
action: if a Village law enforcement officer or other designated Village
officials and employees determine that the failure to remove the snow
and ice from the sidewalk creates an immediate danger to the public
health and/or safety, the police officer and other designated Village
officials shall immediately cause the removal of the snow and/or ice.
C. Snow and ice not to encroach. No person shall push, shove or in any
way deposit any snow or ice onto any public street, alley, sidewalk or
public lands dedicated to public use, except for parcels or lots located
where existing buildings are constructed within five feet of the street
right-of-way and the sidewalks exist from the Village right-of-way to the
curbline. In such instances, the owners, occupants and/or employees of
the parcels or lots shall be permitted to deposit snow and ice from their
sidewalks onto the public streets.
D. Enforcement. All sworn police officers and other designated Village
officials and employees are hereby authorized and directed to enforce
the provisions of this section.
E. Continued violations. Each twenty-four-hour period where a violation
occurs shall constitute a separate offense under this section for
enforcement purposes.
F. Abatement. Failure of the owner, occupant or person in charge of any
parcel or lot to cause the removal of snow and/or ice within the time
established under Subsection A shall result in the Village causing the
removal of said snow and/or ice.
G. Expense. The cost to the Village to abate the snow and/or ice hazard
shall be established from time to time by a majority of the Village Board
and shall be charged to and paid by the parcel or lot owner. Notice of
the bill for the removal of snow and/or ice shall be mailed to the last
known address of the owner of the parcel or lot and shall be payable
within 10 calendar days from the receipt thereof. Within 60 days after
such costs and expenses are incurred and remain unpaid, the
Village Clerk shall enter those charges onto the tax roll as a special tax
as provided by § 66.0907(5), Wis. Stats. [Amended 12-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
H. Penalty. In addition to the provisions set forth in this section, any
person, firm or corporation who or which violates the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code.
§ 423-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-11
1:427
§ 423-11. Terrace areas.
§ 423-12. Vaults.
All vaults and cisterns under sidewalks shall be prohibited.
§ 423-13. Requests for improvements.
Requests or petitions by Village property owners for new streets, street
resurfacing, curb and gutter, storm sewers, utility work and sidewalks
shall be presented to the Village Board on or before September 15 to be
considered for installation in the following year.
§ 423-14. Unlawful dumping on streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited,
dump, sort, scatter or leave any rubbish, stone, wire, earth, ashes, cinders,
sawdust, hay, glass, manure, filth, paper, snow, ice, dirt, grass, leaves,
construction waste, garbage or other offensive or noxious material in any
public street, sidewalk, or alley, or upon any public property or upon any
property of another, without the express permission of the owner of
occupant thereof.
§ 423-15. Obstruction of public ditches.
No person shall, in any manner, obstruct or cause to be obstructed the free
passage of water in any public gutter, ditch, culvert, swale or drain or place
or cause to be placed any rubbish, dirt, sand, gravel or any other matter or
thing so that the same is likely to be carried by the elements into any public
gutter, ditch, culvert, swale or drain.
§ 423-16. Uniform system of numbering houses and buildings.
A. Definition. A terrace is a raised embankment with the top leveled.
B. Noxious weeds; paving. All that part of the terrace not covered by a
sidewalk shall be kept free and clear of all noxious weeds and shall not
be paved, surfaced or covered with any material which shall prevent the
growth of plants and shall be maintained as a lawn, except in areas
specifically approved by the Village Board or its designee. Basketball
backstops, statuary, structures, flagpoles and other objects shall not be
placed in the terrace area.
C. Responsibility to maintain. Every owner of land in the Village whose
land abuts a terrace is required to maintain, or have maintained by his/
her tenant, the terrace directly abutting such land as provided in this
section and elsewhere in this Code. Every owner shall keep mailboxes
located on a terrace free and clear of snow.
A. System established. There is established a uniform system of
numbering houses and buildings fronting on all roads, streets, avenues,
drives, lanes, courts and public ways, referred to in this section as
§ 423-11 EAST TROY CODE § 423-16
1:428
"streets," in the Village. All houses and buildings shall be numbered in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. Base lines.
(1) The base line for the north-south streets is derived by assigning the
number 100 to the north line of the township, and the base line of
the east-west streets is derived by assigning the number 100 to the
east line of the township. The north line of Section 20 has been
assigned the number 1700 and the numbering increases by 100 for
each 1/4 mile south from the north line of said Section 20. The east
line of Section 20 has been assigned the number 2400 and the
numbering increases by 125 for each 1/4 mile west to the west line
of Section 20, and from the west line of Section 20 the numbering
increases 100 for each 1/4 mile west to the west line of Section 19.
(2) All buildings and lots on diagonal streets shall be numbered the
same as north and south streets if the diagonal runs closer to a
north and south line than to an east and west line and the same as
east and west streets if the diagonal runs closer to an east and west
line than to a north and south line.
C. Procedures.
(1) The numbering for each north and south street shall begin at the
north line of Sections 19 and 20 and run consecutively beginning
with number 1700 on the east side of each street and with number
1701 on the west side of each street and shall run consecutively by
twos with one even number and one odd number being assigned for
each 26.4 feet, e.g., on the east side, 1700, 1702, 1704, etc., and on
the west side, 1701, 1703, 1705, etc.
(2) The numbering for each east and west street shall begin at the east
line of Sections 20 and 29 and run consecutively beginning with
number 2400 on the north side of each street and with number
2401 on the south side of each street and shall run consecutively by
twos with one even number and one odd number being assigned for
each 21.12 feet, e.g., on the north side, 2400, 2402, 2404, etc., and
on the south side, 2401, 2403, 2405, etc., to the west line of Section
20, and from the west line of Section 20, which is the east line of
Section 19, to the west line of Section 19, the numbering for each
east and west street shall begin with the number 2900 on the north
side of each street and with number 2901 on the south side of each
street and shall run consecutively by twos with one even number
and one odd number being assigned for each 26.40 feet, e.g., on the
north side, 2900, 2902, 2904, etc., and on the south side, 2901,
2903, 2905, etc., to the west line of said Section 19.
(3) All lots and houses on the south and west sides of all streets shall
be numbered with odd numbers, and all lots and houses on the
north and east sides of all streets shall be numbered with even
numbers.
§ 423-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-16
1:429
(4) All streets not extending through a line perpendicular to the
applicable base point shall be assigned the same relative numbers
as if the street had extended through such a line.
(5) Regardless of the width of the building frontage on any street, no
building shall have more than one number on any street, even
though said building has more than one entrance. If a building has
entrances on more than one street, provided the number serves
different occupants, the building shall have one number for each
street. In each case, the lowest assignable number will be the
number of the building.
(6) Where a multiple-unit building has separate outside entrances
directly serving units, each such entrance shall be designated by
letters of the alphabet running alphabetically from the letter "A."
Said lettering shall run from left to right on each level. In the case
of multiple levels, each level shall run alphabetically beginning
with the letter "A" and each letter shall be preceded with a level
number running consecutively from "1." The number "1" shall be
assigned to the lowest level containing living units.
(7) When a multiple-family unit has an outside entrance or entrances
which do not directly serve units but service entryways or hallways
containing direct inside entrances to units, each such inside
entrance shall be designated by letters of the alphabet running
alphabetically from "A." In such case, which entrance is designated
by which letter shall be decided by the building owner.
(8) Where buildings and residences are served by private roads or
drives, the private road or drive will receive a number determined
by the point at which it intersects a public street. Numbers for the
buildings or residences located on such private roads or drives
shall be determined by the owners thereof.
D. Placement required. When a house or building has been assigned its
respective number or numbers, the owner or occupant shall place or
cause to be placed in the location required under this section the
number or numbers assigned under the uniform system provided for in
this section.
E. Installation. The cost of the number or numbers shall be paid for by the
property owner and the number or numbers shall be procured from the
Building Inspector at the unit price for the same. Such price shall be the
cost of such units to the Village. Replacement of uniform numbers shall
be procured, made and paid for by the owner. The numbers used in
replacement shall conform to the uniform numbers. Nothing contained
in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the use of additional
sets of numbers of a different size or style.
F. (Reserved)211
§ 423-16 EAST TROY CODE § 423-16
1:430
G. Listing. For the purpose of facilitating a correct number, a listing of all
streets within the Village showing the proper numbers of all buildings
fronting upon all streets, and the name of the owner, shall be kept on
file in the office of the Village Clerk unless available on-line. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
H. Number notification. It is the duty of the Building Inspector to inform
any party applying therefor of the number or numbers belonging or
embraced within the limits of said lot or property, as provided in this
section. In case of doubt as to the proper number to be assigned to any
building, the Building Inspector shall determine the number of such
building.
I. New buildings. Whenever any house, building or structure is erected or
located in the Village, it shall be the duty of the owner to procure the
correct number or numbers as designated from the Building Inspector
for the property and to immediately fasten the number or numbers so
assigned upon the building as provided by this section. No building
permit shall be issued for any house, building or structure until the
owner has procured from the Village the official number of the
premises.
J. Street numbers to be displayed. The owner, occupant or agent in charge
of the premises shall cause to be affixed and to be maintained when so
affixed to each principal building controlled by him/her the official
street number assigned to that building, as provided in Subsection A
hereof. The physical numbers provided herein shall not be less than 2 1/
2 inches high on a background of not less than three inches. Each
required number shall be affixed on the particular building in such a
location that it may be easily and readily seen by a person of ordinary
eyesight on the public street or highway upon which the building abuts.
For buildings abutting also on a public alley, the street number shall
also be affixed in such location that it may be seen in like manner from
such alley. Whenever any building is situated more than 50 feet from
the street line, the number of such building shall be conspicuously
displayed at the street line near the walk, driveway or common
entrance to such building and upon the gatepost, fence, tree, post or
other appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the sidewalk.
Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the
use of additional sets of numbers at other locations on the premises.
K. Noncompliance. If the owner or occupant of any building neglects for
20 days to duly attach and maintain the proper numbers on the
building, the Village shall serve him/her a notice requiring him/her to
properly number the same, and if he/she neglects to do so for 10 days
after service, he/she shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in § 1-4
of this Code.
211. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Official numbering map, was repealed 12-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18.
§ 423-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-16
1:431

ARTICLE III
Street Use Permits
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 7, Ch. 7, of the 2000
Code]
§ 423-17. Purpose.
The streets in possession of the Village are primarily for the use of the
public in the ordinary way. However, under proper circumstances, the
Village Board may grant a permit for street use, subject to reasonable
municipal regulation and control. Therefore, this article is enacted to
regulate and control the use of streets pursuant to a street use permit to the
end that the health, safety and general welfare of the public, and the good
order of the Village, can be protected and maintained.
§ 423-18. Application for permit. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
A written application for a street use permit by persons or groups desiring
the same shall be made on a form provided by the Village Clerk and shall
be filed with the Village Clerk. The application shall set forth the following
information regarding the proposed street use:
§ 423-19. Representative at meeting.
The person or representative of the group making application for a street
use permit shall be present when the Village Board gives consideration to
the granting of said street use permit to provide any additional information
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant or
applicants.
B. If the proposed street use is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorizing responsible
heads of such organization.
C. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons who
will be responsible for conducting the proposed use of the street.
D. The date and duration of time for which the requested use of the street
is proposed to occur.
E. An accurate description of that portion of the street proposed to be
used.
F. The approximate number of persons for whom use of the proposed
street area is requested.
G. The proposed use, described in detail, for which the street use permit is
requested.
§ 423-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-19
1:433
which is reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be granted.
§ 423-20. Review by Chief of Police and Director of Public Works.
Before any application for a street use permit is considered by the Village
Board, the application shall be reviewed by the Director of Public Works and
Chief of Police for their recommendation as to the effect that the temporary
closing of the street will have on the public safety and traffic movement in
the area during the time the street may be closed.
§ 423-21. Mandatory denial of permit.
§ 423-22. Permit fee. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
Each application for a street use permit shall be accompanied by a fee set
by the Village Board.
§ 423-23. Consent to issuance of permit. [Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
In addition to the fee required by the previous section, each application
for a street use permit, except for parades or races sponsored by civic,
youth or scout organizations which have been in existence for at least
six months, shall be accompanied by a petition designating the proposed
area of the street to be used and time for said proposed use. Said petition
shall be signed by not less than 75% of the residents over 18 years of age
A. An application for a street use permit shall be denied if:212
(1) The proposed street use is primarily for private or commercial gain.
(2) The proposed street use would violate any federal or state law or
any ordinance of the Village.
(3) The proposed street use will substantially hinder the movement of
police, fire or emergency vehicles, constituting a risk to persons or
property.
(4) The application for a street use permit does not contain the
information required above.
(5) The proposed use could equally be held in a public park or other
location.
B. In addition to the requirement that the application for a street use
permit shall be denied as hereinabove set forth, the Village Board may
deny a permit for any other reason or reasons if it concludes that the
health, safety and general welfare of the public cannot adequately be
protected and maintained if the permit is granted.
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 423-19 EAST TROY CODE § 423-23
1:434
residing along that portion of the street designated for the proposed use.
Said petition shall be verified and shall be submitted in substantially the
form prescribed by the Village Clerk.
§ 423-24. Insurance.
The applicant for a street use permit may be required to indemnify, defend
and hold the Village and its employees and agents harmless against all
claims, liability, loss, damage or expense incurred by the Village on account
of any injury to or death of any person, or any damage to property, caused
by or resulting from the activities for which the permit is granted. As
evidence of the applicant's ability to perform the conditions of the permit,
the applicant may be required to furnish a certificate of comprehensive
general liability insurance to the Village of East Troy. The applicant may be
required to furnish a performance bond prior to being granted the permit.
§ 423-25. Termination of permit.
A street use permit for an event in progress may be terminated by the Police
Department if the health, safety and welfare of the public appear to be
endangered by activities generated as a result of the event or the event is in
violation of any of the conditions of the permit or ordinances of the Village
of East Troy. The Chief of Police has the authority to revoke a permit or
terminate an event in progress if the event organizers fail to comply with
any of the regulations in the street use policy or conditions stated in the
permit.
§ 423-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-25
1:435

ARTICLE IV
Parades and Races
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 7, Ch. 10, of the 2000
Code]
§ 423-26. Purpose; definitions.
§ 423-27. Permit procedure.
A. Purpose. The Village of East Troy recognizes that Village streets and
highways are primarily for the use of vehicular travel. It further
recognizes a need to use these public streets and highways for
processions, parades, runs, walks, marathons, bicycle races, etc., which
do not substantially interfere with the public's right to travel on such
streets and highways. This article is intended to regulate and control
nonvehicular use of the streets and highways and to protect the general
welfare and safety of the persons using the streets and highways within
the Village. Said authority to regulate is contained in § 349.185, Wis.
Stats., and related sections.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms have the
meanings indicated:
HIGHWAY or STREET — Has the meaning set forth in § 340.01, Wis.
Stats., and also includes areas owned by the Village of East Troy which
are used primarily for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
PROCESSIONS, PARADES, RUNS, WALKS, MARATHONS, BICYCLE
RACES, ETC. — Their usual and customary usage.
A. Permit required. No person shall form, direct, lead or participate in any
procession, parade, run, walk, marathon, bicycle race, etc., on any
street or highway under the jurisdiction of the Village unless a permit
has been obtained in advance, as provided by this article.
B. Exemptions from permit requirement. A permit is not required for
assembling or movement of a funeral procession or military convoy. Any
parade, etc., sponsored by any agency of the federal or state
government, acting in its governmental capacity within the scope of its
authority, shall be required to obtain a permit; however, it shall be
exempt from the parade permit fee and insurance requirements
contained herein.
C. When application must be made. A written application for a permit for
any above-described function on the streets and highways under the
jurisdiction of the Village shall be made by one of the organizers or
officers to the Village Clerk on a form provided by said Village Clerk no
less than 15 days prior to the usage. Application made less than 45 days
prior to the day of the proposed usage must be made in person.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
§ 423-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-27
1:437
D. Information required in application. The application shall set forth the
following information regarding the proposed usage:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) If the usage is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
responsible for conducting the usage.
(4) The date when the usage is to be conducted and its duration.
(5) The assembly area, the starting point, the route to be traveled and
the termination point.
(6) The number and size of participants or units comprising the usage.
(7) If the usage is to be conducted by or for any person other than the
applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the Village
Clerk a communication in writing from the person proposing to
hold the usage authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on
his/her or its behalf. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
(8) Any additional information which the Village Clerk finds reasonably
necessary for a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
E. Recommendation of governmental agencies. The Village Clerk shall
submit a copy of the application to the Chief of Police and Director of
Public Works. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
F. Basis for discretionary denial of permit. The application may be denied:
(1) If it is for a usage that is to be held on a workday during hours
when, and at places where, in addition to the proposed usage, the
flow of vehicular traffic is usually delayed by its own volume.
(2) If it is for a usage that is to be commenced between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(3) If sufficient usage marshals are not provided as to reasonably
assure the orderly conduct of the usage.
(4) If the proposed route for conducting the usage involves a street or
highway under construction or detour route.
G. Mandatory denial of permit. The application shall be denied:
(1) If it is made less than 15 days in advance of the time the usage is
scheduled to commence;
§ 423-27 EAST TROY CODE § 423-27
1:438
(2) If it is for a usage that is primarily for private or commercial
economic gain;
(3) If it is for a usage which would involve violation of federal, state or
local laws relating to use of highways or of other applicable
regulations of the Village;
(4) If the granting of the permit would conflict with another permit
already granted or for which application is already pending;
(5) If the application does not contain the information required by
Subsection D;
(6) If more than one assembly area or more than one dispersal area is
proposed; or
(7) For failure to receive a permit under § 84.07(4), Wis. Stats.
H. Permit issued unless threat to public safety. The Village Clerk shall
issue a permit to the applicant subject to the foregoing requirements of
this section, unless the Village Clerk concludes that: [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(1) The policing of the usage will require so large a number of persons
and vehicles, including ambulances, as to prevent adequate service
of the needs of the rest of the municipality;
(2) The usage will substantially hinder the movement of police and fire
and other emergency vehicles so as to create a substantial risk to
persons and property;
(3) The conduct of the usage will substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; or
(4) The usage is so poorly organized that participants are likely to
engage in aggressive or destructive activity.
I. Grant or denial of permit. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
(1) Time when required. The Village Clerk shall act as promptly as he/
she reasonably can on all applications for permits after consulting
with other government agencies directly affected and after
consulting with the applicant, if necessary. All applications filed 45
days or more in advance shall be granted or denied not less than 30
days before the date of the usage stated in the application. Action
on applications filed less than 45 days in advance shall be taken
within 15 days after the application is filed, but in no case later
than 48 hours in advance of the time applied for. The
Village Clerk shall immediately, by the most reasonable means of
communication, notify the applicant of such action and, if the
applications is denied, the reasons for denial of the permit.
§ 423-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-27
1:439
(2) Modification of requested permit. In lieu of denying a permit, the
Chief of Police may authorize the changing of assembly areas or
dispersal areas or the conducting of the usage at a date or time or
over a route different than as applied for in the permit. The
applicant or permittee may accept such modification by
immediately notifying the Village Clerk or Chief of Police, in
writing, of such acceptance.
J. Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a usage
permit a fee set by the Village Board. Schools shall be exempt from the
fee. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
K. Charge for increased costs. Where the Village Clerk determines that
the cost of municipal services incident to the staging of the usage will
be increased because of the usage, the Village Clerk may require the
permittee to make an additional payment into the general fund of the
Village in an amount equal to the increased costs. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
L. Emergency revocation. The Village Clerk or Chief of Police may revoke
a permit already issued if the official deems that such action is justified
by an actual or potential emergency due to weather, fire, riot, other
catastrophe or likelihood of a breach of the peace or by a major change
in the conditions forming the basis of the standards of issuance. In lieu
of revoking a permit, an above-named official may require the permittee
to file evidence of good and sufficient sureties, insurance in force or
other evidence of adequate financial responsibility, running to the
Village of East Troy and such third parties as may be injured or
damaged, in an amount depending upon the likelihood of injury or
damage as a direct and proximate result of the holding of the usage
sufficient to indemnify the municipality and such third parties as may
be injured or damaged thereby, caused by the permittee, its agents or
participants. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
M. Usage permit contents. Each usage permit shall state such information
as the Village Clerk shall find necessary to the enforcement of this
article. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
N. Copies of usage permits distributed. Immediately upon the issuance of
a usage permit, the Village Clerk shall send a copy thereof to the
following: [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(1) Each public transportation utility whose regular service will be
affected by the usage.
(2) The Chief of Police, Director of Public Works and East Troy
Emergency Services Secretary.
O. Compliance with regulations.
§ 423-27 EAST TROY CODE § 423-27
1:440
(1) Permittee. A permittee under this article shall comply with all
permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws,
ordinances and other regulations of the state and Village.
(2) Participants. No person who leads or participates in any usage shall
disobey or encourage others to disobey this section after a law
enforcement officer has directly and presently informed him/her of
any of the provisions of this section or the terms of the applicable
usage permit.
P. Insurance required. Prior to issuance of the permit by the Village Clerk,
each permittee shall furnish evidence of a liability insurance policy in
amounts of not less than $1,000,000 for one person and $1,000,000 for
any one accident which shall be in force and effect at the time such
usage is to take place. Said evidence of insurance shall include a
certificate of insurance naming the Village of East Troy as an additional
insured in connection with said usage. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
§ 423-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-27
1:441

ARTICLE V
Horse-Drawn Carriages
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 7, Ch. 14, of the 2000
Code]
§ 423-28. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGE — Any vehicle drawn by a horse, donkey, mule,
or mini mule which is designed or intended for use of passengers for hire.
OPERATE or OPERATION — Operation by the owner or any agent of the
owner or by any person with the owner's knowledge, consent or permission,
express or implied.
OWNER — An individual, a firm, a copartnership, a corporation, a company
or any association of joint stock.
PERMIT — The grant by the Village to operate a horse-drawn vehicle upon
the public streets of the Village.
§ 423-29. Compliance required.
The operation of horse-drawn carriages within and upon the public streets
of the Village shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions
set forth in this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
the business of operating a horse-drawn carriage in the Village until the
provisions of this article have been complied with.
§ 423-30. Permit required; inspection sticker. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any horse-drawn
carriage upon the public streets of the Village where the owner of the
vehicle has not been issued a permit and upon which an inspection sticker
has not been affixed as provided for in this article. The sticker shall be
provided by the Village Clerk's office and shall be affixed to the horsedrawn
carriage in a manner prescribed by the Village Clerk and shall be
nontransferable from the vehicle for which the same was issued except as
may be authorized by the Village Clerk.
§ 423-31. Application for permit.
A. Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate a horse-drawn
carriage in the Village shall submit to the Village Clerk a written
application which shall contain the following information: [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(1) The name, address, telephone number and form of business of the
applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, it shall also state the
§ 423-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-31
1:443
names, addresses and occupations of its officers, directors and
major stockholders and names and addresses of any parent or
subsidiary companies, the date and place of incorporation and, if
incorporated outside the state, whether or not it has been qualified
to do business within the state. If the applicant is a corporation
controlled by another corporation, the names, addresses and
occupations of the officers, directors and major stockholders of the
controlling corporation shall also be stated. If the applicant is a
partnership or other unincorporated association, the names and
addresses of each member, whether active or inactive, shall be set
forth, and if one or more partners or members are corporations,
the names and addresses and occupations of such corporation's
officers, directors and major stockholders shall also be stated.
(2) The trade name, if any, under which the applicant proposes to do
business.
(3) A thorough description, including photographs, of the proposed
horse-drawn carriage business to be operated; the manner in which
the applicant proposes to install, maintain and operate the
business; the proposed hours of operation; proposed location from
which the business is to be operated; the proposed route or routes
to be served or utilized, together with a map or maps describing the
proposed routes; the numbers of horse-drawn vehicles to be
operated under the proposed business; the types of animal or beast
of burden to be used to draw any vehicle; and the kind, make and
model of the vehicles to be used in the business, together with the
safety and sanitation devices and methods to be applicable.
(4) A thorough description of the proposed manner and location in
which the applicant proposes to feed, shelter, quarter and stable
and otherwise care for the animals to be used in the business; the
method to be used in transporting the animals within and without
the Village; and a thorough description, with maps if necessary, of
the manner and location in which the applicant proposes to load
and unload the carriage, animal and equipment, if applicable.
(5) A schedule of proposed rates and charges to all classes of
passengers.
(6) Copies of the veterinarian records required in § 423-38D.
(7) An insurance certificate providing that the applicant has met the
insurance requirements of this article.
(8) A sworn statement acknowledging that any and all drivers
employed by the applicant shall be safe and experienced in
handling of such vehicles and animals and that the animals so used
shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained. It shall further
state that the permittee shall be responsible for the actions of his or
her drivers and animals.
§ 423-31 EAST TROY CODE § 423-31
1:444
§ 423-32. Adherence to plan submitted in application. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
Permittees must adhere to the routes, rates and vehicle number and design
submitted in their application for permit. Any deviance from the application
without the approval of the Village Clerk, Chief of Police and Department of
Public Works shall be a violation of this article.
§ 423-33. Liability and indemnification.
(9) Any such information the Village shall at any time demand in order
to reasonably determine whether the request for a permit should
be granted.
B. Upon receipt and acceptance of a complete application for a permit, the
Village Clerk shall forward copies of the application to the following
Village departments and officials: the Chief of Police and Department of
Public Works. Each official or department shall evaluate this application
for public health, safety and welfare concerns as pertains to his or her
department. If the applicant's plan for service meets with the official's
approval, he or she shall report the approval in writing to the
Village Clerk. If the plan or application does not meet the approval of
the reviewing official, he or she shall report disapproval to the
Village Clerk with reasons for disapproval listed in writing. Should the
application be disapproved by either the Chief of Police or the
Department of Public Works, the application for permit shall be denied,
and no permit to operate a horse-drawn carriage shall be issued to the
applicant. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
C. Any applicant whose application for a permit has been denied may,
within 30 days after the denial, appeal to the Village Board of Trustees.
D. Once the application has been approved by the necessary departments,
the Village Clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant upon payment of
the fee set by the Village Board. The permit shall be valid for one year
or part thereof remaining at the time of the issuance of permit.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
E. No more than 10 permits shall be issued and active in the Village at any
given time.
F. If an permit issued under this article is lost or destroyed, the permit
holder may obtain a duplicate upon payment of a service charge set by
the Village Board. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
A. A permittee shall pay, and by its acceptance of a permit specifically
agrees to pay, any and all damages or penalties which the Village may
be legally required to pay as a result of the permittee's operation or
maintenance of a horse-drawn carriage under this article, whether or
§ 423-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-33
1:445
§ 423-34. Compliance with traffic regulations; use of designated
areas.
not the acts or omissions complained of are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by the Village.
B. A permittee shall also pay all expenses incurred by the Village in
defending itself with regard to any and all damages and penalties
mentioned in Subsection A of this section. These expenses shall include
all out-of-pocket expenses, including a reasonable attorney's fee and
the reasonable value of services rendered by any employee of the
Village.
C. The permittee shall maintain, throughout the term of the permit,
liability insurance insuring the Village and permittee with regard to all
damages mentioned in Subsection A of this section caused by the
grantee or its agents, in the minimum amounts of:
(1) Workers' and unemployment compensation insurance as provided
by the laws of this state.
(2) One hundred thousand dollars for bodily injury or death to any one
person within the limit and $300,000 for bodily injury or death
resulting from any one accident and $50,000 for property damage
resulting from any one accident.
D. The insurance policies obtained by the permittee in compliance with
this section shall be issued by a company or companies acceptable to
the Village, and a current certificate or certificates of insurance, along
with written evidence of payment of all required premiums, shall be
filed and maintained with the Village during the term of the permit. The
policies shall name the Village as an additional insured and shall
contain a provision that written notice of cancellation or reduction in
coverage of the policy shall be delivered by registered mail to the
Village at least 30 days in advance of the effective date.
A. A permittee, having been issued a permit under this article to engage in
the business of operating a horse-drawn carriage, shall be subject to all
traffic provisions of this Code and all other ordinances, rules and
regulations now in effect in the Village or the state and all traffic
ordinances, rules and regulations which may pertain to the operation of
horse-drawn carriages hereafter enacted or adopted by the Village or
the state and such rules and regulations formulated and promulgated
under authority of this article.
B. Horse-drawn carriages shall not stand or park upon any street in any
business district at any place other than a designated areas, except that
this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from
temporarily stopping for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading and unloading passengers.
§ 423-33 EAST TROY CODE § 423-35
1:446
§ 423-35. Rates and charges to be displayed.
Each permittee shall prominently display in each horse-drawn vehicle a
card or sign which shall show the schedule of the rates and charges for
the transportation services furnished by the permittee, the Village permit
number and the name and address of both the permittee and driver of such
vehicle. The card or sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place in such
vehicle while it is in use as a horse-drawn vehicle for hire, so that it is
clearly visible to all passengers in such vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any
permittee, operator, agent, lessee or driver of any horse-drawn carriage to
charge more than the rate so posted.
§ 423-36. Sanitation.
All permittees shall comply with the following sanitation requirements:
§ 423-37. Inspection of vehicles.
Upon issuance of a permit the Village of East Troy Police Department shall
check each vehicle which the permittee intends to operate on the streets of
the Village for the following:
A. All horses, mules and other animals shall be equipped with adequate
devices to prevent manure and other excrement from falling upon the
streets of the Village. Any excrement which should fall upon the streets
of the Village shall be removed at the expense of the permittee.
B. All animal waste for disposal shall be promptly transported to sites or
facilities legally empowered to accept it for treatment or disposal. The
Village reserves the right to approve or disapprove sites, taking into
account routes within the Village and the rules and regulations of the
governmental body having jurisdiction over said sites and facilities.
C. A permittee shall further comply with all applicable health and
sanitation provisions of the County Health Department and all rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
A. A slow moving vehicle sign on the rear of the carriage.
B. Two red reflectors no smaller than three inches in diameter shall be
attached, one to each side of the carriage.
C. When operated in the hours of darkness, a strobe or flashing light shall
be secured to the neck of the horse pulling the carriage and said light
shall be visible to other traffic.
D. When operated in the hours of darkness, a glowing red light shall be
affixed to the rear of the carriage and shall be visible at a distance of
500 feet.
E. The carriage shall have brakes capable of stopping the carriage within
50 feet when traveling at 20 miles per hour.
§ 423-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-38
1:447
§ 423-38. Carriage equipment; treatment of animals.
§ 423-39. Use of vehicles in criminal activity.
It shall be unlawful for any grantee or agent or employee of the same
willfully to permit any horse-drawn carriage to be used in the perpetration
of a crime.
§ 423-40. Suspension or revocation of permits. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
A. All carriages must be equipped with a step to allow persons to enter and
exit safely. Rubber tires and wheels shall be used on all carriages to
provide for maximum passenger comfort and for consideration of
passing public.
B. All animals shall be thoroughly broken, trained to harness and properly
restrained; no animal may be allowed to go untended. All animals shall
be equipped with properly fitting and appropriate equipment for street
service, including properly fitting shoes for street work. Steel shoes
must have borium grabs, and no aluminum shoes will be permitted at
any time.
C. In addition, animals shall have a minimum of 20 minutes of rest for
every two hours of heavy work and shall be offered clean water at least
every two hours depending on weather. The permittee shall assure
adequate rest periods, feeding schedules, health and related animal
performance and well-being for each animal under the permittee's
ownership, care or control. This responsibility shall include carriage
load limits, hours of operation and daily hours of animal usage, except
that no animal shall be required to work more than eight hours per day.
No animal shall be left unattended while in service.
D. For each animal that will be pulling a permitted vehicle, the permittee
shall provide veterinary records from a veterinarian licensed in the
State of Wisconsin finding such animal to be free from infectious
disease, in good health, and fit for hack and carriage service under this
article. Each animal shall thereafter be reexamined annually by a
veterinarian licensed in the State of Wisconsin and veterinary records
of such examination provided finding such animal to be free from
infectious disease, in good health, and fit for hack and carriage service
in order for each animal to remain in service. No animal shall be used to
draw a horse-drawn vehicle unless the permittee keeps said
veterinarian records available for inspection by the Village Police
Department at any time.
E. It shall be the duty of the permittee to immediately remove any injured,
diseased or deceased animal from the streets and to dispose of the
same properly.
§ 423-38 EAST TROY CODE § 423-40
1:448
§ 423-41. Drivers.
Drivers of all horse-drawn carriages shall have and keep in full effect a
valid Wisconsin driver's license. All drivers shall be safe and experienced in
handling of the animals and all equipment.
A. Whenever there is a reasonable cause to believe that a person holding a
permit to operate a horse-drawn carriage is violating the provisions of
this article, the Village Clerk may, upon written, certified notice of the
violation to the permittee, suspend the permits issued to such person
until such time as the violations are corrected to the satisfaction of the
Village or within a period of 30 days, whichever is less. If the violation is
not corrected within 30 days, the permits will be automatically revoked.
Any permittee whose permits have been revoked under this subsection
may, within 30 days after the revocation, appeal to the Village Board of
Trustees.
B. If, upon investigation, the Chief of Police finds that the holder of a
permit has violated any provision of this article or has been convicted of
the following, then the Village Clerk shall revoke the permit: murder,
kidnapping, aggravated battery, burglary, robbery, sexual battery,
prostitution, exposure of sexual organs, lewd, lascivious or indecent
assault or act upon or in the presence of a child, any crime involving the
sale of controlled substance, manslaughter or negligent homicide
resulting from the use of a motor vehicle. Any person having his or her
permit so revoked may appeal, by filing notice thereof, with the
Village Clerk within 30 days from the time of such revocation. Such
appeal as filed shall not act as superseding until such time as the Village
Board of Trustees shall take final action on such appeal.
§ 423-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-41
1:449
Chapter 432
TAXICABS
§ 432-1. License required; exceptions.
§ 432-2. License application.
§ 432-3. Insurance required. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
No license shall be issued until the applicant files with the Village Clerk a
policy of liability insurance covering all vehicles to be included under the
license. Such policy shall be issued by a company licensed to do business
in the state and shall insure the licensee against loss from liability to the
amount of $1,000,000 for the injury or death of one person in any one
accident and in the amount of $1,000,000 for damage to property of others
for any one accident due to the negligent operation of such vehicle. The
license shall automatically be revoked if a current insurance certificate is
not on file with the Village.
A. No person shall engage in the business of carrying passengers for hire
in a motor vehicle or hold himself/herself out so to do on or along the
public streets of the Village of East Troy unless the operator thereof
holds a license therefor.
B. This chapter shall not be applicable to vehicles operating upon
established routes which are regulated by the Public Service
Commission of Wisconsin or vehicles operated solely as funeral cars or
ambulances.
A. All applications for a license shall be made in writing and filed with the
Village Clerk stating the full name of the applicant, his/her address, the
make, model and serial number of the vehicle or vehicles he/she
proposes to operate, and the state license numbers. Applications for
renewal of existing licenses shall be made in the same manner as for
the original license. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. The license fee shall be set by the Village Board for each vehicle
operated by the same licensee, and said fee shall accompany the
application. The license year shall commence July 1 and end June 30. If
less than six months remain of the license year, the license fee for each
taxi shall be reduced by 1/2. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
C. The Village Clerk shall present such application to the Village Board at
its next regular meeting, and the Board shall consider such application
and shall instruct the Village Clerk to issue the license or dismiss the
application upon a majority vote of said Board. [Amended 12-16-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-18]
§ 423-41 EAST TROY CODE § 432-3
1:450
Chapter 440
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
§ 440-1. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in direct sales
within the Village of East Troy without being registered for that purpose as
provided herein.
§ 440-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Includes any benevolent, philanthropic,
religious, patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or
corporation, or one purporting to be such, including for example the Boy
Scouts, Girl Scouts, 4-H Clubs and school organizations.
MERCHANDISE — Includes personal property of any kind, and shall include
merchandise, goods or materials provided incidental to services offered or
sold. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the seller for
the retention of merchandise by a donor or prospective customer.
PERMANENT MERCHANT — Any person who, for at least one year prior to
the consideration of the application of this chapter to said merchant:
PERSON — All humans of any age or sex, partnerships, corporations,
associations, groups, organizations and any other description of a collection
of human beings working in concert or for the same purpose or objective.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any individual who engages in the retail sale
of merchandise at any place in this state temporarily and who does not
intend to become and does not become a permanent merchant of such
place. The term shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and
transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required by the
transient merchant for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective
customer. For purposes of this chapter, sale of merchandise includes a sale
in which the personal services rendered upon or in connection with the
merchandise constitute the greatest part of value for the price received
but does not include a farm auction sale conducted by or for a resident
farmer of personal property used on the farm or the sale of produce or other
perishable products at retail or wholesale by a resident of this state.
§ 440-3. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter:
Has continuously operated an established place of business in the
Village; or
A.
Has continuously resided in the Village and now does business from his/
her residence.
B.
§ 432-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-3
1:451
A. Any person delivering products to regular customers on established
routes. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
B. Any person selling merchandise at wholesale to dealers in such
merchandise.
C. Any person selling Wisconsin agricultural products which the person
has grown.
D. Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders at the
home of the buyer for merchandise regularly offered for sale by such
merchant within this county and who delivers such merchandise in his/
her regular course of business.
E. Any person who has an established place of business where the
merchandise being sold is offered for sale on a regular basis and in
which the buyer has initiated contact with and specifically requested a
home visit by said person.
F. Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has
had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer.
G. Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the
sale or offering for sale of merchandise.
H. Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court
and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
I. Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for, or on behalf of, said organization, provided
that there is submitted to the Village Clerk proof that such charitable
organization is registered under § 202.12, Wis. Stats. Any charitable
organization engaging in the sale of merchandise and not registered
under § 202.12, Wis. Stats., or which is exempt from that statute's
registration requirements, shall be required to register under this
chapter. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
J. Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant but against whom
complaint has been made to the Village Clerk that such person is a
transient merchant, provided that there is submitted to the
Village Clerk proof that such person has leased for at least one year or
purchased the premises from which he/she is conducting business or
proof that such person has conducted such business in this Village for
at least one year prior to the date complaint was made. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
K. Any individual licensed by an examining board as defined in § 15.01(7),
Wis. Stats.
L. Transient merchants while doing business at special events authorized
by the Village Board.
§ 440-3 EAST TROY CODE § 440-3
1:452
§ 440-4. Registration procedure. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
M. Minors under 18 years of age who are residents of the Village.
A. Registration information. Applicants for registration must complete and
return to the Village Clerk a registration form furnished by the Village
Clerk which shall require the following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone numbers, and temporary
address, if any.
(2) Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and date of birth.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the transient merchant represents
or is employed by or whose merchandise is being sold.
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will
be conducted, if any.
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
merchandise offered and any services offered.
(6) Proposed method of delivery of merchandise, if applicable.
(7) Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by the
applicant in the conduct of his/her business.
(8) Last cities, villages and towns, not to exceed three, where the
applicant conducted similar business just prior to making this
registration.
(9) Place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving this Village.
(10) Statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or ordinance violation related to the applicant's transient
merchant business within the last five years, the nature of the
offense and the place of conviction.
B. Identification and certification. Applicants shall present to the
Village Clerk for examination:
(1) A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required.
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the Sealer of
Weights and Measures where the applicant's business requires use
of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities.
(3) A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business
involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be
certified under state law, such certificate to state that the applicant
§ 440-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-4
1:453
§ 440-5. Investigation. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated
not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for permit
is made.
C. Registration fee.
(1) At the time of filing applications, a filing fee set by the Village
Board shall be paid to the Village Clerk to cover the cost of
investigation of the facts stated in the applications and for
processing said registration. Every member of the group must file a
separate registration form.
(2) The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the
Village Clerk his/her agent to accept service of process in any civil
action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or
service performed by the applicant in connection with the direct
sales activities of the applicant, in the event the applicant cannot,
after reasonable effort, be served personally.
(3) Every applicant shall pay a registration fee per day as set by the
Village Board; provided, however, that applicants who sell food
products may register with the Village Clerk for a period of one
calendar year and pay a registration fee per year set by the Village
Board. The registration shall expire on June 30 of each year, and
the applicant shall be required to reapply, pay the filing/
investigative fee and pay the annual registration fee.
(4) Upon payment of said fees and signing of the statement, the
Village Clerk shall register the applicant as a transient merchant
and date the entry. Said registration shall be valid for a period of 30
days from the date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal as
provided in § 440-5B below. At the end of any thirty-day-period, the
applicant may request a new permit which, upon payment of the
appropriate fees and upon proof satisfactory to the Village that the
applicant has complied with the provisions of this chapter, may be
issued for an additional thirty-day-period.
A. Upon receipt of each application, the Village Clerk shall refer it
immediately to the Police Department for an investigation of the
statements made in such registration, said investigation to be
completed within five days from the time of referral.
B. The Village Clerk shall refuse to register the applicant and issue a
permit if it is determined, pursuant to the investigation above, that the
application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate
statement; complaints of a material nature have been received against
the applicant by authorities in the last cities, villages and towns, not
exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business; the
applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance
§ 440-4 EAST TROY CODE § 440-5
1:454
§ 440-6. Appeals.
Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal
procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board or, if
none has been adopted, under the provisions of §§ 68.07 through 68.16, Wis.
Stats.213
§ 440-7. Prohibited practices; disclosure requirements.
violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly
related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or the
applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of
§ 440-4B above.
A. Prohibited practices.
(1) A transient merchant shall be prohibited from calling at any
dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m., except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place
where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No
Solicitors" or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of
any dwelling place; or remaining on any premises after being asked
to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority
over such premises.
(2) A transient merchant shall not misrepresent or make false,
deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality,
quantity or character of any merchandise offered for sale, the
purpose of his/her visit, his/her identity or the identity of the
organization he/she represents. A charitable organization transient
merchant shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of
merchandise being offered will actually be used for the charitable
purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Said portion shall
be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the merchandise.
(3) No transient merchant shall impede the free use of sidewalks and
streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from
vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
(4) No transient merchant shall make any loud noises or use any
sound-amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced
is capable of being plainly heard outside a one-hundred-foot radius
of the source.
(5) No transient merchant shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in
or around the area in which he/she is conducting business.
B. Disclosure requirements.
213. Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Administrative Review.
§ 440-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:455
§ 440-8. Record of violations. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
The Police Department shall report to the Village Clerk all convictions for
violations of this chapter, and the Village Clerk shall note any such violation
on the record of the registrant convicted.
§ 440-9. Revocation of registration.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to
a prospective customer, a transient merchant shall expressly
disclose his/her name, the name of the company or organization he/
she is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of merchandise or
services he/she offers to sell.
(2) If any sale of merchandise is made by a transient merchant or any
sales order for the later delivery of merchandise is taken by the
seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel said transaction if it
involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more
than $25, in accordance with the procedure as set forth in
§ 423.203, Wis. Stats. The seller shall give the buyer two copies of a
typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the
requirements of § 423.203(1)(a), (b) and (c), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats.
(3) If the transient merchant takes a sales order for the later delivery
of merchandise, he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide
the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the
agreement, the amount paid in advance, whether full, partial or no
advance payment is made, the name, address and telephone
number of the seller, the delivery or performance date, and
whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms
thereof.
A. Registration may be revoked by the Village Board after notice and
hearing if the registrant made any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement in the application for registration, made any
fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation
in the course of engaging in direct sales, violated any provision of this
chapter or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory
violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in
direct selling.
B. Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally or pursuant to
§ 440-4C on the registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the
hearing. Such notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and
a statement of the acts upon which the hearing will be based.
§ 440-7 EAST TROY CODE § 440-9
1:456
Chapter 443
TREES AND SHRUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 354. Property maintenance — See Ch. 375.
§ 443-1. Village Forester.
The Village Board may employ a Village Forester or designate a municipal
employee to take charge of and direct, subject to its supervision and control,
the transplanting, removal, trimming, spraying, caring for and protecting of
all trees and shrubs on or in that part of every street, the grade of which has
been established, lying between the lot line and the curb or in the center
of the side plots in any terraces, boulevards or parkways, and in all public
parks or grounds belonging to the Village, and he/she shall direct, control
and regulate all transplanting, removal, trimming, spraying, fertilizing and
maintenance by others in such areas. The Village Forester shall guard all
trees and shrubs within the Village to prevent the spread of disease, insects
or pests and to eliminate dangerous conditions, thereby ensuring public
safety. All work done by the Village Forester is under the direction and
supervision of the Department of Public Works. The Village Forester shall
have such other powers and duties as provided by § 27.09, Wis. Stats., and
Village ordinances.214
§ 443-2. Planting, removal or maintenance.215
A. Intent and purpose. The Village of East Troy shall regulate, finance and
control the planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and
shrubs in or upon all public areas of the Village to eliminate and guard
against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons
using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public areas; to promote
and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the Village; to prohibit
the undesirable and unsafe planting, removal, treatment and
maintenance of trees and shrubs located in public areas; and to guard
all trees and shrubs both public and private within the Village against
the spread of disease, insects or pests. To that end, the Village of East
Troy shall undertake a master plan to replace any trees and shrubs
which shall be removed for whatever reason. To further implement such
plan, any tree or shrub that has been removed, for whatever reason,
shall be replaced within one year, unless exceptional circumstances
dictate otherwise, under the direction of the Village Forester or
214. Editor's Note: Original § 6-4-2, New developments, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
215. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-2
1:457
§ 443-3. Abatement of public nuisances.
Director of Public Works by the Village, and shall be consistent with all
Village ordinances or parts thereof.
B. Notice to owners. Whenever the East Troy Village Board proposes the
setting out, planting or removing of any living shade tree, it shall
attempt to give notice to the owner or its agent of the lot or parcel of
land on which such tree stands or will stand, or, if neither is known and
a tenant occupies such property, then to such tenant, of a time and
place at which such contemplated work will be considered by the
Village Forester, specifying the street, avenue, alley or boulevard and
portion thereof upon or from which trees are proposed to be planted or
removed and the general nature and character of the changes and
improvements contemplated. If the property owner objects, he/she may
apply to the East Troy Village Board for a hearing, and the notice shall
incorporate this provision. After such hearing, the East Troy Village
Board shall direct the Village Forester or Director of Public Works to
abandon such work or proceed with it, as the best interest of the public
requires.
A. Authority over public trees and shrubs. The Village Forester shall plant,
trim, spray, preserve, renew and remove public trees and shrubs or
cause such work to be done as may be necessary to ensure the public
safety, preserve the beauty of public areas and to protect public
property, sewers and water mains from damage or injury.
B. Authority over private trees and shrubs.
(1) Notice to abate public nuisances.
(a) Whenever the Village Forester shall find on examination that
any tree, shrub or part thereof growing or located upon private
premises is a public nuisance, as defined below, he/she shall
notify the owner or his/her agent by mailing notice to the last
known address of the property owner by certified mail, or by
delivery of notice by a police officer, that the nuisance must be
sprayed, removed or otherwise abated as directed in the notice
within 30 days, unless the Village Forester shall determine that
immediate action is necessary for public safety.
(b) "Public nuisance" means any tree, shrub or part thereof which,
by reason of its condition, interferes with the use of any public
area, is infected with a plant disease, is infested with injurious
insects or pests, is injurious to public improvements, is dead or
partially dead, or endangers the life, health, safety or welfare
of persons or property.
(2) Abatement by Village. If the owner of such premises or his/her
agent refuses or neglects to comply with the notice within the time
specified, the Village Forester shall cause the nuisance to be
§ 443-2 EAST TROY CODE § 443-3
1:458
§ 443-4. Permit required.
sprayed, removed or otherwise abated and shall report the expense
thereof to the Village Clerk, who shall enter it as a charge against
the property upon which the tree or shrub is located. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(3) Authority of Village Forester to enter private premises. The Village
Forester or authorized representative may enter upon private
premises at all reasonable times to examine any tree or shrub
located upon or over such premises and carry out any of the
provisions of this section.
(4) Interference with Village Forester prohibited. No person shall
interfere with the Village Forester or his/her authorized agents
while they are engaged in carrying out any work or activities
authorized by this section.
(5) Charges for private tree inspections. Any person requesting the
Village Forester to examine a private tree shall be responsible for
the cost incurred for such inspection.
A. With approval/permission. Except upon order of the Village Forester, no
person shall plant, remove, spray, brace, trim, prune, cut above or
below ground, disturb, alter or do surgery on a tree or shrub in the
public right-of-way or any public area, or cause such act to be done by
others, without approval/permission for such work from the Village
Forester as herein provided.
B. Permit exemptions. No permit shall be required to cultivate, fertilize or
water public trees or shrubs.
C. Approval/permission and conditions. If the Village Forester determines
that the proposed work or planting described in an application for a
permit is necessary and in accord with the purpose of this section,
taking into account the safety, health and welfare of the public, location
of utilities, public sidewalks, driveways, and streetlights, general
character of the area in which the trees or shrubs are located, type of
soil, and characteristics and physiological need of the genus, species
and variety of tree or shrub, he/she shall issue permission to the
applicant.
D. Permit form; expiration; inspection. Every permit shall be issued by the
Village Forester on a standard form and shall include a description of
the work to be done and shall specify the genus, species and variety,
size, nursery grade and location of trees or shrubs to be planted, if any.
Any work done under such permit shall be performed in accordance
with the terms thereof and the provisions of this section. Permits issued
under this section shall expire in 30 days after the date of issuance.
E. Notification to public utilities.
§ 443-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-4
1:459
§ 443-5. Rules and regulations for planting and trimming;
obstructions at intersections.
(1) Whenever permission is issued under this section to a public utility
to remove, trim, prune, cut, disturb, alter or do surgery on any
public tree or shrub, the Director of Public Works or the Village
Forester shall limit the work to be done to actual necessity of the
utility and may instruct the utility as to the method applied.
(2) A public utility may secure an annual working agreement with the
Director of Public Works which gives the Village Forester the
authorization to have input into work to be done associated with
trees and shrubs.
A. Planting.
(1) The size and genus, species and variety of trees and shrubs to be
planted in public areas and as part of a Village-approved forestry
program and the manner of planting shall be submitted to the
Village Forester for approval before commencement of such work.
(2) No trees or shrubs shall be planted within 35 feet of any street
corner. There shall be a minimum of 35 feet between Village
parkway trees or as determined by the Village Forester, such
determination to be based upon the following factors; however, not
limited to such by reason of enumeration: the genus, species and
variety.
(3) The following trees shall be planted in the terrace/parkway:
(a) Norway maple (Emerald Queen, Columnar or Globe);
(b) Red maple;
(c) Elm;
(d) Sugar maple;
(e) Hackberry;
(f) White ash (Autumn Purple);
(g) Green ash (seedless variety);
(h) Certified male gingko;
(i) Thornless honey locust (Skyline, Imperial or Moraine);
(j) Ironwood;
(k) Red oak;
(l) Linden (Little Leaf, Redmond, Chancellor or Green Spire); and
§ 443-4 EAST TROY CODE § 443-5
1:460
(m) Improved varieties approved by the University of Wisconsin
Horticulture Department, College of Agriculture and Life
Sciences.
(4) The following tree varieties are not permitted in the terrace/
parkway:
(a) Poplar;
(b) Ailanthus;
(c) Box elder;
(d) Catalpa;
(e) Mountain ash;
(f) Birch;
(g) Willows;
(h) Conifers;
(i) Silver maple;
(j) Chinese or Siberian Elm;
(k) Any fruit-bearing or nut-bearing trees; and
(l) Such other that may not be approved by the University of
Wisconsin Horticulture Department, College of Agriculture
and Life Sciences.
B. Trimming. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(1) Trees or shrubs standing in or upon any public right-of-way, public
areas or upon any private premises adjacent to any public right-ofway
or public areas shall be kept trimmed so that the lowest
branches projecting over the street or alley provide a clearance of
not less than 14 feet. The Village Forester may waive the provisions
of this section for newly planted trees if he/she determines they do
not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any streetlight
or endanger public safety.
(2) The necessity of pruning shall be determined by the Village
Forester.
(3) Clearance from sidewalk to lower branches shall not be less than
10 feet.
C. Obstruction of view at intersections prohibited. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this section, no person shall maintain, plant or
permit to remain on any private or public premises situated at the
intersection of two or more streets or alleys in the Village any hedge,
tree, shrub or other growth which may obstruct the view of the operator
§ 443-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-5
1:461
§ 443-6. Prohibited acts; damage to trees and shrubs.
§ 443-7. Appeals. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
Any person who receives a determination or order under this chapter from
the Village Forester and objects to all or any part thereof may appeal such
of any motor vehicle or pedestrian approaching such intersection. In
the clear sight triangle, which means a triangle formed by the curblines
of two intersecting rights-of-way and a third line connecting specified
points on those curblines to provide a full view of corners of streets,
alleys and highways, trees and shrubs shall not exceed a thirty-inch
height above the street grade. Any hedge, tree, shrub or growth which
exceeds such thirty-inch height is hereby declared a public nuisance.216
A. No person shall, without the consent of the owner in the case of a
private tree or shrub or without prior approval from the Village
Forester in case of a public tree or shrub, do or cause to be done by
others any of the following acts:
(1) Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire, sign, unprotected electrical
installation or other device or material to, around or through a tree
or shrub.
(2) Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub or
permit any fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub.
(3) Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil, salt brine, or other
injurious substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or about any
tree or shrub.
(4) Remove any guard, stake or other device or material intended for
the protection of a public tree or shrub or close or obstruct any
open space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to
permit access of air, water and fertilizer.
(5) Excavate any ditch, tunnel or trench or lay any drive a radius of 10
feet from any tree or shrub, except by those public utilities under
authorization of an annual agreement and/or unless otherwise
noted on a permit for excavation to public utilities.
(6) Erect, alter, repair, raze or excavate without placing suitable
guards, as approved by the Village Forester, around all public trees
or shrubs which may be injured by such operations.
B. When a permit is obtained from the Village to move over-height or overwidth
structures or objects, the Village Forester shall advise the carrier
that any trees or shrubs damaged as a result of the move shall be the
permittee's liability. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
216. Editor's Note: Original § 6-4-6(d), Injury to trees and shrubs prohibited, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02.
§ 443-5 EAST TROY CODE § 443-7
1:462
determination or order to the Village Board within seven days of receipt of
the order, and the Village Board shall hear such appeal within 45 days of
receipt of written notice of the appeal. After such hearing, the Village Board
may reverse, affirm or modify the order or determination appealed from,
and the grounds for its decision shall be stated in writing. The Village Board
shall, by letter, notify the party appealing the order or determination of its
decision within 10 days after the hearing has been concluded. The Village
Board shall file its written decision with the Village Clerk.
Chapter 458
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles and play vehicles — See Ch. 200.
Snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles — See
Ch. 410.
Horse-drawn carriages — See Ch. 423, Art. V.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 432.
Abandoned and junked vehicles — See Ch.
461.
§ 443-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-7
1:463

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 458-1. State traffic laws adopted.
§ 458-2. Vehicle equipment; adoption of state regulations.
A. Statutes adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
Code, the statutory provisions in Chapters 110, 194 and 340 through
349 of the Wisconsin Statutes, describing and defining regulations with
respect to vehicles and traffic, for which the penalty is a forfeiture only,
exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory penalty is a fine or
term of imprisonment or exclusively state charges, are hereby adopted
and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any regulation
incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this
chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the
statutory regulations in Chapters 340 through 349 incorporated herein
are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure to the
extent legally practicable uniform statewide regulation of vehicle traffic
on the highways, streets and alleys of the State of Wisconsin. Any
person who shall, within the Village of East Troy, Wisconsin, violate any
provisions of any statute incorporated herein by reference shall be
deemed guilty of an offense under this section.217
B. General references. General references in this chapter to Wisconsin
statutory sections or chapters describing or defining procedures or
authority for enactment or enforcement of local traffic regulations shall
be deemed to refer to the most recent enactments of the Wisconsin
Legislature describing or defining such procedures or authorities.
A. Administrative regulations adopted. The following administrative rules
and regulations adopted by the Secretary of the Wisconsin Department
of Transportation and published in the Wisconsin Administrative Code,
exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be
imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein:218
(1) Chapter Trans 150, Leasing of Vehicles by Private Carriers.
(2) Chapter Trans 304, Slow Moving Vehicle Emblem.
(3) Chapter Trans 305, Standards for Vehicle Equipment.
(4) Chapter Trans 326, Motor Carrier Safety Requirements for
Transportation of Hazardous Materials.
217. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). Original § 10-1-1(b), Other state laws adopted, and (c), Statutes specifically
incorporated by reference, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-2
1:465
§ 458-3. Official traffic control devices; prohibited signs, signals
and markers.
B. Noncompliance prohibited. No person shall operate or allow to be
operated on any highway, street or alley within the Village a vehicle that
is not in conformity with the requirements of Subsection A or the
provisions of § 110.075 and Ch. 347, Wis. Stats., incorporated by
reference in § 458-1 of this chapter.
C. Safety checks.
(1) Operators to submit to inspection. When directed to do so by any
law enforcement officer, the operator of any motor vehicle shall
stop and submit such vehicle to an inspection and such tests as are
necessary to determine whether the vehicle meets the
requirements of this section or that the vehicle's equipment is in
proper adjustment or repair. No person, when operating a motor
vehicle, shall fail to stop and submit such vehicle to inspection
when directed to do so by any law enforcement officer as herein
provided.
(2) Authority of officer. Any law enforcement officer of the Village is
hereby empowered, whenever he/she shall have reason to believe
that any provision of this section is being violated, to order the
operator of the vehicle to stop and to submit such vehicle to an
inspection with respect to brakes, lights, turn signals, steering,
horns and warning devices, glass, mirrors, exhaust systems,
windshield wipers, tires and other items of equipment.
(3) Vehicle to be removed from highway. Whenever, after inspection as
provided by this section, a law enforcement officer determines that
a vehicle is unsafe for operation, he/she may order it removed from
the highway and not operated, except for purposes of removal and
repair, until the vehicle has been repaired as directed in a repair
order. Repair orders may be in the form prescribed by the
Secretary of the Department of Transportation under § 110.075(5),
Wis. Stats., and shall require the vehicle owner or operator to
cause the repairs to be made and return evidence of compliance
with the repair order to the department of the issuing officer within
the time specified in the order.
D. Penalty. Penalty for violation of any provision of this section, including
the provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code incorporated
herein by reference, shall be as provided in § 458-40, together with the
costs of prosecution and applicable penalty assessment.219
A. Duty of Department of Public Works Director to erect and install
uniform traffic control devices. Whenever traffic regulations created by
219. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-2 EAST TROY CODE § 458-3
1:466
§ 458-4. Registration record of vehicle as evidence.
When any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any
provision of this chapter regulating stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner,
as shown by the ownership registration of the vehicle supplied by the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation, or a comparable authority of any
other state, shall be deemed to have committed the violation for purposes
of enforcement of this chapter, and specifically § 458-1, and shall be subject
to the applicable forfeiture penalty, provided that the defenses defined and
described in § 346.485(5)(b), Wis. Stats., shall be a defense for an owner
charged with such violation.
this chapter, including a State of Wisconsin traffic regulation adopted
by reference in § 458-1, require the erection of traffic control devices
for enforcement, the Department of Public Works Director, with the
cooperation of the Police Department, shall procure, erect and maintain
uniform traffic control devices conforming to the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices promulgated by the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation giving notice of such traffic regulation to the users of
the streets and highways on which such regulations apply. Whenever
state law grants discretion to local authorities in erecting or placement
of a uniform traffic control device, devices shall be erected in such
locations and in such a manner as, in the judgment of the Department
of Public Works Director, will carry out the purposes of this chapter
and give adequate warning to users of the streets and highways of the
Village of East Troy.
B. Prohibited signs and markers in highways. No person other than an
officer authorized by this chapter to erect and maintain official traffic
control devices, or his/her designee, shall place within the limits of any
street or highway maintained by the Village any sign, signal, marker,
mark or monument, unless permission is first obtained from the
Department of Public Works Director or, where applicable, the State
Department of Transportation. Any sign, signal, marker, mark or
monument placed or maintained in violation of this subsection shall be
subject to removal as provided in Subsection C.220
C. Removal of unofficial signs, markers, signals and traffic control devices.
The Department of Public Works Director may remove any sign, signal,
marking or other device which is placed, maintained or displayed in
violation of this chapter or state law. Any charge imposed against
premises for removal of a prohibited or illegal sign, signal, marking or
device shall be reported by the Department of Public Works Director to
the Village Board for review and certification at its next regular
meeting following the imposition of the charge. Any charge not paid on
or before the next succeeding November 15 shall be placed upon the
tax roll for collection as other special municipal taxes.
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-5
1:467
§ 458-5. School bus warning lights.
A. For purposes of this section, "school bus" shall be defined as provided in
§ 340.01(56), Wis. Stats.221
B. Use of lights.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 346.48(2)(b)2, Wis. Stats.,
adopted by reference in § 458-1 to the contrary, and except as
provided in Subsection C below, school bus operators shall use
flashing red warning lights in residential and business districts
when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or
unloaded at locations at which there are no crosswalks or traffic
signals, so that pupils must cross the street or highway before
being loaded or after being unloaded.
(2) The operator of a school bus equipped with flashing red warning
lights shall actuate such lights at least 100 feet before stopping to
load or unload pupils or other authorized passengers and shall not
extinguish such lights until loading or unloading is completed and
persons who must cross the street or highway are safely across.
(3) The operator of a school bus shall use the flashing red warning
lights when loading or unloading passengers from either side
where the curb and sidewalk are laid on one side of the road only.
(4) The operator of a school bus shall use the flashing red warning
lights when loading or unloading passengers in a residential or
business district when the passengers are to be loaded or unloaded
at a location at which:
(a) There are no traffic signals.
(b) Sidewalk and curb are laid on both sides of the street or
highway; and
(c) Such persons must cross the street or highway before being
loaded or after being unloaded.
(5) The operator of a motor vehicle which approaches from the front or
rear of any school bus which has stopped on a street or highway,
when the bus is displaying flashing red warning lights, shall stop
the vehicle not less than 20 feet from the bus and shall remain
stopped until the bus resumes motion or the operator extinguishes
the flashing red warning lights. The operator of a school bus which
approaches the front or rear of another school bus that has stopped
and is displaying red warning lights shall stop not less than 20 feet
from the other bus, display its red warning lights, and remain
stopped with red warning lights actuated until the other bus
221. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-5 EAST TROY CODE § 458-5
1:468
§ 458-6. Blue warning lights on police vehicles.
§ 458-7. Accident reports.
The operator of every vehicle involved in an accident shall, immediately
after such accident, file with the Police Department a copy of the report
required by § 346.70, Wis. Stats., if any. If the operator is unable to make
such report, any occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident capable
of making such report shall have the duty to comply with this section. Such
reports shall be subject to the provisions and limitations of §§ 346.70(4)(f)
and 346.73, Wis. Stats., specifically that accident reports filed in
accordance with this section shall be for the confidential use of the
Department and shall not be open to public inspection except as permitted
by § 346.73, Wis. Stats.
resumes motion or the other operator extinguishes the flashing red
warning lights.
C. Pursuant to § 349.21(2), Wis. Stats., the use of flashing red warning
lights by school bus operators is prohibited when pupils or other
authorized passengers are loaded or unloaded directly from or onto the
school grounds, or that portion of a right-of-way between the road and
the school grounds designated by "school" warning signs, as provided
in § 118.08(1), Wis. Stats.
A. Pursuant to §§ 346.03(3), 346.94(14), 346.95(3) and 347.25(1), (1m)(a)
and (b) and (4), Wis. Stats, a marked police vehicle under
§ 340.01(3)(a), Wis. Stats., may be equipped with a blue light and a red
light which flash, oscillate or rotate.
B. If the vehicle is so equipped, the lights shall be illuminated when the
operator of the police vehicle is exercising the privileges granted under
§ 346.03, Wis. Stats. The blue light shall be mounted on the passenger
side of the vehicle and the red light shall be mounted on the driver side
of the vehicle. The lights shall be designed and mounted so as to be
plainly visible and understandable from a distance of 500 feet during
normal sunlight and during hours of darkness. No operator of a police
vehicle may use the warning lights except when responding to an
emergency call, or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law, when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm
or when necessarily parked on a highway in a position which is likely to
be hazardous to traffic using the highway.
§ 458-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-7
1:469

ARTICLE II
Street Traffic Regulations
§ 458-8. Operators to obey traffic control devices.
Every operator of a vehicle approaching an intersection at which an official
traffic control device is erected in accordance with this chapter shall obey
the direction of such official traffic control device, as required by the
Wisconsin Statutes incorporated by reference in § 458-1 of this chapter.
Operators of vehicles approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering
a highway, as required by § 346.46, Wis. Stats. Operators approaching
intersections at which a yield sign has been installed shall yield the right-ofway
to other vehicles, as required by § 346.18(6), Wis. Stats.
§ 458-9. Heavy traffic routes.
A. Definition. For purposes of this section, "heavy traffic" shall be defined
as:
(1) All vehicles not operating completely on pneumatic tires; and
(2) All vehicles or combination of vehicles designed or used for
transporting property of any nature and having a gross weight of
more than 12,000 pounds. "Heavy traffic" does not include school
buses, motor buses or recreational motor homes.
B. Prohibited routes.
(1) Heavy traffic is prohibited from using any Village of East Troy
street or highway not designated as a heavy traffic route.
(2) This section shall not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using a
Village street or highway for the purpose of obtaining orders for
supplies or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or from
any place of business or residence which has an entrance on such
street or highway, nor shall this section apply to heavy traffic
necessary to obtain orders, to make deliveries, or to move supplies
or equipment for agricultural purposes. This exception shall be
permitted for the period of time necessary to complete the abovedescribed
activities; however, under no circumstances shall this
exception be construed to permit overnight parking of any vehicle,
described as heavy traffic, on any Village street located in an area
zoned as residential, as those areas are defined by Chapter 510,
Zoning, of this Code. This section will not act to prohibit heavy
traffic from using any Village streets over which are routed state
trunk highways. When being driven to the site of any construction,
repair or maintenance of electric, gas or water service, vehicles
owned and operated by a public utility will be exempt from the
provisions of this section.222
222. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-9
1:471
§ 458-10. Speed limits.
C. Administration. The Department of Public Works Director, in
cooperation with the Police Department, shall administer this section.
Administration shall include:
(1) Posting of signs. Appropriate signs shall be posted giving notice of
this section and of the heavy traffic routes established herein.
Yellow signposts may also be used to designate heavy traffic routes.
(2) Maps. Maps of the Village showing heavy traffic routes shall be
prepared and shall be available upon request by heavy traffic
operators and owners.
D. Construction equipment.
(1) Heavy construction equipment may use Village streets or highways
not designated as heavy traffic routes, provided that the closest
access route is utilized.
(2) Village-owned or -operated equipment is specifically excluded from
the provisions of this section.
E. Liability. Any operator, corporation, owner or agent whose heavy traffic
vehicle damages any Village streets or highways in violating this
section shall be liable and required to pay the Village the cost of repair
or replacement of the damaged street or highway.
F. Streets designated Class "B" highways. All streets and highways within
the Village of East Troy, Wisconsin, are hereby designated Class "B"
highways, subject to the weight limitations imposed on Class "B"
highways by the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference in § 458-1,
except the highways or parts of highways designated as heavy traffic
routes in Subsection G.
G. Heavy traffic routes.
(1) The following streets in the Village of East Troy are hereby
designated heavy traffic routes, for commercial vehicles, pursuant
to § 349.17, Wis. Stats.:
(a) State Highway 20.
(b) County Trunk Highway L.
(c) Country Trunk Highway ES.
(d) Country Trunk Highway G.
(e) State Highway 120.
(2) On those Village streets designated for heavy traffic, weight limits
shall be enforced in accordance with state law, as adopted pursuant
to § 458-1.
§ 458-9 EAST TROY CODE § 458-10
1:472
A. Statutory speed limits. The provisions of §§ 346.57, 346.58 and 346.59,
Wis. Stats., relating to the maximum and minimum speed of vehicles,
are hereby adopted.
B. Modifications designated. The Village Board determines that the
statutory speed limits on the streets indicated in this subsection are
unreasonable, unsafe or imprudent and modifies such speed limits,
under authority granted by § 349.11, Wis. Stats., by reducing, with the
approval of the State Department of Transportation, the speed limits
set forth in the appropriate sections of the statutes as set forth in this
subsection:223
(1) From 25 miles per hour pursuant to the provisions of
§ 346.57(4)(e), Wis. Stats., to 15 miles per hour for all vehicles on:
(a) Mill Street between Main Street and Austin Street, between
the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between the hours of
3:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(b) Autumn Lane.
(c) Mallard Way.
(d) East Troy Municipal Airport (excluding aircraft).
(e) West Street between Main Street and Graydon Avenue
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:15 a.m. and between the
hours of 2:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. on those days school is in
session or upon any time or day when children are present in
supervised recreational activities.
(f) Graydon Avenue between Bellview and Lilly Street between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:15 a.m. and between the hours of
2:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. on those days school is in session or
upon any time or day when children are present in supervised
recreational activities.
(g) Townline Road between 100 feet north of Graydon Avenue and
Main Street between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:15 a.m. and
the hours of 2:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. on those days when school
is in session or upon any time between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
on those days when school is in session and children are
present.
(h) Beulah Avenue from 100 feet north of Elm Street to Union
Street between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:15 a.m. and 2:30
p.m. and 4:00 p.m. on those days when school is in session or
upon any time between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on those days
when school is in session and children are present.
223. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-10
1:473
(i) Division Street from Union Street to 100 feet north of the
railroad tracks on Division Street between the hours of 7:15
a.m. and 8:15 a.m. and between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and
12:00 p.m. and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m.
on those days when school is in session or upon any time
between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. when school is in
session and children are present.
(2) From the fixed limits as specified by provisions of § 346.57(4), Wis.
Stats., to 35 miles per hour for all vehicles, at all times, on State
Highway 20, from a point 3/10 of a mile west of its intersection with
Beulah Avenue westerly to its intersection with Townline Road.
(3) From the fixed limits as specified by provisions of § 346.57(4), Wis.
Stats., to 35 miles per hour for all vehicles, at all times, on:
(a) County Trunk Highway ES from its intersection with State
Highway 20 southwesterly to its intersection with Mill Street
(drops to 30 miles per hour at Byrnes Street).
(b) State Trunk Highway 20 from its intersection with County
Trunk Highway ES to a point 2/10 of a mile west of its
intersection with East Drive.
(c) Townline Road from its intersection with State Highway 20
southerly to its intersection with County Trunk Highway ES.
(d) St. Peter's Road, starting from a point 650 feet from the east
edge of Division Street to a point of 1,409 eastward to three
houses east of Steeple Drive.
(4) From the fixed limits as specified by provisions of § 346.57(4), Wis.
Stats., to 30 miles per hour for all vehicles, at all times, on:
(a) County Trunk Highway ES from its intersection with Clark
Street westerly to its intersection with West Street.
(b) State Highway 20 from a point 2/10 of a mile west of its
intersection with East Drive westerly to a point 3/10 of a mile
west of its intersection with Beulah Avenue.
(5) From the fixed limits as specified by provisions of § 346.57(4), Wis.
Stats., to 25 miles per hour for all vehicles, at all times, on County
Trunk ES from its intersection with Mill Street westerly to its
intersection with Clark Street.
(6) From the fixed limits as specified by provisions of § 346.57(4), Wis.
Stats., to 45 miles per hour for all vehicles, at all times, on Honey
Creek Road from the east edge of State Highway 120 to the Village
of East Troy limits at the east end of Honey Creek Road.
§ 458-10 EAST TROY CODE § 458-11
1:474
§ 458-11. Railroad grade crossing stops.
Pursuant to the authority granted in § 349.085, Wis. Stats., when a train or
railroad engine of any kind is within 1,000 feet of any of the railroad grade
crossings set forth in this section, the operators of vehicles shall be required
to stop and remain stopped until such time as they can reasonably proceed
with safety:
§ 458-12. One-way streets.
Pursuant to § 349.10, Wis. Stats., the following streets and parts thereof
are declared to be one-way streets, and no person shall operate any vehicle
thereon except in the indicated direction:
§ 458-13. Stop intersections.
In the interest of public safety and pursuant to the provisions of § 349.07,
Wis. Stats., and other applicable statutory provisions, the following streets
and intersections are declared to be stop intersections, and traffic signs or
signals giving notice thereof shall be erected by the Village in accordance
with § 458-3:
A. Church Street between School Street and Edwards Street.
B. Byrnes Street between State Highway 20 (North Street) and County
Trunk Highway ES (Main Street).
C. State Highway 20 (North Street) between Byrnes Street and the Village
limits.
D. County Trunk Highway ES (Main Street) approximately 25 feet east of
Young Street.
A. On County Trunk Highway ES (Main Street) on the northerly border of
the Village Square between the west edge of Church Street and the east
edge of Division Street the vehicles shall move in a westerly direction
only.
B. On Division Street between the north edge of County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street) at the northwest corner of the Village Square and the
south edge of Main Street at the southwest corner of the Village Square
vehicles shall move in a southerly direction only.
C. On County Trunk Highway ES (Main Street) along the southerly border
of the Village Square from the west edge of Division Street to the east
edge of Church Street vehicles shall move in an easterly direction only.
D. On Church Street from the south edge of County Trunk Highway ES
(Main Street) at the southeast corner of the Village Square to the south
edge of County Trunk Highway ES (Main Street) at the northeast
corner of the Village Square vehicles shall move in a northerly direction
only.
§ 458-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-13
1:475
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Austin Street East and west Church Street
Austin Street East and west Mill Street
Autumn Lane East and west Brookstone Lane
Autumn Lane North Mallard Way
Belleview Avenue North and south Graydon Avenue
Beulah Avenue North State Highway 20 (North
Street)
Beulah Avenue North and south County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street)
Brittany Lane West Steeple Drive
Brookstone Lane North Autumn Lane
Brookstone Lane South O'Leary Lane
Buell Drive West County Trunk Highway G
Byrnes Street North State Highway 20 (North
Street)
Byrnes Street North and south Railroad tracks
Byrnes Street South County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street)
Carriage Drive East Steeple Drive
Carriage Drive North St. Peter's Road
Center Street North State Highway 20 (North
Street)
Center Street South Elm Street
Central Avenue East Lilly Street
Central Avenue West Emery Street
Chafin Street East Beulah Avenue
Chelsea Court East and west Steeple Drive
Church Street North County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street) at the
south end of the Village
Square
Church Street North Edwards Street
Church Street North and south School Street
Church Street South County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street) at the
north end of the Village
Square
Clark Street North Union Street
§ 458-13 EAST TROY CODE § 458-13
1:476
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Clark Street North and south Austin Street
Clark Street North and south County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street)
Clark Street North and south South Street
County Trunk Highway ES
(Main Street)
North and south State Highway 20
County Trunk Highway L South State Highway 20
Division Street North County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street) at the
south end of the Village
Square
Division Street North and south Austin Street
Division Street North and south South Street
Division Street North and south State Highway 20 (North
Street)
Division Street North and south Union Street
Division Street South County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street) at the
north end of the Village
Square
Douglas Avenue East Lilly Street
Douglas Avenue West Emery Street
East Drive South State Highway 20 (North
Street)
Edwards Street West Division Street
Edwards Street West Fremont Street
Elm Street East Division Street
Elm Street East and west Beulah Avenue
Emery Court North Graydon Avenue
Emery Street North State Highway 20
Emery Street North and south Superior Avenue
Emery Street South Graydon Avenue
Energy Drive North County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street)
Fremont Street North and south State Highway 20 (North
Street)
Frontage Road East East Drive
Frontage Road West Thomas Drive
§ 458-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-13
1:477
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Glenn View Court West Thomas Drive
Graydon Avenue East Beulah Avenue
Graydon Avenue East and west Belleview Avenue
Graydon Avenue East and west West Street
Graydon Avenue West Townline Road
Grove Alley North State Highway 20
Grove Alley South Edwards Street
Honey Creek Road West State Highway 120
Kettle Court West North Sterling Circle
Klovar Lane West Division Street
Lenck Avenue South County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street)
Lilly Street North and south Graydon Avenue
Mallard Way West Autumn Lane
Mill Street North County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street)
North Sterling Circle South State Highway 20 (North
Street)
O'Leary Lane East County Trunk Highway G
Posekany Lane West South Sterling Circle
Prairie Court West Thomas Drive
School Street East County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street)
School Street East and west Church Street
School Street West Division Street
South Sterling Circle West North Sterling Circle
South Street East and west Mill Street
State Highway 20 East and west County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street)
Steeple Drive East North Sterling Circle
Steeple Drive North St Peter's Road
Superior Avenue East and west Emery Street
Superior Avenue West Townline Road
Thomas Drive North St. Peter's Road
Thomas Drive South State Highway 20 (North
Street)
§ 458-13 EAST TROY CODE § 458-13
1:478
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Townline Road North State Highway 20 (North
Street)
Union Street East Church Street
Union Street East and west Division Street
Union Street West Beulah Avenue
West Street North and south County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street)
West Street North and south Graydon Avenue
Woodview Court East Thomas Drive
Young Street North County Trunk Highway
ES (Main Street)
A. Village Square.
(1) At the northeast end of the Village Square on Church Street, all
vehicles except vehicles eastbound on County Trunk Highway ES
(Main Street) shall stop.
(2) At the west center of the Village Square, where County Trunk
Highway ES turns westward from Division Street, vehicles
southbound on Division Street shall stop before entering upon or
crossing the intersection.
B. Schools.
(1) At a point on each side of the high school and middle school
driveways that intersect Graydon Avenue, at a point 470 feet east of
the east line of Troyjens Subdivision, vehicles shall stop.
(2) At Graydon Avenue at the high school and middle school driveways,
at a point 470 feet east of the east line of Troyjens Subdivision,
vehicles eastbound and westbound shall stop before entering upon
or crossing the intersection.
(3) At the intersection of the exit of the middle school service road and
Graydon Avenue, vehicles northbound at the exit shall stop before
entering upon or crossing the intersection.
(4) At the intersection of the exit of the middle school parking lot and
Graydon Avenue, vehicles northbound at the exit shall stop before
entering upon or crossing the intersection.
(5) At the intersection of the exit of the high school service road and
Graydon Avenue, vehicles southbound at the exit shall stop before
entering upon or crossing the intersection.
§ 458-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-13
1:479
(6) At the intersection of Graydon Avenue and the exit of the high
school service road and the exit of the middle school parking lot,
vehicles eastbound and westbound on Graydon Avenue shall stop
before entering upon or crossing the intersection.
(7) At the intersection of the exit of the high school student parking lot
and Graydon Avenue, vehicles southbound at the exit shall stop
before entering upon or crossing the intersection.
(8) At the intersections of the exits of the high school faculty parking
lot and West Street, vehicles eastbound at the exit shall stop before
entering upon or crossing the intersection.
(9) At the intersection of the driveway to Chester Byrnes School and
Division Street, vehicles eastbound on the driveway shall stop
before entering upon or crossing the intersection.
(10) At the intersection of the driveway to the Prairie View Elementary
School faculty parking lot and Townline Road, vehicles eastbound
on the driveway shall stop before entering upon or crossing the
intersection.
(11) At the intersection of the driveway to the Prairie View Elementary
School visitor parking lot and Townline Road, vehicles eastbound
on the driveway shall stop before entering upon or crossing the
intersection.
C. Other driveways and exits.
(1) At the intersection of the driveway to the Village Marketplace and
Townline Road, vehicles westbound on the driveway shall stop
before entering upon or crossing the intersection.
(2) At the intersection of the driveways to the Village Marketplace and
County Trunk Highway ES (Main Street), vehicles southbound on
the driveways shall stop before entering upon or crossing the
intersection.
(3) At the driveway located at 3094 Graydon Avenue, approximately
176 feet east of the northeastern point of the intersection of
Graydon Avenue and West Street, all vehicles shall stop.
(4) At the intersection of the driveway to Scot Industries and State
Highway 20 (North Street), vehicles on the driveway shall stop
before entering upon or crossing the intersection.
(5) At the intersection of the driveway of the tennis court and West
Street, vehicles eastbound on the driveway shall stop before
entering upon or crossing the intersection.
(6) At the intersection of Interstate 43 and State Highway 20, vehicles
proceeding southbound from the off ramp of southbound Interstate
43 across State Highway 20, and vehicles proceeding northbound
§ 458-13 EAST TROY CODE § 458-13
1:480
§ 458-14. Point of stopping.
For purposes of this chapter, all stops shall be made by vehicles immediately
prior to entering the crosswalk closest to the intersection being approached
and located between the vehicle and the intersection. Where there are no
marked crosswalks but sidewalks exist, then all stops shall be made before
crossing the extended edge of the sidewalk farthest from the intersection
being approached. In the event there are neither marked crosswalks nor
sidewalks, then all stops shall be made with the front of the vehicle located
approximately at a line extended from the stop sign and perpendicular
thereto into the street being traveled by the vehicle.
§ 458-15. Remaining stopped; conditions for proceeding.
All vehicles coming to a stop pursuant to the provisions set forth in this
chapter shall remain stopped until such time as:
§ 458-16. Highway damage.
from the off ramp of northbound Interstate 43 across State
Highway 20, shall stop before entering upon or crossing the
intersection.
(7) At the intersection of Interstate 43 and County Trunk Highway G,
vehicles proceeding northbound from the northbound off ramp of
Interstate 43 and southbound from the southbound off ramp of
Interstate 43 shall stop before entering upon or crossing the
intersection.
A. In the case of a four-way stop, all vehicles which previously arrived or
stopped at the intersection have proceeded through the intersection.
B. At any intersection where fewer than four directions are but at least one
direction is controlled by a stop sign or a signal, all vehicles which
previously arrived or stopped at the intersection have proceeded
through the intersection and there are no vehicles proceeding in a
direction not required to stop so close to the intersection as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
A. Any person violating the weight restrictions on any roads or highways
in the Village of East Troy shall be deemed to have caused or
contributed to the damage of said road or highway, by way of excessive
wear and tear, or by way of specific damages if the same can be
established. Actual damages may also be ordered in addition to the fine.
B. In addition to any other violation of local or county ordinance or rule,
Administrative Code or state statute, a separate citation may be issued
against any person violating this section.
C. Any person owning or leasing a vehicle or operating or causing to be
operated a vehicle which is in excess of Wisconsin Statutes weight
limits, or Wisconsin Department of Transportation Administrative Code
§ 458-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-16
1:481
restrictions, shall be fined as a penalty for damage to any road or
highway as follows: $50 plus an amount equal to $0.10 per pound which
is in excess of the most restrictive weight limitation, as defined in any
such ordinance or rule, Administrative Code or state statute.
D. "Person" is defined herein as any natural person, driver, operator,
principal, agent, lessor, lessee, employee, partnership or corporation,
or its officers.
§ 458-16 EAST TROY CODE § 458-16
1:482
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 458-17. Restrictions on parking; posted limitations.
A. Forty-eight-hour limitation. [Amended 12-1-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-14]
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall park or leave standing any
automobile, truck, tractor, trailer or vehicle of any description on
any public street or public parking lot in the Village of East Troy for
a period of 48 or more consecutive hours in the same location, at
any time, except that where more restrictive parking limits have
been established, the more restrictive limits shall apply, and as
provided in Subsection A(2) of this section. When any law
enforcement officer shall find a vehicle standing upon a public
street or parking lot in violation of the provisions of this section, he/
she is authorized to move such a vehicle, or to require the operator
in charge thereof to move such vehicle, to a position permitted
under this chapter. The law enforcement officer may cause said
vehicle to be removed to a proper impoundment and storage area,
where storage space is available, and in such case the owner shall
pay the costs of removing said vehicle and the storage fees on said
vehicle before he/she may recover the possession thereof.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(2) (Reserved)224
B. Posted limitations.
(1) The Village Board may designate certain streets or portions of
streets as no parking or no stopping or standing zones, or as zones
for parking by physically handicapped persons, and may limit the
hours in which the restrictions apply. The Village shall mark, by
appropriate signs, each zone so designated, in accordance with the
provisions of § 349.13, Wis. Stats.
(2) Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control
device, no person shall stop or park a vehicle in an established no
stopping or standing zone where stopping or standing is
prohibited. No vehicle shall be parked in a no parking zone during
hours when parking is prohibited, except physicians on emergency
calls, or as permitted by state law or elsewhere in this Code of
Ordinances.
(3) The Chief of Police is hereby granted the authority, within the
reasonable exercise of police power, to prohibit, limit the time, or
224. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), regarding overnight parking in the Village
municipal lot located at 2108 Church Street, was repealed 12-18-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-18. For current provisions regarding parking in that lot, see § 458-26D.
§ 458-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-17
1:483
§ 458-18. Parking restrictions during street maintenance, special
events or snow removal.
§ 458-19. Stopping or parking prohibited in certain specified
places.
otherwise restrict the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles
beyond the provisions of Ch. 346, Wis. Stats. The Village Board
shall have the authority to restrict the turning or movement of
heavy traffic and to impose special weight limitations on any
highway or portions thereof which, because of the weakness of
the roadbed due to deterioration or climatic conditions or other
special or temporary conditions, would likely be seriously damaged
or destroyed in the absence of any restrictions on heavy traffic
movement or special weight limitations.
(4) No prohibition, restriction or limitation on parking, or restriction
on movement or turning of heavy traffic and imposition of special
weight limits, is effective unless official traffic control devices have
been placed or erected indicating the particular prohibition,
restriction or limitation.
(5) After the parking limitations on any given street have expired, any
change of location of not more than one stall following expiration of
the parking period allowed shall be and constitute a violation of this
chapter.
A. Street maintenance. Whenever it is necessary to clear or repair a
Village roadway or any part thereof, the Public Works Department and/
or Police Department shall post such highways or parts thereof with
signs bearing the words "No Parking by Order of the Police
Department." Such signs shall be erected at least two hours prior to the
time that street maintenance work is to be commenced. No person shall
park a motor vehicle in violation of such signs.
B. Temporary parking restrictions for special events. For the period of
time during which a community event is being held, and upon proper
resolution of the Chief of Police, all or any portion of a street adjacent to
the area at which the community event is being held may be designated
as a temporary no parking zone. All such temporary no parking zones
shall be properly designated by an official "No Parking" sign placed or
erected pursuant to the authority and direction of the Chief of Police.
The operator of any motor vehicle shall not park or allow such vehicle to
stand in such temporary no parking zone.
C. Parking during snow removal. No person shall park, place or leave
standing any automobile, truck or other vehicle on any street or public
way after one hour from the time such area has been designated and
marked with signs or barriers by the Public Works and/or Police
Department of the Village indicating no parking due to snow removal.
§ 458-17 EAST TROY CODE § 458-19
1:484
A. Parking prohibited at all times. Except temporarily for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading, or in receiving or
discharging passengers or property, and while the vehicle is attended
by a licensed operator so that it may be moved promptly in case of an
emergency or to avoid obstruction of traffic, no person shall, at any
time, park or leave standing any vehicle:225
(1) Within an intersection.
(2) On a crosswalk.
(3) On a terrace or sidewalk area, except when parking in such place is
clearly indicated by official traffic signs or markers or parking
meters. "Terrace or sidewalk area" means that area between the
sidewalk and the nearest curbline running parallel or generally
parallel thereto or, in the absence of a sidewalk, 10 feet beyond the
curbline.
(4) Alongside or opposite any highway excavation or obstruction when
such stopping or standing would obstruct traffic or when
pedestrian traffic would be required to travel in the roadway.
(5) On the roadway side of any parked vehicle, unless double parking is
clearly indicated by official traffic signs or markers.
(6) Within a fire lane consisting of either the driveway between the
front doors of a fire station and the public street or in such places
properly designated and marked as fire lanes ordered by the Fire
Chief.
(7) Upon any portion of a highway where and at the time when
stopping or standing is prohibited by official traffic signs indicating
the prohibition of any stopping or standing.
(8) In any place or manner so as to obstruct, block or impede traffic.
(9) Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, unless a greater distance is
indicated by an official traffic sign.
(10) Upon any portion of a highway where and at the time when parking
is prohibited, limited or restricted by official traffic signs.
(11) Upon any bridge.
(12) Upon any street or highway within the Village limits, any vehicle
which faces a direction different from the direction of normal traffic
flow for the lane of traffic in which said vehicle is stopped or
standing.
(13) In a loading zone.
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-19
1:485
§ 458-20. Parking reserved for vehicles of disabled persons.226
When official traffic signs indicating such restriction have been erected in
accordance with § 458-3 of this chapter, no person shall park, stop or leave
standing any vehicle upon any portion of a street, highway or public or
(14)Within four feet of the entrance to an alley, private road or
driveway.
(15) In any municipal park when said park is closed to the public.
B. Parking in driveways. No person shall park or leave standing any motor
vehicle in any private driveway without the permission of the owner or
lessee of the property on which such driveway is located, whether or
not such driveway is posted to limit or restrict parking.
C. Vehicles not to block private drive, alley or fire lane. No vehicle shall, at
any time, be parked so as to unreasonably restrict the normal access to
any private drive, alley or fire lane. Said access shall be deemed to be
unreasonably restricted if any vehicle is parked within four feet of
either side of said access. Upon discovery by a police officer, or upon
complaint by the owner of any such blocked drive, alley or fire lane, the
Chief of Police may order said vehicle towed from such position at the
risk and expense of the owner of said vehicle.
D. Parking vehicle for repair or to display for sale prohibited.
(1) No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any street, alley, public
right-of-way or municipal parking lot in the Village of East Troy for
the purpose of repairing said vehicle or to display such vehicle for
sale. No person shall park on any street or avenue any vehicles for
the primary purpose of advertising.
(2) No person, other than an owner and/or operator of a business
located on business-zoned property engaged in the regular
business of selling vehicles, may display a vehicle for sale upon
private premises unless the following conditions are met:
(a) Consent to display the vehicle has been given by the owner or
lessee of the premises;
(b) The owner of the vehicle is on the premises or resides there;
(c) The vehicle displayed for sale is parked entirely on the
premises;
(d) The premises contains only one vehicle displayed for sale; and
(e) The advertisement or sign for sale of the vehicle is not larger
than two square feet.
226. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-19 EAST TROY CODE § 458-20
1:486
private parking facility reserved for vehicles displaying special registration
plates or identification cards or emblems issued by the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation or, for vehicles registered in another
jurisdiction, by such other jurisdiction designating the vehicle as one used
by a physically disabled person.
§ 458-21. Leaving keys in vehicle; parking vehicles with motor
running.
§ 458-22. Unattended motorized machinery.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit any
construction, compaction, earth grading or farm machinery which is selfpropelled
and moves upon the surface of the earth, and which is owned or
controlled by him/her, to stand for any period of time unattended without
locking the ignition system or otherwise rendering said machinery
inoperable so as to prevent any person unauthorized by the owner or
individual in control thereof from starting said machinery.
§ 458-23. Angle parking.
A. Leaving keys in vehicle. No person shall permit any motor vehicle to
stand or remain unattended on any street, alley or other public area,
except an attended parking area, unless either the starting lever,
throttle, steering apparatus, gear shift or ignition of the vehicle is
locked and the key for such lock is removed from the vehicle. Whenever
any police officer shall find any vehicle standing with the key in the
ignition in violation of this section, such officer is authorized to remove
such key from the vehicle and deliver the key to the Police Department
for safe keeping.
B. Parking vehicles with motor running. No person shall park or leave
standing any motor vehicle with the motor or refrigerator unit running
for more than 30 minutes within 300 feet of any residence, within the
Village of East Troy, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
A. The Village Board shall, from time to time, have certain streets or
portions of streets marked with white lines to designate parallel or
diagonal parking places. Angle parking or parking diagonally is
prohibited on all streets, alleys and highways of the Village except as
provided herein in designated angle parking stalls. All vehicles shall
park parallel to, and within one foot of, the curb except where streets
and parking lots are so marked for angle parking.
B. No person shall, at any time, park any vehicle:
(1) In any direction other than the designated parking angle, where
angle parking spaces are so designated and provided by
appropriate markings.
§ 458-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-23
1:487
§ 458-24. Seasonal all-night parking restrictions; permits.
§ 458-25. All-night parking restrictions; locations designated.
No parking shall be allowed between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on
either side of the street around the Village Square or at any of the following
locations which constitute either a boundary for, an approach to, or a part
of the Village Square:
(2) Backwards into angle parking spaces so designated and provided
by appropriate markings.
(3) With a trailer attached or any vehicle longer than 20 feet on any
street where angle parking is so provided and allowed.
A. Seasonal all-night parking restrictions. Except as set forth herein as to
emergency calls and as hereinafter provided, no person shall park or
permit any vehicle to remain parked on any street or highway in the
Village between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. during the months of
November through March, both inclusive. Signs giving notice of this
restriction shall be placed or erected at or near the corporate limits of
the Village on all state and county trunk highways and connected
streets as required by § 349.13, Wis. Stats.
B. Permit exceptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A,
persons may park licensed motorized vehicles between the hours of
2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. (from November through March), provided that
each vehicle so parked shall have a written permit as specified in
Subsection C clearly displayed on the driver's side of the back
windshield.
C. Permit issuance. A separate overnight parking permit, as referred to in
Subsection B, shall be obtained for each vehicle, from the Police
Department, which shall issue said permits upon request, and which
shall collect from the person requesting said permit a nonprorated fee
set by the Village Board for each permit issued. Each permit shall be
written for a specific location, shall authorize the operator to park in
front of the street address listed on the permit only, and shall be valid
from the day issued until the next succeeding March 31. No permit may
be issued for those locations enumerated in § 458-25.227
A. Main Street between the west edge of Division Street and the east edge
of Clark Street.
B. The west side of Division Street between the south edge of Union Street
and the north edge of Main Street.
C. The east side of Division Street between the south edge of Union Street
and the north edge of Main Street.
227. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-23 EAST TROY CODE § 458-25
1:488
§ 458-26. Parking prohibited zones. [Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-10; 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
D. The east side of Church Street from Austin Street to Main Street and
Main Street to Union Street.
E. The west side of Division Street between the south edge of Union Street
and the north edge of Austin Street.
F. The west side of Church Street between the south edge of Union Street
and the north edge of Main Street.
G. The west edge of Church Street between the north edge of Austin
Street and the south edge of Main Street.
H. The east edge of Division Street between the north edge of Austin
Street and the south edge of Main Street.
I. On the south side of Union Street between Division and Church Streets.
J. Any municipal parking lot with the exception of the lot located at 2108
Church Street, addressed in § 458-26D. [Amended 12-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-18]
A. The operator of any motor vehicle shall not park or allow such vehicle to
stand in any of the following places:
(1) Upon any portion of a street when such portion is properly
designated by an official no parking sign, or an area painted red or
yellow, placed, painted or erected pursuant to the authority and
direction of the Village Board.
(2) On a street adjacent to the entrance of a school, church, theater or
any other place of public assembly. This prohibition shall
specifically apply to the north or south sides of Graydon Avenue
from the center of West Street in a westerly direction for 950 feet
and on Townline Road from Highway ES north to the northernmost
point of Graydon Avenue, on both the west and east sides of the
road only during the hours from 7:00 a.m. until 3:30 p.m., when
school is in session; parking shall be permitted at all other times.
This subsection further prohibits motor vehicles from parking,
stopping or standing during the hours designated, for the purpose
of picking up students.
(3) On the south side of Main Street from the east edge of Church
Street to the Village limits on the east.
(4) On the north side of Main Street between the west edge of Clark
Street and the east edge of Beulah Avenue, and on the south side of
Austin Street from Clark Street to a distance 300 feet westerly
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sundays.
(5) Any area designated a fire lane.
§ 458-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-26
1:489
(6) On both sides of West Street for 1,000 feet immediately north of the
intersection of West Street and Main Street.
(7) On the east side of Church Street from the north line of Austin
Street to a point 36 feet northerly therefrom.
(8) On the north side of Main Street from Church Street to a point 100
feet east of Hilltop Drive.
(9) On the east side of West Street from Main Street to South Street.
(10)On the east side of West Street from Graydon Avenue to a point 300
feet north of Graydon Avenue.
(11) Beneath the grandstands at the Village of East Troy Municipal
Park.
(12)On both sides of Energy Drive for 450 feet immediately south of the
intersection of Energy Drive and Highway ES.
(13)On the end of Clayton Avenue no closer than 10 feet to the end of
the street.
(14)West side of Division Street, north of Highway 20 to the Village
limits.
(15)On the side of any Village street where a bicycle path is marked on
the pavement.
(16) Fifty feet on the west side of Beulah Avenue between Elm Street
(north) and Elm Street (south) and 50 feet on Elm Street (south)
from the corner of Beulah Avenue on the south side of Elm Street
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday.
B. There shall be no student parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, in the Village of East Troy library
parking lot.
C. (Reserved)228
D. Public parking in the municipal parking lot located at 2108 Church
Street shall be prohibited from 9:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. unless an
overnight parking permit is obtained from the Village Clerk-Treasurer's
office. The cost and number of permits allowed shall be determined by
the Village Board, and permits shall be renewed annually on November
1. Public parking shall be permitted at this location between the hours
228. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, prohibiting parking during certain times on a portion
of Beulah Avenue, was repealed 10-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07.
§ 458-26 EAST TROY CODE § 458-26
1:490
§ 458-27. Parking limits; exceptions.
of 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.229 [Amended 12-18-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-18]
A. When signs are erected in any block specified in this chapter giving
notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours
at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except
Sundays and the following holidays:
(1) New Year's Day.
(2) Veterans Day.
(3) Memorial Day.
(4) Fourth of July.
(5) Labor Day.
(6) Thanksgiving Day.
(7) Christmas Day.
B. When signs are erected in the locations listed below giving notice
thereof, no person except a law enforcement official shall park a vehicle
for longer than 15 minutes at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and the following holidays:
(1) New Year's Day.
(2) Veterans Day.
(3) Memorial Day.
(4) Fourth of July.
(5) Labor Day.
(6) Thanksgiving Day.
(7) Christmas Day.
C. Those specified blocks are: on the east and west sides of Church Street
between the north side of Austin Street and the south side of Union
Street; on the east side and west sides of Division Street between the
north side of Austin Street and the south side of Union Street; and on
the north and south sides of both eastbound and westbound Main Street
between the east side of Church Street and the east side of Clark
Street.
229. Editor’s Note: Former Subsections E, limiting parking on a portion of Beulah Avenue, and
F, describing signage to be posted on Chafin Avenue, were repealed 10-15-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-07.
§ 458-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-27
1:491
§ 458-28. Limited parking zones.
Parking at the following described locations shall be strictly limited to
automobiles and any other vehicles with a gross weight of five tons or less:
Name of Street Side Location
Church Street East and west From the north edge of Austin
Street to the south edge of
Union Street
Division Street East and west From the north edge of Austin
Street to the south edge of
Union Street
Main Street North and south Between the east edge of
Church Street and the west
edge of School Street
Main Street North and south Between the west edge of
Division Street and the east
edge of Clark Street
Main Street North and south Between the west edge of
Division Street and the east
edge of Townline Road
§ 458-29. Parking of trucks, tractors, buses and other heavy or
large vehicles.
D. All-day parking on the inside of the Village Square shall be allowed in
the following specified blocks:
(1) On the east side of Division Street between the south side of the
westbound lane of Main Street and the north side of the eastbound
lane of Main Street.
(2) On the south side of the westbound lane of Main Street between
the east side of Division Street and the west side of Church Street.
(3) On the west side of Church Street between the south side of the
westbound lane of Main Street and the north side of the eastbound
lane of Main Street.
(4) On the north side of the eastbound lane of Main Street between the
east side of Division Street and the west side of Church Street.
A. Parking. No person owning or having control of any truck, trailer, truck
power unit, tractor, bus or recreation vehicle or combination of vehicles
weighing in excess of 12,000 pounds gross weight, or over 21 feet in
length (including accessories, racks or other physical extensions), or
having a height of more than eight feet from the roadway, shall park the
same upon any street, avenue or public way. The provisions of this
subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit the lawful temporary
parking of such equipment upon any street, avenue, public way or
§ 458-27 EAST TROY CODE § 458-29
1:492
§ 458-30. Unlawful removal of parking citations.
No person other than the owner or operator thereof shall remove a Village
parking ticket from a motor vehicle.
§ 458-31. Operation of motor vehicles in public parking lots.
§ 458-32. Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
private property in the Village for actual loading or unloading of goods,
wares or merchandise; provided, however, that loading and unloading,
as used in this section, shall be limited to the actual time consumed
in such operation. The Village Board may, however, designate specific
truck parking zones. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
B. Exceptions. Any municipal vehicle or public works equipment is
excepted from the provisions of Subsection A above.
C. Bus parking. No operator of a school bus or other bus, regardless of its
size, shall park such vehicle in any residential district, on the street, on
a lawn, in the alley, in a driveway or anywhere else, except for such time
as is reasonably necessary to facilitate the loading or unloading of the
vehicle, except that school buses may park at any school when required.
D. Removal. Any vehicle unlawfully parked under Subsection A or C above
may be removed from the street by order of a law enforcement officer,
pursuant to § 458-32, and the expense of so moving and storing such
vehicle shall be paid by the operator or owner of said vehicle as a
forfeiture, in addition to the penalties hereafter prescribed.
A. Unlicensed operators prohibited. No person who does not hold a valid
operator's license shall operate a vehicle in any public parking lot or
ramp or in any private parking lot or ramp held out for the use of
parking for the general public.
B. Traffic regulations applicable. All provisions of § 458-1 of this chapter
and of the Wisconsin Statutes and laws incorporated herein by
reference shall be applicable on any public parking lot or ramp and on
any private parking lot, road or ramp held out for use for the general
public for parking or vehicular traffic.
A. Hazard to public safety. Any vehicle parked, stopped or standing upon a
highway or public parking lot or ramp in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is declared to be a hazard to traffic and public
safety.
B. Removal by operator. Such vehicle shall be removed by the operator in
charge, upon request of any law enforcement officer, to a position
where parking is permitted or to a private or public parking or storage
premises.
§ 458-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-32
1:493
§ 458-33. Inoperable, wrecked or discarded vehicles.230
§ 458-34. Traffic and parking regulations on school district
grounds.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 118.105, Wis. Stats., the following
regulations shall apply to the grounds of the public school district located
within the Village of East Troy:
C. Removal by traffic officer. Any law enforcement officer, after issuing a
citation for illegal parking, stopping or standing of an unattended
vehicle in violation of this chapter, is authorized to remove such vehicle
to a position where parking is permitted.
D. Removal by private service. The officer may order a motor carrier
holding a permit to perform vehicle towing services, a licensed motor
vehicle salvage dealer, or a licensed motor vehicle dealer who performs
vehicle towing services to remove and store such vehicle in any public
storage garage or rental parking grounds or any facility of the person
providing the towing services.
E. Towing and storage charges. In addition to other penalties provided in
this chapter, the owner or operator of a vehicle so removed shall pay the
actual cost of moving, towing and storage. If the vehicle is towed or
stored by a private motor carrier, motor vehicle salvage dealer or
licensed motor vehicle dealer, actual charges regularly paid for such
services shall be paid. If the vehicle is stored in a public storage garage
or rental facility, customary charges for such storage shall be paid.
Upon payment, a receipt shall be issued to the owner of the vehicle for
the towing or storage charge.
A. Storage prohibited. No person owning or having custody of any
partially dismantled, nonoperable, wrecked, junked or discarded motor
vehicle shall allow such vehicle to remain on any public street or
highway, parking lot or ramp longer than 48 hours after notification
thereof by the Police Department. Any such vehicle not removed within
48 hours is declared to be a public nuisance and may be removed as
provided in this chapter.
B. Exemptions. This section shall not apply to a motor vehicle in an
appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place
and manner authorized by the Village of East Troy.
A. Parking. No person shall park any vehicle in any vehicular traveling
area or parking area of the East Troy School District, except in
conformity with posted parking regulations set forth for such vehicular
travel and parking areas.
230. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 461, Vehicles, Junked, Stored or Abandoned.
§ 458-32 EAST TROY CODE § 458-34
1:494
§ 458-35. Snow emergency.
B. Speed limits. No person shall, at any time, operate a motor vehicle upon
any East Troy School District grounds at a speed in excess of 10 miles
per hour.
C. Vehicles prohibited at specified times. No person shall, at any time,
operate a motor vehicle other than a school bus or emergency vehicle in
or upon any drive designated for buses only during the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and during the hours of 3:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on any
weekday during the months school is in session.
D. State traffic forfeiture laws adopted. All provisions of Chapters 340 to
349 of the Wisconsin Statutes describing and defining regulations with
respect to vehicles and traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture only,
including penalties to be imposed and procedures for prosecution, are
hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully
set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any
statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by
this section.231
E. Miscellaneous rules.
(1) No person shall operate a motor vehicle on such school premises at
a rapid or sudden acceleration with the intent of squealing tires or
leaving tire marks.
(2) No person shall operate a motor vehicle on such premises across
parking lot islands or parking lot dividers.
A. Declaration of emergency. The Director of Public Works or, in his
absence, the Chief of Police or the Village President may declare a snow
emergency during a severe snow, sleet, or ice storm or immediately
thereafter, whenever traffic becomes congested by reason of such
snowfall, sleet or ice storm and/or the operation of emergency vehicles,
including snow removal equipment and machinery, is impeded.232
B. Duration of emergency. Such emergency shall exist so long as traffic
remains congested and the operation of emergency vehicles is impeded,
or likely to be impeded, by the falling of snow, ice or sleet, or the road
conditions, and the congestion of traffic upon streets, alleys or public
parking lots of the Village.
C. Notice of emergency. The Village President, Director of Public Works or
the Chief of Police may proclaim the state of emergency through the
press, radio or other public means of communication and may designate
and authorize police officers and snow removal personnel to inform the
231. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
232. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-35
1:495
citizenry of the existence of the emergency. Police officers or
Department of Public Works personnel may erect temporary "No
Parking" signs in lieu of notification of the citizenry. Vehicles must be
removed from the street, alley or public parking lot within one hour of
erection of these signs.
D. Parking prohibited during emergency. No person shall park any vehicle
on a street, alley, or public parking lot during a snow emergency or
immediately thereafter until such street, alley or public parking lot has
been cleared of snow, ice or sleet.
E. Removal of vehicles. The Director of Public Works or the Police Chief or
his/her designee may remove any vehicle which may interfere with the
operation of any snow, ice or sleet removal equipment or any
emergency vehicle. The cost of removal of such vehicle shall be charged
to the owner of such vehicle. Said removal may be accomplished by any
towing service.
F. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section may be subject to the penalties contained in § 458-40D(2).233
233. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-35 EAST TROY CODE § 458-35
1:496
ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 458-36. Disturbance of the peace with a motor vehicle.
A. Unnecessary noise prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a motor vehicle in such a manner which shall make or cause to
be made any loud, disturbing or unnecessary sounds or noises such as
may tend to annoy or disturb another in or about any public or private
area in the Village of East Troy.
B. Unnecessary smoke prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a motor vehicle in such a manner which shall make or cause to
be made any smoke, gases or odors which are disagreeable, foul or
otherwise offensive, which may tend to annoy or disturb another in or
about any public or private area in the Village.
C. Unnecessary acceleration and display of power prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle, including motorcycles,
all-terrain vehicles and bicycles, in such a manner as to cause, by
excessive and unnecessary acceleration, the tires of such vehicle or
cycle to spin or emit loud noises or to unnecessarily throw stones or
gravel, nor shall such driver cause to be made by excessive and
unnecessary acceleration any loud noise as would disturb the peace.
D. Disorderly conduct with a motor vehicle.
(1) Conduct prohibited. No person shall, within the Village of East
Troy, by or through the use of any motor vehicle, including but not
limited to an automobile, truck, motorcycle, minibike or
snowmobile, cause or provoke disorderly conduct with a motor
vehicle, cause a disturbance or annoy one or more persons, or
disturb or endanger the property or the safety of another's person
or property.
(2) Definition. "Disorderly conduct with a motor vehicle" means the
engaging in violent, abusive, unreasonably loud conduct, or
disturbing or endangering the property or the safety of another's
person or property, or deliberate or intentional spinning of wheels,
squealing of tires, revving of engine, blowing the horn, causing the
engine to backfire or causing the vehicle, while commencing to
move or in motion, to raise one or more wheels off the ground.
E. Avoidance of traffic control device prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to leave the
roadway and travel across private property to avoid an official traffic
control device, sign or signal.
F. Operation in restricted area prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to leave the
roadway and park, stop or travel upon or across any public or private
property, parking lot, driveway or business service area for any purpose
§ 458-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-36
1:497
§ 458-37. Motor vehicles on pedestrianways and overpasses.
No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle on any pedestrianway
or pedestrian overpass within the Village of East Troy, except municipal or
county maintenance vehicles.
§ 458-38. School crossing guards.
Pursuant to § 349.215, Wis. Stats., those adult persons hired by the School
District or Police Department to act as school crossing guards shall have
the authority to stop vehicular traffic and to keep it stopped as long as
except the official conduct of business located on said property, without
the consent of the owner or lessee of the property. This section shall
specifically include but not be limited to:
(1) Public park property.
(2) Cemetery properties.
(3) School District property.
(4) Medical facilities.
(5) Funeral homes.
(6) Service stations.
(7) Grocery stores.
(8) Restaurants.
(9) Financial institutions.
(10) Other similar type businesses with service driveways or drive-up or
drive-through facilities.
G. Stopping and parking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
stop or park a motor vehicle in any manner on any public or private
property or parking lot contrary to a regulatory sign posted thereon
which may permit parking by certain persons and limits, restricts or
prohibits parking as to other persons without the consent of the owner
or lessee of the property. Any vehicle parked in violation of this
subsection may be removed or towed by the property owner, at the
vehicle owner's expense.
H. Use of compression brakes. No person shall use compression brakes or
operate a motor vehicle using brakes which are in any way activated or
operated by the compression of the engine of any such motor vehicle or
any unit or part thereof, unless such brakes are necessarily used in an
emergency situation. The prohibition contained in this subsection shall
not apply to fire, police, EMS and/or other emergency vehicles.234
234. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 458-36 EAST TROY CODE § 458-38
1:498
necessary, at their respective school crossings, for the purpose of
permitting school children to cross the street.
§ 458-39. Driving over curbing or safety islands.
A. Driving over curbing prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any motor
vehicle to be driven or backed over any curbing in the Village of East
Troy.
B. Driving over safety zones or islands prohibited. Whenever safety zones
or safety islands are marked in accordance with the Wisconsin Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, no operator of a vehicle shall, at
any time, drive through or over a safety zone or safety island. Persons
causing damage to curbing or driving over such curbing shall be
responsible for the cost of such repairs.
§ 458-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-39
1:499

ARTICLE V
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 458-40. Violations and penalties.
A. Forfeiture penalty. The penalty for violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be a forfeiture as hereafter provided, together with court
costs and fees prescribed by § 814.63(1) and (2) or 814.65(1), Wis.
Stats., the penalty assessment for moving traffic violations and the
driver improvement surcharge imposed by §§ 757.05 and 346.655, Wis.
Stats, where applicable. Payment of the judgment and applicable court
costs, fees, assessments and surcharges may be suspended by the
sentencing court for not more than 60 days. Any person 17 years of age
or older who shall fail to pay the amount of the forfeiture, court costs,
any penalty assessment or driver surcharge, or other penalty imposed
for violation of any provisions of this chapter may, upon order of the
court entering judgment therefor and having jurisdiction of the case, be
imprisoned until such forfeiture, costs and assessment are paid, but not
exceeding 90 days.
B. Other sanctions.
(1) By court. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the
sentencing court to exercise additional authorities granted by the
Wisconsin Statutes to suspend or revoke the operating privileges of
the defendant or order the defendant to submit to assessment and
rehabilitation programs or to attend traffic safety school, in
addition to payment of a monetary penalty or in lieu of
imprisonment.
(2) By municipality. No person who has been convicted of a violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be issued a license or permit by
the Village, except a dog license, until the forfeiture imposed for
such violation and any penalty assessment, court costs and fees or
surcharge is paid.
(3) Alcohol-related offenses. Upon conviction of any alcohol-related
offense for which the Village of East Troy has expended funds or
incurred expense for the withdrawal or testing of blood or urine,
the cost of such service to the Village shall be added to any
forfeiture, court costs, and fees imposed by the court.
C. Forfeitures for violation of uniform moving traffic regulations.
Forfeitures for violations of any moving traffic regulation set forth in
the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference in § 458-1 shall conform to
the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for violations of the
comparable Wisconsin Statute, including any variations or increases for
subsequent offenses; provided, however, that this subsection shall not
be construed to permit prosecution under this chapter for any offense
described in Chapters 341 to 349 of the Wisconsin Statutes for which an
imprisonment penalty or fine may be imposed upon the defendant.235
§ 458-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-40
1:501
§ 458-41. Enforcement.
D. Forfeitures for parking violations.
(1) Forfeitures for uniform statewide parking, stopping and standing
offenses. Minimum and maximum forfeitures for violation of
nonmoving traffic regulations adopted by reference in § 458-1 as
described in Chapters 341 to 349 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall be
as found in the current edition of the Revised Uniform State Traffic
Deposit Schedule.236
(2) Penalty for other parking violations. The forfeiture for violation of
parking regulations in §§ 458-17 through 458-31, except for
§ 458-30, shall be $5 to $100.
(3) Forfeitures for violations of § 458-30.
(a) First offense: not less than $50 nor more than $150.
(b) Second offense: not less than $150 nor more than $300.
(c) Third offense: permanent revocation of parking privileges.
E. Other violations. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this
chapter for which a penalty is not otherwise established by this section
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10 nor more than $200
for the first offense and not less than $20 nor more than $500 for the
second offense within two years.
A. Enforcement procedures.
(1) How enforced. This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with
the applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes and this
section.
(2) Applicable court procedure. Except where otherwise specifically
provided by the laws of the State of Wisconsin or this Code, the
traffic regulations in this Code shall be enforced in accordance with
the provisions of § 345.20(2)(b) and Ch. 800, Wis. Stats.
B. Citations.
(1) Uniform citation and complaint. The Wisconsin Uniform Traffic
Citation and Complaint described and defined in the Wisconsin
Statutes shall be used for enforcement of all provisions of this
chapter, except those provisions which describe or define
nonmoving traffic violations and violations of §§ 346.71 through
346.73, Wis. Stats. Violations of §§ 346.71 through 346.73, Wis.
Stats., shall be reported to the District Attorney and the Wisconsin
235. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
236. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-40 EAST TROY CODE § 458-41
1:502
Uniform Traffic Citation shall not be used in such cases, except
upon written request of the District Attorney.
(2) Parking citations. The Village Attorney and Chief of Police shall
recommend to the Village Board a citation for use in enforcing the
nonmoving traffic offenses in this chapter. Such citation shall be
used for enforcement of nonmoving traffic regulations defined and
described in the Wisconsin Statutes, adopted by reference in
§ 458-1, and all provisions regarding nonmoving traffic violations in
this chapter. The citation for nonmoving traffic violations shall
contain a notice that the person cited may discharge the forfeiture
for violation of a nonmoving traffic regulation and penalty thereof
by complying with Subsection C(2) of this section. Nonmoving
traffic citations may be issued by law enforcement officers or by
civilian employees of the Police Department.
C. Deposits and stipulations.
(1) Uniform traffic offenses.
(a) Who may make. Persons arrested or cited for violation of
moving traffic regulations created by this chapter shall be
permitted to make deposits and stipulations of no contest or
released by the arresting officer in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. Stipulations of
guilt or no contest may be made by persons arrested for
violations of this chapter in accordance with § 66.0114(1)(b),
Wis. Stats., whenever the provisions of § 345.27, Wis. Stats.,
are inapplicable to such violations. Stipulations shall conform
to the form contained in the uniform traffic citation and
complaint under § 345.11, Wis. Stats.237
(b) Delivery or making of deposit and stipulation. Any person
stipulating guilt or no contest under the preceding subsection
must make the deposit required under § 345.26, Wis. Stats., or,
if the deposit is not established under such statute, shall
deposit a forfeited penalty as provided in the schedule
established by the Chief of Police and approved by the Village
Board. Deposits, including those for parking or nonmoving
violations, shall be brought or mailed to the Clerk of Municipal
Court, as directed by the arresting officer.
(2) Nonmoving traffic offenses.
(a) Direct payment of penalty permitted. Persons cited (summons
not issued) for violation of nonmoving traffic regulations
described and defined in this chapter may discharge the
penalty thereof and avoid court prosecution by mailing or
forwarding within five days of the issuance of the citation to
237. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-41
1:503
the Police Department the minimum forfeiture specified for
the violation. When payment is made as provided in this
subsection, no court costs shall be charged.238
(b) Court prosecution. If the alleged violator does not deliver or
mail a deposit as provided in Subsection C(2)(a) within 15 days
of the date of the citation, the Chief of Police shall forward a
copy of the citation to the Village Attorney for prosecution.
(c) Registration suspension. If the alleged violator does not pay
the forfeiture or appear in court in response to the citation for
a nonmoving traffic violation on the date specified in the
citation or, if no date is specified on the citation, within 28 days
after the citation is issued, the Village may ask the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation to suspend the registration of
the vehicle involved or refuse registration of any vehicle owned
by the person, pursuant to the provisions of § 345.28(4), Wis.
Stats., and Subsection C(4) below.
(d) Bond. Any official authorized to accept deposits under
§ 345.26, Wis. Stats., or this section shall qualify by taking the
oath prescribed by § 19.01, Wis. Stats.
(3) Notice of demerit points and receipt. Every officer accepting a
forfeited penalty or money deposit under this section shall receipt
therefor in triplicate as provided in § 345.26(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
Every officer accepting a stipulation under the provisions of this
section shall comply with the provisions of §§ 343.28, 345.26(1)(a)
and 345.27(2), Wis. Stats., and shall require the alleged violator to
sign a statement of notice in substantially the form contained on
the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under
§ 345.11, Wis. Stats.239
(4) Registration suspension program.
(a) The Village shall participate in the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation Traffic Violation and Registration Program, as
set forth in § 345.28, Wis. Stats., and Ch. Trans 128, Wis. Adm.
Code, and all amendments or changes thereto.
(b) The Chief of Police is hereby designated as a delegated
authority for purposes of §§ 85.13 and 345.28, Wis. Stats., and
Ch. Trans 128, Wis. Adm. Code. The Chief of Police is
authorized to perform, on behalf of the Village, all functions
required of a local authority under said statutes and code,
including but not limited to:
238. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
239. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 458-41 EAST TROY CODE § 458-41
1:504
[1] Preparing and completing all forms and notices, notifying
the Wisconsin Department of Transportation of unpaid
citations for nonmoving traffic violations;
[2] Specifying whether the registration of vehicles involved in
unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations should be
suspended and/or whether registration should be refused
for any vehicle owned by persons with unpaid citations for
nonmoving traffic violations;
[3] Determining the method by which the Village will pay the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation for
administration of the program;
[4] Establishing the effective date for participation; and
[5] Taking such other action as is necessary to institute and
continue participation in the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation Traffic Violation and Registration Program.
(c) The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to assign a member of
the Police Department to perform such acts as are necessary to
effectuate this subsection.
(d) In addition to all applicable fines and court costs, the cost of
using the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic
Violation and Registration Program shall be assessed as
permitted by § 345.28(4)(d), Wis. Stats. The Police Department
may refuse to notify the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation of payment on a citation until all applicable
fines and costs, including costs assessed under the preceding
sentence, are paid.
(e) This subsection shall not be interpreted as requiring that all
unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations be processed
through the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic
Violation and Registration Program. The Village's participation
in such program shall be in addition to any and all other means
legally available to enforce such citations.
§ 458-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-41
1:505

ARTICLE VI
Off-Road Motor Vehicle Operation; Minibikes and Self-Propelled
Vehicles
§ 458-42. Unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles.240
A. Findings. The unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles has
resulted in:
(1) Serious damage to public and private lands, including damage or
destruction of vegetation, animal life and improvement to the
lands;
(2) The permanent scarring of land and an increase in both erosion and
air pollution;
(3) Collisions and near collisions threatening the life and safety of the
operators of such vehicles, as well as of other persons; and
(4) A loss of the privacy, quietude and serenity to which the owners and
users of land are rightfully entitled.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the terms below shall be
defined as follows:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is self-propelled and shall
include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, jeeps, vans,
motorcycles, motorbikes, go-carts, motorized three-wheeled vehicles,
all-terrain vehicles, mopeds, snowmobiles, dune buggies and tractors.
"Motor vehicle" shall not mean any airplane, railroad train, boat,
wheelchair or bicycle. A vehicle which would otherwise be defined as a
motor vehicle under this section shall not be so defined while it is being
operated:
OFF ROAD —
Solely for the purpose of construction or maintenance of an
improvement to land or solely for access to construction or
maintenance sites, provided that such operation is by persons
having legitimate business on such lands or sites;
(1)
By or at the direction of public employees or utility company
employees as part of their employment duties; or
(2)
By the holder of an easement or right of access on or over the
land on which operation is occurring, or the holder's employees or
agents.
(3)
(1) Any location which:
240. Editor's Note: Original § 10-4-1, State all-terrain vehicle laws adopted, which immediately
preceded this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II). See now Ch. 410, Snowmobiles and All-Terrain Vehicles.
§ 458-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-42
1:507
§ 458-43. Minibikes and self-propelled vehicles.
OPERATION — The physical manipulation or activation of any of the
controls of a motor vehicle necessary to put it in motion.
UNAUTHORIZED — Without the express prior consent of the owner,
lessee, manager or other person authorized to give consent by the
owner or lessee of land. Authorization shall not be implied from a
failure to post private or public land.
(a) Is not a paved or maintained public street or alley;
Is not used or maintained by the owner or lessee of land as a
driveway, parking lot or other way for motor vehicles; or
(b)
Is a private trail for use only by the owner or his/her permittee
for recreational or other vehicular use.
(c)
(2) "Off road" shall not include any recreational or other vehicular use.
"Off road" shall not include any creek bed, riverbed or lake;
provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to
snowmobiles or other vehicles being operated on the ice covering
such creek bed, riverbed or lake.
(3)
C. Unauthorized off-road operation prohibited.
(1) The unauthorized off-road operation of a motor vehicle is
prohibited.
(2) Except for authorized maintenance vehicles and snowmobiles, or
all-terrain vehicles operating in areas authorized by the Village
Board, it shall be unlawful to operate any minibike, go-cart, allterrain
vehicle or any other motor-driven craft or vehicle
principally manufactured for off-highway use on the Village streets,
alleys, parks, sidewalks, bikeways, or parking lots or on any public
lands or private lands or parking lots held open to the public. The
operator shall, at all times, have the written consent of the owner
before operation of such craft or vehicle on private lands.
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this section:
HIGHWAY — All public ways and thoroughfares and bridges on the
same. It includes the entire highway right-of-way width, not limited to
the actual traveled portion, but also includes the shoulders, ditches and
other areas adjacent thereto.
MINIBIKE — Any motorized vehicle primarily used for transportation or
sport, including but not limited to motorcycles, off-the-road trail bikes
and motorized bikes.
MOTORIZED VEHICLE — Any self-propelled device in, upon or by
which any person or property is or may be transported.
§ 458-42 EAST TROY CODE § 458-43
1:508
SELF-PROPELLED VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle primarily used
for off-the-road use, including but not limited to go-carts, all-terrain
vehicles and all other vehicles not registered pursuant to Ch. 341, Wis.
Stats., but not snowmobiles.
B. Operation of minibikes and self-propelled vehicles. No person shall
operate a minibike or self-propelled vehicle in the Village of East Troy in
the following manner:
(1) At a rate of speed that is unreasonable or imprudent under the
circumstances.
(2) In any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of
another.
(3) While under the influence of intoxicating liquor, fermented malt
beverages, narcotics or other controlled substances.
(4) In such a way that the exhaust of the motor makes an excessive or
unusual noise.
(5) Without a functioning muffler.
(6) Upon any public highway, street or alley, or upon any sidewalk or
parkway in the Village of East Troy, unless such vehicle is
registered as required by Ch. 341, Wis. Stats., and its operation and
operator are specifically permitted to operate said vehicle by the
Wisconsin Statutes.
(7) Upon any slide, ski or skating area, except for the purposes of
serving the area or crossing the places where marked.
(8) Upon any lands owned, operated or leased by the Village of East
Troy.
(9) Upon a cemetery, burial ground, school or church property, without
the express consent of the owner.
C. Liability of parent or guardian. No parent or guardian of any child
under the age of 18 years shall authorize or permit such child to violate
any of the provisions of this section. Any child under the age of 18 years
who shall operate a minibike or self-propelled device shall be presumed
to be operating said vehicle under the authority of a parent or guardian.
D. Penalties. Any person who shall violate this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit for each offense not less than $25 nor more
than $200, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned
in the county jail not to exceed 30 days.
§ 458-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 458-43
1:509
Chapter 461
VEHICLES, JUNKED, STORED OR ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 354.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 375.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 458.
§ 461-1. State statutes adopted.
The provisions of §§ 342.40 and 175.25, Wis. Stats., and the definitions
therein, are adopted by reference.
§ 461-2. Definition.
For the purposes of this chapter, a junked, stored, or abandoned vehicle
means any self-propelled land vehicle which can be used for towing or
transporting people or materials, or parts thereof, including but not limited
to automobiles, trucks, buses, motorized campers, motorcycles, motor
scooters, mopeds, tractors, snowmobiles and trailers of all types, in a
disassembled, dismantled, junked, wrecked or inoperable condition, on any
real estate located within the corporate limits of the Village, except upon a
permit issued by the Village Board.
§ 461-3. Prohibited acts.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall leave unattended any
junked, stored or abandoned vehicle for such time and under such
circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have been
abandoned. No person shall store any such junked or abandoned vehicle on
public or private property within the Village of East Troy for longer than
10 days without making application to the Village Board for a permit herein
described. A motor vehicle shall not be considered an abandoned motor
vehicle when it is out of ordinary public view or when designated as not
abandoned by a duly authorized municipal official or when designated as
not abandoned pursuant to a permit issued hereunder.
§ 461-4. Impoundment.
A. Police duty. Whenever any Village law enforcement officer shall find any
such vehicle placed or stored in the open upon private property, public
property or a public highway in the Village of East Troy, he/she shall
notify the owner of such vehicle and/or the owner of the property upon
which such vehicle is placed or stored of the intention of the Village to
remove such vehicle. If any such vehicle is not removed within five days
after such notice, the Chief of Police shall cause such vehicle to be
removed, the cost of such removal to be charged to the property from
§ 458-43 EAST TROY CODE § 461-4
1:510
§ 461-5. Owner liable for costs.
The owner of any abandoned, junked or stored motor vehicle for which no
permit has been issued by the Village Board, except a stolen vehicle, is
responsible for all costs of impounding and disposing of the vehicle. Costs
not recovered from the sale of the vehicle may be recovered in a civil action
by the Village against the owner.
§ 461-6. Sale or disposition.
which it is removed and such charges to be entered upon the tax roll
as a special assessment. Upon removal, such vehicle shall be stored in
a suitable place for at least 14 days after the owner thereof receives
notice of such storage, if the name and whereabouts of the owner can
be readily ascertained.241
B. Exception. Any vehicle in violation of this chapter shall be impounded
by the Chief of Police of the Village until lawfully claimed or disposed of
under § 461-6A or B, except that if the Chief of Police or any member of
the Police Department authorized by the Chief of Police determines that
the cost of towing and storage charges for the impoundment would
exceed the value of the vehicle, the vehicle may be junked or sold by the
Chief of Police prior to expiration of the impoundment upon his/her
determination that the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or other
reason. All substantially complete vehicles in excess of 19 models years
of age shall be disposed of in accordance with § 461-6A.
A. Value in excess of $100. Any abandoned, junked or stored motor vehicle
for which no permit has been issued by the Village Board and which is
determined by the Chief of Police or any duly authorized member of the
Village Police Department to have a value in excess of $100 shall be
retained in storage for a period of 14 days after certified mail notice has
been sent to the owner and lienholders of record, to permit reclamation
of the vehicle after payment of accrued charges. Such notice shall set
forth the year, make, model and serial number of such abandoned,
junked or stored motor vehicle and the place where the vehicle is being
held and shall inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to
reclaim the vehicle. The notice shall state that failure of the owner or
lienholders to exercise their rights to reclaim the vehicle under this
subsection shall be deemed a waiver of all right, title and interest in the
vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle. Each retained vehicle
not reclaimed by its owner or lienholder may be sold. The Village may
dispose of the vehicle by sealed bid or auction sale. At such sale, the
highest bid for any such motor vehicle shall be accepted unless the
same is deemed inadequate by the Chief of Police, in which event all
bids may be rejected. If all bids are rejected, or no bid is received, the
Village may either readvertise the sale, adjourn the sale to a definite
date, sell the motor vehicle at a private sale, or junk the vehicle. Any
241. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 461-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 461-6
1:511
§ 461-7. Permits.
interested person may offer bids on each abandoned vehicle to be sold.
A Class 1 notice, pursuant to the provisions of Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., shall
be published in the official newspaper of the Village prior to any such
sale and shall be in the same form as the certified mail notice sent to
the owner or lienholder of record. Upon sale of an abandoned vehicle,
the Village shall supply the purchaser with a complete form designed
by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation enabling the purchaser
to obtain a regular certificate of title for the vehicle. The purchaser
shall have 10 days to remove the vehicle from the storage area but shall
pay a reasonable storage fee established by the municipality or county
for each day the vehicle remains in storage after the second business
day subsequent to the sale date. Ten days after the sale, the purchaser
shall forfeit all interest in the vehicle and the vehicle shall be deemed
to be abandoned and may be sold again. Any listing of vehicles to be
sold by the Village shall be made available to any interested person or
organization who or which makes a written request for such list. The
Village may charge a fee for the list.
B. Value less than $100. Any abandoned vehicle which is determined by
the Chief of Police or his/her duly authorized deputy to have a value of
less than $100 may be disposed of by direct sale to a licensed salvage
dealer upon determination that the vehicle is not reported stolen.
C. Report required. Within five days after the sale or disposal of a vehicle,
as provided in Subsection A or B, the Chief of Police shall advise the
Wisconsin Division of Motor Vehicles of the sale or disposition thereof.
A. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation desiring a permit to
maintain an abandoned, junked or stored motor vehicle or parts
thereof, as herein defined, shall apply for a permit if such motor vehicle
or parts thereof will remain on public or private property for longer
than 10 days. The permit application shall be on forms provided by the
Village Clerk's office, shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee set by the Village Board, and shall be returned to the
Village Clerk for consideration by the Village Board at the next
regularly scheduled meeting. Any such permit issued by the Village
Board shall specify the quantity and manner of storing such motor
vehicles or parts thereof and shall be signed by the Village President
and Village Clerk. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Any such permit issued hereunder shall be revocable at any time by the
Village Board after a hearing before such Board at which it has been
found that the permit holder has failed or refused to comply with this
chapter or any restrictions contained in such permit. Such hearing may
be held by the Village Board on its own motion or upon the complaint, in
writing, duly signed and certified by the complainant. Such complaint
or motion shall state the nature of the alleged failure to comply with
such ordinance or permit restrictions. A copy of the complaint or
§ 461-6 EAST TROY CODE § 461-7
1:512
Chapter 470
WASTE MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 270.
Hazardous materials and pollution — See Ch.
285.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 289.
Nuisances — See Ch. 354.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 375.
Junked and abandoned vehicles — See Ch.
461.
motion together with a notice of the hearing shall be served upon the
permit holder not less than 10 days previous to the date of hearing.
§ 461-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 461-7
1:513

ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Management
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 8, Ch. 3, of the 2000
Code]
§ 470-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Solid Waste Management Ordinance of
the Village of East Troy," hereinafter referred to as "this article."
§ 470-2. Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of this article to enhance
and improve the environment and promote the health, safety and welfare of
the Village by establishing minimum standards for the storage, collection,
transport, processing, separation, recovery and disposal of solid waste.
§ 470-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings given herein, unless different meanings are clearly indicated
by the context:
AGRICULTURAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in the
rearing and slaughtering of animals and the processing of animal products
or orchard and field crops.
BULKY WASTE — Items whose large size precludes or complicates their
handling by normal collection, processing or disposal methods.
COMMERCIAL UNIT — All property other than residential units, and shall
include boardinghouses, motels and resorts.
CURB — The back edge or curb and gutter along a paved street, or where
one would be if the street was paved and had curb and gutter.
DEMOLITION WASTES — That portion of solid wastes consisting of wastes
from the repair, remodeling or reconstruction of buildings, such as lumber,
roofing and sheathing scraps, rubble, broken concrete, asphalt and plaster,
conduit, pipe, wire, insulation and any other materials resulting from the
demolition of buildings and improvements.
DISPOSAL — The orderly process of discarding useless or unwanted
material.
DNR — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DUMP — A land site where solid waste is disposed of in a manner that does
not protect the environment.
DWELLING UNIT — A place of habitation occupied by a normal singlefamily
unit or a combination of persons who may be considered as
equivalent to a single-family unit for the purposes of this article.
§ 470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-3
1:515
GARBAGE — Includes every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or
vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use,
cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables
originally used for foodstuffs.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Those wastes such as toxic, radioactive or
pathogenic substances which require special handling to avoid illness or
injury to persons or damage to property and the environment.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Waste material, except garbage, rubbish and
refuse, directly or indirectly resulting from an industrial processing or
manufacturing operation.
LITTER — Solid waste scattered about in a careless manner, usually
rubbish.
NONRESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE — Solid waste from agricultural,
commercial, industrial or institutional activities, or a building or group of
buildings consisting of four or more dwelling units.
PERSON — Individuals, firms, corporations and associations, and includes
the plural as well as the singular.
PRIVATE COLLECTION SERVICES — Collection services provided by a
person licensed to do same by the DNR.
RECYCLABLE WASTE — Waste material that can be remanufactured into
usable products and shall include, by way of enumeration but not by way
of limitation, glass, plastics, newspapers, cardboard, and metals (aluminum,
steel, tin, brass, etc.).
REFUSE — Includes all waste material, including garbage, rubbish and
industrial waste, and shall, by way of enumeration but not by way of
limitation, include grass, leaves, sticks, tree branches and logs, stumps,
stone, cement, boards, furniture or household appliances, and garden
debris.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE — All solid waste that normally originates in
a residential environment from residential dwelling units.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — An individual household capable of independent
habitation by a family unit. A single-family dwelling shall be considered
to be one residential unit; a multifamily dwelling shall be considered to
be multiple residential units, the number of residential units to equal the
number of family units to be housed therein. "Residential unit" shall not
include boardinghouses, motels or resorts.
RUBBISH — Includes combustible and noncombustible waste material,
except rocks, concrete, bricks and similar solid materials, plaster or dirt,
that is incidental to the operation of a building and shall include, by way
of enumeration but not by way of limitation, tin cans, bottles, rags, paper,
cardboard, and sweepings.
SCAVENGING — The uncontrolled removal of materials at any point in solid
waste management.
§ 470-3 EAST TROY CODE § 470-3
1:516
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, rubbish and other useless, unwanted or
discarded material from agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional activities. "Solid waste" does not include solid or dissolved
material in domestic sewage.
STORAGE — The interim containment of solid waste in an approved manner
after generation and prior to collection and ultimate disposal.
STORAGE AREAS — Areas where persons place containers during
noncollection days, as well as areas where containers are set out on
collection day.
§ 470-4. Refuse storage areas.
Storage areas shall be kept in a nuisance- and odor-free condition. Litter
shall not be allowed to accumulate. Collection crews will not be responsible
for cleaning up loose materials from any containers which have become
ruptured or broken due to wet conditions, animals, vandalism or other
cause. The occupant and/or owner shall be responsible for cleaning up this
litter. Litter not collected shall not be allowed to accumulate. Violation will
result in the occupant and/or owner being notified to clean up his area,
with continued violation resulting in the owner being prosecuted under the
provisions of this article and other Village ordinances.
§ 470-5. Approved waste and refuse containers.
A. Carts for refuse and recycling. The only containers allowed for weekly
waste collection and biweekly recycling collection are the wheeled
carts provided by the waste hauling contractor. Each residential unit
shall be provided one ninety-six-gallon cart for refuse and a second
ninety-six-gallon cart for recycling. The property owner or tenant may
request smaller carts but shall be limited to one cart for refuse and one
for recycling.
B. Repaired or replacement carts. The hauling contractor shall repair or
replace carts that are worn or damaged from normal usage. The
property owner or tenant shall be responsible for lost or stolen carts
and for damage to the carts caused by abuse. Abuse includes melted
carts from hot ashes or fire, carts cut with a saw and carts run over by
cars or trucks.
C. Approved containers for bulk collection. Suitable containers of a type
approved by the Village Board shall be provided by the property owner
or tenant for extra material to be placed at the curb for the once a
month bulk collection. In order to be approved, such containers shall be
maintained in a nuisance- and odor-free condition and shall be
sufficient to prevent the scattering of contents by weather conditions
and animals. Containers shall not exceed 30 gallons or 60 pounds,
excluding carts for automated collection that may be 48 to 96 gallons
and may weigh up to 350 pounds. Plastic bags may be utilized for the
bulk refuse or recycling collection but shall be of sufficient strength to
allow lifting and loading of contents without tearing. Bags for recycling
§ 470-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-5
1:517
§ 470-6. Collection of refuse.
shall consist of a transparent plastic material such that the contents can
be identified by the drivers and which cannot be damaged by freezing
and are not susceptible to melting. Such containers and bags shall not
be placed at the curb for weekly collection.
D. Sawdust and ashes. Sawdust and cold, completely extinguished ashes
shall only be left for collection in approved containers.
A. Placement of residential solid waste for collection.
(1) Residential solid waste shall be accessible to collection crews.
Residential solid waste in approved containers shall be placed
immediately behind the curb of the public street for collection or
containers shall be placed immediately adjacent to the alley of
premises that abut on the alley. Yard wastes defined in § 470-13 and
bulky wastes from residential units shall likewise be placed in neat,
orderly fashion behind the curb when such special collection is
scheduled. During winter months, solid waste shall not be placed
on top of the snow bank, nor shall it be placed in the roadway. The
owner shall either shovel out an area behind the curb in which to
place his waste or he shall place it in his driveway. Collection crews
will not collect residential solid waste unless it is placed at the curb
of a public street. Residential units shall bring their solid waste to
the terrace adjacent to the street curb for collection. Should
collection crews be unable to discharge contents of garbage cans
into collection vehicles using normal handling procedures, the
cans, including contents, will be left at curbside. The owner shall
make provisions to assure that the solid waste therein can be
collected on the next collection day. Collection crews will not empty
garbage cans by means other than dumping.242
(2) No garbage containers or other containers for refuse other than
those of the Village shall be placed, kept, stored or located within
the right-of-way of a street or alley; provided, however, that the
Village Board may authorize the location of such containers within
a public right-of-way at specified places and times when such
location is necessary for the expeditious collection and disposition
of refuse.
B. Restriction on time of placement.
(1) Receptacles and containers for refuse and rubbish shall be placed
in collection locations as designated in Subsection A above prior to
6:00 a.m. of the scheduled collection day, but not more than 24
hours prior to such time.
242. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 470-5 EAST TROY CODE § 470-6
1:518
§ 470-7. Prohibited activities and noncollectible materials.
(2) All receptacles, bags and containers for refuse and garbage
disposal shall be removed from the curbside collection point within
24 hours after the regular collection time.
(3) Employees of licensed collectors will not enter any structures to
remove garbage or refuse, except by written agreement with the
property owner.
A. Dead animals. It shall be unlawful to place any dead animal, or parts
thereof, in a container for collection; provided, however, that this
subsection shall not apply to animal parts from food preparation for
human consumption.
B. Undrained food wastes. It shall be unlawful to place any garbage or
other food wastes in a container for collection, unless they are first
drained and wrapped.
C. Ashes. It shall be unlawful to place hot ashes for collection. (See
§ 470-5D.)
D. Improper placement. It shall be unlawful to place, or allow to be placed,
any solid waste upon the roads, streets, or public or private property
within the Village contrary to the provisions of this article.
E. Compliance with article. It shall be unlawful to store, collect, transport,
transfer, recover, incinerate or dispose of any solid waste within the
boundaries of the Village contrary to the provisions of this article.
F. Improper transportation. It shall be unlawful to transport any solid
waste in any vehicle which permits the contents to blow, sift, leak or fall
therefrom. If spillage does occur, the collection crew shall immediately
return spilled materials to the collection vehicle and shall properly
clean, or have cleaned, the area. All vehicles used for the collection and
transportation of solid waste shall be durable, easily cleanable and
leakproof, if necessary, considering the type of waste and its moisture
content. Collection vehicles shall be cleaned frequently to prevent
nuisances and insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair.
G. Interference with authorized collector. No person other than an
authorized collector shall collect or interfere with any garbage after it
shall have been put into a garbage receptacle and deposited in the
proper place for the collector, nor shall any authorized person molest,
hinder, delay or in any manner interfere with an authorized garbage
collector in the discharge of his duties.
H. Scavenging. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any solid
waste or refuse placed for collection on the terrace without the
permission of the owner.
§ 470-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-7
1:519
§ 470-8. Garbage accumulation; declaration of nuisance.
The accumulation or deposit of garbage, trash or putrescible animal or
vegetable matter in or upon any lot or land or any public or private place
within the Village which causes the air or environment to become noxious
or offensive, or to be in such a condition as to promote the breeding of
I. Private dumps. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a
dump.
J. Burning of waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste
in any manner, except as provided elsewhere in this Code of Ordinance.
K. Noncollectible materials. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for
collection any of the following wastes:
(1) Hazardous waste.
(2) Toxic waste.
(3) Chemicals.
(4) Explosives or ammunition.
(5) Flammable liquids.
(6) Large quantities of paint or liquid paint.243
(7) Trees and stumps (except Christmas trees).244
(8) Construction debris.245
(9) Carcasses.246
L. Animal or human wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place
animal wastes and/or human wastes for collection. These wastes should
be disposed of in the sanitary sewer system.
M. Hospital wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for
collection any pathogenic hospital wastes, biohazardous wastes or
items such as needles and syringes.247
N. Building waste. All waste resulting from remodeling, construction or
removal of a building, roadway or sidewalk shall be disposed of by the
owner, builder or contractor. Building materials of any kind will not be
collected. Building materials shall not be burned or buried at the
construction site.
243. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
244. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
245. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
246. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
247. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 470-7 EAST TROY CODE § 470-8
1:520
flies, mosquitoes or other insects, or to provide a habitat or breeding place
for rodents or other animals, or which otherwise becomes injurious to the
public health, is prohibited and declared to constitute a nuisance.
§ 470-9. Refuse from outside Village.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, deposit or cause
to be deposited, for collection, any waste or refuse not generated within the
corporate limits of the Village of East Troy.
§ 470-10. Improper use of trash receptacles.
No person shall place in or on any garbage can, dumpster or other trash
receptacle not belonging to or assigned by the owner of such receptacle
to such person any garbage, refuse or trash without the permission of the
owner or designated assignee of such receptacle, unless such receptacle is
designated expressly or implicitly for use by the general public.
§ 470-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-10
1:521

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 8, Ch. 4, of the 2000
Code]
§ 470-11. Purpose. [Amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
The purposes of this article are to describe the refuse and recycling
collection policies of the Village of East Troy and to promote recycling,
composting and resource recovery through an effective recycling program,
as provided in § 287.11, Wis. Stats., and Chapter NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 470-12. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted as authorized under § 287.09(3)(b), Wis. Stats., and
as authorized by the Village of East Troy.
§ 470-12.1. Abrogation and greater restrictions. [Added 8-5-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-03]
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or
interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this
article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall apply.
§ 470-12.2. Interpretation. [Added 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where
any terms or requirements of this article may be inconsistent or conflicting,
the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a
provision of this article is required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by a standard
in Chapter NR 544, Wis. Administrative Code, and where the article
provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the
Wisconsin Statutes and the Chapter NR 544 standards in effect on the date
of the adoption of this article, or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this article.
§ 470-12.3. Severability. [Added 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
Should any portion of this article be declared unconstitutional or invalid by
a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be
affected.
§ 470-12.4. Applicability. [Added 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
The requirements of this article apply to all persons within the Village
of East Troy, as well as occupants and owners or designated agents of
multifamily dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties.
§ 470-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-12.5
1:523
§ 470-12.5. Administration. [Added 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the Village of East
Troy and its designated agents.
§ 470-13. Definitions. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
The following definitions are applicable in this article:
BIMETAL CONTAINER — A container for carbonated or malt beverages that
is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
CONTAINER BOARD — Corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
E-CYCLE (ELECTRONICS OR ELECTRONIC SCRAP) — Includes all covered
electronic devices including:
FOAM POLYSTYRENE PACKAGING — Packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
GLASS CONTAINER — A glass bottle, jar or other packaging container used
to contain a product that is the subject of a retail sale and does not include
ceramic cups, dishes, oven ware, plate glass, safety and window glass, heatresistant
glass such as Pyrex, lead-based glass such as crystal or TV tubes.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any substance or combination of substances,
including any waste of a solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous form, which
may cause or significantly contribute to any increase in mortality or an
A. Television.
B. Computers (desktop, laptop, netbook and tablet computers).
C. Desktop printers (including those that scan, fax and/or copy).
D. Computer monitors.
Other computer accessories (including keyboards, mice, speakers,
external hard drives and flash drives).
E.
F. E-readers.
G. DVD players, VCRs and other video players (i.e., DVRs).
H. Fax machines.
I. Cell phones.
A. Is designed for serving food or beverages.
Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
B.
Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
C.
§ 470-12.5 EAST TROY CODE § 470-13
1:524
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, or which
may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical
or infectious characteristics. This term includes, but is not limited to,
substances which are toxic, corrosive, flammable, irritants, strong
sensitizer or explosives, as determined by the Department of Natural
Resources.
HDPE — High-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 2.
LDPE — Low-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 4.
MAGAZINES — Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
MAJOR APPLIANCE — A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven,
refrigerator, furnace, boiler, dehumidifier, water heater or stove.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A property containing five or more
residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
NEWSPAPER — A newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES — Commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. This
term does not include multiple-family dwellings.
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade printing and writing papers from offices in
nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This
term does not include industrial process waste.
OTHER RESINS or MULTIPLE RESINS — Plastic resins labeled by the SPI
Code No. 7.
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
local governmental unit, as defined in § 66.0131(1)(a), Wis. Stats., state
agency or authority or federal agency.
PETE — Polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI Code No. 1.
PLASTIC CONTAINER — An individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can,
jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a
product that is the subject of a retail sale.
POST-CONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in § 291.01(7),
Wis. Stats., waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap
automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in § 289.01(17),
Wis. Stats.
PP — Polypropylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 5.
PS — Polystyrene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 6.
PVC — Polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI Code No. 3.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Includes lead acid batteries, major
appliances, waste oil, aluminum containers, bimetal containers, corrugated
§ 470-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-13
1:525
paper and other container board, glass containers, magazines, newspaper,
office paper, rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE,
PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and other resins or multiple resins, steel containers,
waste tires, aseptic cartons such as juice boxes, soup boxes and ice cream
and bi-metal containers.
SOLID WASTE — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(33), Wis. Stats.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(35), Wis.
Stats.
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process which
is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of solid waste. "Treatment" includes incineration.
WASTE TIRE — A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in
diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact
root balls.
§ 470-14. Separation of recyclable material. [Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02; 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
A. Recyclables. Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit
residences, multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and
properties shall separate the following materials from postconsumer
waste.
(1) Electronic scrap.
(2) Lead acid batteries.
(3) Major appliances.
(4) Waste oil.
(5) Yard waste.
(6) Aluminum containers.
(7) Bi-metal containers.
(8) Corrugated paper or other container board.
(9) Glass containers.
(10) Magazines.
(11) Newspaper.
(12) Office paper.
§ 470-13 EAST TROY CODE § 470-14
1:526
§ 470-15. Exceptions to separation requirements. [Amended
8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
The separation requirements of § 470-14 do not apply to the following:
§ 470-16. Care and placement of separated recyclable material.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 8-5-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-03]
(13) Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, LDPE, PVC, PP, PS
and other resins or multiple resins.
(14) Steel containers.
(15)Waste tires.
(16) Foam polystyrene packaging.
B. Exemptions. The Village Board reserves the right to designate
additional solid waste materials as recyclable or currently collected
materials as no longer recyclable in accordance with state law and to
either add or delete them from any collection services provided by the
Village of East Troy. The Village Clerk shall provide written notice to its
service recipients of this declaration through official posting.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
A. Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties that send
their post-consumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that recovers the
materials specified in § 470-14A from solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically possible.
B. Solid waste which is burned for supplemental fuel at a facility if less
than 30% of the heat input into the facility is derived from the solid
waste burned as supplemental fuel.
C. A recyclable material specified above in § 470-14A(7) through (16) for
which a variance has been granted by the Department of Natural
Resources under § 287.11(2m), Wis. Stats., or s. NR 544.14, Wis.
Administrative Code.
A. General preparation. To the greatest extent practical, the recyclable
materials separated in accordance with § 470-14 shall be cleaned and
kept free of contamination such as food or product residue, oil or
grease, or other nonrecyclable materials, including but not limited to
household hazardous waste, medical waste and agricultural chemical
containers.
B. Placement.
(1) Recyclable materials shall be placed in bins provided by the hauler
and placed at the curb or roadside for pickup. The contents become
§ 470-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-16
1:527
§ 470-17. Management of e-cycle, lead acid batteries, major
appliances, waste oil and yard waste. [Amended 8-5-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-03]
§ 470-18. Preparation and collection of recyclable materials.
[Amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
Except as otherwise directed by the Village Board, occupants of singlefamily
and two- to four-unit residences shall do the following for the
preparation and collection of the separated materials specified in
§ 470-14A:
the property of the Village of East Troy, and no person without
written approval of the Village shall collect the same.
(2) All refuse and nonrecyclables shall be placed for collection in
accordance with Article I, Solid Waste Management, of this
chapter.
A. Electronic scrap shall be deposited at the Wastewater Treatment Plant
drop-off site or other designated site(s) specified by the Village and/or
its contractor(s) for collection according to their specifications on
scheduled electronic recycling event dates.
B. Lead acid vehicle batteries. Only car and truck batteries with the casing
unbroken will be accepted.
C. Major appliances shall be separated from other solid waste and
recyclables and placed for collection at least three feet outside of carts
at the time bulk collection occurs in the Village; and/or handled in any
other legal manner specified by the Village and/or its contractor(s) for
recycling them.
D. Waste oil. Common engine oil only shall be accepted in leakproof
containers. Antifreeze or hazardous materials will not be accepted.
E. Yard materials shall be separated from other solid waste and
recyclables and not placed into trash or recycling carts. Instead the
responsible person shall follow the guidelines specified in § 470-19.
A. Aluminum cans. All aluminum cans shall be rinsed clean of product
residue, well drained and flattened.
B. Bi-metal steel aluminum containers for carbonated and malt beverages.
Shall be rinsed, well drained and flattened.
C. Corrugated paper and other container board. Shall be free of debris and
flattened.
D. Glass containers. Brown glass, green glass and clear glass containers
shall be rinsed, well drained and shall have caps removed.
§ 470-16 EAST TROY CODE § 470-18
1:528
§ 470-19. Grass clippings, leaves, brush or branch clippings.
[Amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
Yard waste shall be collected on scheduled yard waste collection dates with
the following specifications. Brush and branch clippings must be bundled,
less than four feet in length, less than six inches in diameter, and less
than 50 pounds. No full trees. Clippings, leaves and garden debris must
be in paper bags, compostable bags or in thirty-two-gallon bins. All yard
waste must be free of glass, plastic, metal, stones and other nondegradable
materials. Weeds are included but invasive species including garlic mustard
should not be mixed with yard waste. Invasive species may be bagged and
placed in the solid waste bin for collection.
§ 470-20. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
multiple-family dwellings. [Amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
E. Catalogs, magazines, and newsprint. Catalogs, magazines and
newsprint shall be recycled.
F. Office paper. Office paper shall be recycled. Shredded paper shall be
placed in brown paper bags and placed in recycle bins.
G. All rigid plastic containers. All rigid plastic containers including PETE,
HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS or OTHER shall have caps and rings removed,
be clean of product residue, be rinsed, well drained and flattened.
H. Steel containers. Shall be rinsed, labels removed and flattened.
I. Tires. Tires shall be separated from all other refuse. The responsible
person shall make prior arrangements for pickup and payment with the
hauler and will be charged a user fee at the then-current rate charged
to the garbage pickup contractor by the landfill operator.
J. Foam polystyrene packaging shall be clean, flattened and placed in
proper receptacle.
A. Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of
the following to recycle the materials specified in § 470-14A:
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility.
(3) Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the
dwelling and at least semiannually thereafter about the established
recycling program.
(4) Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which
materials meet processing requirements, collection methods or
sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or
company, including a name, address and telephone number.
§ 470-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-20
1:529
§ 470-21. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
nonresidential facilities and properties. [Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02; 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
§ 470-22. Improper disposal or handling of refuse and recyclable
materials. [Amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
See Article I, Solid Waste Management, of this chapter, §§ 470-7 through
470-9.
§ 470-23. Prohibitions on disposal of materials separated for
recycling. [Amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid
waste treatment facility any of the materials specified in § 470-14A which
have been separated for recycling, except that waste tires may be burned
with energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
B. The requirements specified in Subsection A do not apply to the owners
or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings if the post-consumer
waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a processing facility
licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for
recycling the materials specified in § 470-14A from solid waste in as
pure a form as is technically feasible.
A. Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties
shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in
§ 470-14A:
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify in writing, at least semiannually, all users, tenants and
occupants of the properties about the established recycling
program.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
(4) Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and
recycle, which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in
order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or
sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or
company, including a name, address and telephone number.
B. The requirements specified in Subsection A do not apply to the owners
or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties if the
post-consumer waste generated within the facility or property is
treated at a processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural
Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in
§ 470-14A from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
§ 470-20 EAST TROY CODE § 470-24
1:530
§ 470-24. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
§ 470-25. Fees.
A. For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
article, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the Village
of East Troy may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling,
post-consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites
and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties, and any records
relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when
necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse
access to any authorized officer, employee or authorized representative
of the Village of East Troy who requests access for purposes of
inspection and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may
obstruct, hamper or interfere with such an inspection.
B. Any person who violates a provision of this article may be issued a
warning or citation by the Village of East Troy Police Department to
collect forfeitures. The issuance of a citation under this subsection shall
not preclude the subsequent issuance of additional citations under any
other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter.
C. Penalties for violating this article may be assessed as follows:
(1) Any person who violates § 470-23 may be required to forfeit $50 for
a first violation, $200 for a second violation, and not more than
$2,000 for a third or subsequent violation.
(2) Any person who violates a provision of this article except § 470-23
may be required to forfeit not less than $25 for a first violation, not
more than $100 for a second violation, and not more than $1,000
for a third or subsequent violation; not less than $10 or more than
$1,000 for each violation.
A. Refuse and recycling services are contracted for by the Village Board
for all residential units in buildings of four families or fewer. All charges
for such services for the year shall be placed on the real estate property
tax bill as a special charge for the coming year.
B. For new construction, the owner shall be charged a fee at the time an
occupancy permit is issued so as to reimburse the Village for the
remainder of the year's garbage/recycling fee.
C. Said fees shall be specified by the Village Board as amended from time
to time based upon the Village's contract with its hauler and shall be
prorated from the date the occupancy permit is issued until the end of
that calendar year.
D. The fee shall be charged on a per-residential-unit basis for all
multifamily properties of four units or fewer.
§ 470-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-25
1:531

ARTICLE III
Dumping and Waste Disposal
[Adopted 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2 as Title 8, Ch. 6, of the 2000
Code]
§ 470-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the dumping or disposal of waste,
garbage, refuse and sludge by individuals, corporations and municipalities
within the Village of East Troy. Because of the possible danger to the health,
safety and welfare of the public, such dumping or disposal within the Village
of East Troy shall only be permitted under the terms and conditions set forth
below in this article.
§ 470-27. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable in this article:
DUMPING or DISPOSAL — Includes, but is not limited to, unloading,
throwing away, discarding, emptying, abandoning, discharging, burning or
burying waste, garbage, refuse or sludge on, into or under any property or
lands, whether publicly or privately owned, within the Village.
GARBAGE — Discarded material resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving and consumption of food.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, village, town or county.
REFUSE — Combustible and noncombustible discarded material, including
but not limited to trash, rubbish, paper, wood, metal, glass, plastic, rubber,
cloth, ashes, litter and street rubbish, industrial waste, dead animals, mine
tailings, gravel pit and quarry spoils, toxic and hazardous wastes, and
material and debris resulting from construction or demolition.
SLUDGE — Sewage treatment residue in any form whatsoever, whether
solid, semisolid or liquid, which has been processed or treated in any way,
form or manner.
WASTE — Garbage, refuse and all other discarded or salvageable material,
including waste materials resulting from industrial, commercial and
agricultural operations and from domestic use and public service activities.
§ 470-28. Permit required.
Except as expressly permitted in § 470-29, no individual, corporation or
municipality shall dump or dispose of waste, garbage, refuse or sludge
within the Village of East Troy unless a permit to engage in such dumping or
disposal is first obtained from the Village of East Troy under the conditions
prescribed herein.
§ 470-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-29
1:533
§ 470-29. Exceptions.
The following shall not be deemed to come within the scope or meaning of
this article:
§ 470-30. General regulations.
Persons or municipalities who or which are permitted to engage in dumping
or disposal operations shall be subject to the following regulations:
§ 470-31. Application for permit. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
There shall be a public hearing on any application for a permit to engage
in dumping or disposal operations. The application shall be on file with the
Village Clerk at least 30 days before the public hearing. The application
shall contain the name and address of the applicant, an explanation of the
nature and purpose of the dumping or disposal, and a detailed description
of the dumping or disposal plan.
A. Sites used for the dumping or disposal of waste, garbage or refuse from
a single family or household, a member of which is the owner, occupant
or lessee of the property; provided, however, that such waste, garbage
or refuse is placed in suitable containers or stored in such other way as
to not cause a public or private nuisance and placed for pickup by the
Village garbage hauler.
B. Any dumping operation under the direction and control of the Village of
East Troy.
A. The dumping or disposal operations must be conducted in such a way as
to not constitute a public or private nuisance.
B. The dumping or disposal operations shall be permitted only in
industrially zoned areas, as set forth in the Official Zoning Map of the
Village of East Troy.
C. Persons or municipalities engaged in dumping or disposal operations
must conduct the operations in such a way that dust, dirt, debris or
other materials or substances will not be carried by wind across the
boundary of the parcel of land being used for dumping or disposal
operations.
D. A suitable covering of gravel or dirt shall be placed over all of the area
used for dumping or disposal operations within a reasonable time after
the dumping or disposal occurs, not to exceed 10 days. Such covering
must be done in such a way as to give the area so covered a grading
compatible with the surrounding and adjacent property, in such a way
as to not substantially depreciate property values within the immediate
area.
§ 470-29 EAST TROY CODE § 470-32
1:534
§ 470-32. Public hearing.
A public hearing will be required under the following terms:
§ 470-33. Bond; right of entry.
§ 470-34. Issuance of permit.
The application for a permit shall be processed within 90 days of the receipt
thereof and shall be issued if the Village Board is satisfied that there has
been and will be reasonable compliance with the conditions enumerated
herein.
§ 470-35. Revocation of permit.
The permit, once issued, may be revoked after public hearing upon a
published Class 1 notice by the Village of East Troy, at any time, if any of
the conditions necessary for the issuance thereof or any terms of this article
are violated.
A. Notice shall be given as a Class 3 notice, as described in § 985.07, Wis.
Stats.
B. The cost of publication of such notices shall be deposited by the
applicant in advance.
C. A public hearing shall be held on the date specified in the notices or any
adjourned date. However, such public hearing shall be merely advisory
in regard to affecting any action which may be taken by the Village
Board upon such application.
A. The Village Board reserves the right to require the applicant to post a
bond, the condition of which will be that this article shall be observed
and that the dumping or disposal plan will be carried out and any
penalties imposed shall be paid; if there is a violation of this article or if
the dumping or disposal plan is not carried out, the Village Board shall
have the right to revoke the dumping or disposal permit and, if
necessary, obtain a court order terminating such dumping or disposal
operation; and if, after a reasonable demand, the owner of the land does
not cover the dumping or disposal area in accordance with the dumping
or disposal plan, the Village Board shall have the right to correct the
violation and to charge the expense against the bond.
B. The applicant for a dumping or disposal permit, in making the
application, grants to the Village of East Troy the right to go on the land
and carry out the dumping or disposal plan, if the owner or occupant of
the land fails to do so after reasonable notice is given.
§ 470-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-36
1:535
§ 470-36. State regulations applicable.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to limit or restrict the application
of any state law or administrative regulation of any state agency regulating
the subject of this article.
§ 470-37. Landfill negotiations.
Any person desiring to negotiate with the Village of East Troy for the
purpose of siting a landfill or landfill expansion under § 289.33, Wis. Stats.,
shall also comply with the following requirements:
A. Post a fee set by the Village Board with the Village of East Troy which
shall be set aside for negotiating expenses of the negotiating
committee, said sum to be separate from, and in addition to, other
permit fees required by state, county or Village ordinances, regulations
or statutes.248
B. Execute an agreement to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the
Village of East Troy, its agents and employees, as well as the members
of the negotiating committee, from any and all liability in any way
related to the proposed solid waste disposal facility or the review or
negotiation thereof.
C. Supply sufficient sureties, bonds or proof of insurance in an amount of
no less than $3,000,000, in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney, to
establish the financial viability of the applicant to construct and operate
the site, as well as undertake its responsibilities set forth in Subsection
B of this section.
D. Provide an environmental assessment of the proposed solid waste
disposal facility, or any expansion thereof, demonstrating that the same
will not have any substantial impact on the environment or local
property values or any adverse impact on any resident residing within
one mile of the proposed facility.
248. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 470-36 EAST TROY CODE § 470-37
1:536
Chapter 475
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 400. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 495.
§ 475-1. Water Utility regulations and rates.
§ 475-2. Cross-connection control.
A. Public Service Commission rates, regulations and rules adopted. The
State of Wisconsin Public Service Commission rates, regulations and
rules currently, and as they may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein as though fully set forth.
B. Water rates. All rate schedules are contained in the rate file set forth by
the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin for the East Troy Water
Utility. The schedules are on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
C. Water service. All persons now receiving water supply from the East
Troy Water Utility, or who may request service in the future, shall be
considered as having agreed to be bound by the rules and regulations
as filed with the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin. [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
D. Penalties. Penalties for violation of this section shall be as provided in
§ 1-4 of this Code.
A. Definition. A cross-connection shall be defined as any physical
connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate systems,
one of which contains potable water from the Village water system and
the other water from a private source, water of unknown or
questionable safety, or steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there may
be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending
on the pressure differential between the two systems.
B. Prohibition. No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to
be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any crossconnection.
No interconnection shall be established whereby potable
water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than
the regular public water supply of the Village may enter the supply or
distribution system of said municipality, unless such private, auxiliary
or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of
such supply shall have been approved by the East Troy Municipal Water
Utility and by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, in
accordance with § NR 810.15(2), Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 470-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-2
1:537
§ 475-3. Connection to public water supply; private wells.
C. Cross-connection inspections. It shall be the duty of the Director of
Public Works to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by
the public water system where cross-connection with the public water
system is deemed possible.249
D. Backflow prevention device required. All buildings connected to the
Village of East Troy public water supply shall be equipped with
backflow prevention devices, as designated by the Village Building
Inspector or the Village Director of Public Works or their
representatives. All such devices shall meet Wisconsin Department of
Safety and Professional Services requirements and shall be installed
within 30 days of written notice to the owner of such property to correct
such deficiency.
E. Discontinuance of service; notice; hearing.
(1) The East Troy Municipal Water Utility is hereby authorized and
directed to discontinue water service to any property wherein any
connection in violation of this section exists and to take such other
precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger
of contamination of the public water system. Water service shall be
discontinued only after reasonable notice and opportunity for
hearing under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., except as provided hereinafter.
Water service to such property shall not be restored until the crossconnection(
s) has been eliminated in compliance with the
provisions of this section.
(2) If it is determined by the Building Inspector or Director of Public
Works, or their representatives, that a cross-connection endangers
public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate action, and
a written finding to that effect is filed with the Village Clerk, and a
copy is delivered to the customer's premises, service may be
immediately discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity
for hearing under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., within 10 days of such
emergency discontinuance. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
A. Definition. "Well" means an excavation or opening in the ground made
by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods for the purpose of
obtaining groundwater.
B. Compliance.
(1) General. No new private well or pump for such a well shall be
constructed or installed, nor shall any such existing well or pump
be maintained, except in compliance with the provision of this
249. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-2 EAST TROY CODE § 475-3
1:538
section. All wells and pumps, whether new or existing, shall require
a well operation and/or a pump permit.
(2) Mandatory compliance.
(a) The owners of all houses, buildings, or other structures used
for or usable for human habitation, or for the conduct of any
trade, business or industry, located within the Village and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is
located a water main are required at the owner's expense to
connect to the Village public water supply, in accordance with
this section, within one year after the public water supply is
accessible thereto.
(b) The Village Building Inspector shall provide official notification
to such owner or his agent by registered mail addressed to the
last known address of the owner or his agent of the
requirement to make connection to the public water supply.
The notice shall direct the owner or his agent to connect the
building to such main in the manner prescribed by the Building
Inspector and to install such facilities as may be reasonably
necessary to furnish an adequate supply of pure water for
drinking and to prevent creation of a health nuisance.
(c) The Village shall provide official notification to such owners of
the requirement to make connection to the public water supply.
If the owner fails to have the connection made, after expiration
of the time provided by the notice, the Village may bring an
action against the owner for violation of this section or may
cause connection to be made by a licensed plumber, under the
direction of the Village, and charge the cost of such connection
as a special tax against the property.
(d) The owner or his agent may, within 30 days after completion of
the work, file a written option with the Village Treasurer
stating that he cannot pay the cost of connection in one lump
sum and electing that such sum be levied in five equal annual
installments, with interest at the rate of the Village's current
cost of borrowing plus 2% per annum from the date of
completion of the work, to be placed on the tax roll. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(e) By adoption of this section, the Village determines and ordains
that the requirement to connect to the public water supply is
necessary for the preservation of public health, comfort and
safety.
(f) Where public water supply is not available, and will not be
available in a reasonable time, a private water supply system
may be used until such time that a public water supply system
becomes available. Private water supply systems shall be used
§ 475-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-3
1:539
and installed in accordance with Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis.
Adm. Code.
(3) Exceptions to mandatory compliance.
(a) Upon application to the Village Clerk, exception from
mandatory compliance may be permitted based upon the
following criteria: the property which is otherwise subject to
mandatory compliance is at least five acres in area, the
structure to be served is a single-family residence and the
building site of the residence is at least 400 feet from the
public water supply. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
(b) If the property which is otherwise subject to mandatory
compliance meets the criteria enumerated in Subsection
B(3)(a), the Village may grant permission for the installation of
a private water supply system for a period of five years
following the installation of the private water supply system,
unless the property is transferred, conveyed and/or sold during
this period or the private water supply system requires
reconstruction during this period. At the end of the five-year
period, the Village may require that the residence be
connected to the public water supply system if the property is
then served by such a system or may renew such permit for an
additional five-year period if the requirements of Subsection E
have been met.
(c) All private water supply systems permitted under this
subsection shall be used and installed in accordance with Chs.
NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(4) Abandonment. All private wells located on any premises which is
served by the public water system of the Village shall be properly
abandoned and filled. Only those wells for which a well operation
permit has been granted by the Village Building Inspector may be
exempted from this requirement, subject to conditions of
maintenance and operation.
C. Application for construction or installation permit. Application for a
permit for construction of a well or installation of a pump shall be made
by the property owner or his/her agent to the Village Building Inspector
prior to commencement of the well construction or pump installation
and shall include the following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant, owner of the site and installer,
and any state license held by him/her.
(2) Description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded
subdivision, or by metes and bounds referenced to the U.S. Public
Land Survey.
§ 475-3 EAST TROY CODE § 475-3
1:540
(3) Description of the work to be performed.
(4) Plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor licensed in Wisconsin, or
other map drawn to scale and approved by the Village Building
Inspector, showing the location, property boundaries, dimensions
and distances of the following: [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
(a) Subject site.
(b) Location of the well or pump.
(c) Location and elevation of any flood hazard areas.
(d) Location of existing and proposed buildings on the site.
(e) Location and distance to any source of contamination
identified in § NR 812.08(4), Wis. Adm. Code.
(5) Appropriate fee for construction of a well, installation of a pump
and renewal of an existing permit (which includes a test kit)
according to the fee schedule on file in the Village Clerk's office. A
double fee may be charged if work is started before a permit is
applied for and issued. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
D. Construction and inspection of new wells.
(1) Location, construction and materials. Well and pump location,
construction and materials shall be as specified in Ch. NR 812, Wis.
Adm. Code; provided, however, that all new wells installed shall be
constructed in accordance with those standards applicable to
potable water supply wells.
(2) Sample and reports. Well water samples shall be submitted to the
State Laboratory of Hygiene and well construction reports shall be
submitted to the State Department of Natural Resources and the
well owner, as specified in § NR 812.22(6) and (7), Wis. Adm. Code.
Copies should be issued to the Village Building Inspector and
Director of Public Works.250
(3) Inspection. The Village Building Inspector, or his/her designee,
shall inspect or cause the inspection of all private water supply
systems after construction, but before backfilling, no later than the
end of the next workday, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays, after receiving notice from the contractor in charge.
E. Well operation permits. A well operation permit shall be granted to a
new or existing well owner not served by the Village public water
supply system, and a well operation permit may be granted to a well
250. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-3
1:541
owner served by a Village public water supply to operate a well for
a period not to exceed five years and may be renewed for successive
five-year terms thereafter, if the following requirements are met for
the original permit and each renewal and application is made on forms
provided by the Village Building Inspector:
(1) The well and pump installation meet the requirements of Ch. NR
812, Wis. Adm. Code, and a well constructor's report is on file with
the Department of Natural Resources, or certification of the
acceptability of the well has been granted by the Department of
Natural Resources.251
(2) The well has a history of producing safe water and presently
produces bacteriologically safe water, as evidenced by one sample.
(3) The proposed use of the well can be justified as being necessary in
addition to water provided by the public water system under Ch.
NR 811, Wis. Adm. Code.
(4) No cross-connection shall exist between the piping of the public
water system and the private well as verified by an annual
inspection by the Village Building Inspector.
(5) The fee for each permit or renewal shall be determined by the
Village Board of Trustees from time to time and shall be paid at the
time application is made. The fee includes testing one water
sampling by the Village of East Troy Water Utility.252
(6) Wells unable to pass the safe water sample standards will be
required to be abandoned within 60 days of formal notification of
the Village of East Troy. If not abandoned, the Village will abandon
at the owner's expense.
F. Well abandonment.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to prevent unused and/
or improperly constructed wells from serving as a passage for
contaminated surface or near surface waters or other materials to
reach the usable groundwater.
(2) Methods. All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this section
shall be abandoned according to the procedures and methods of
Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code. All debris, pump, piping, unsealed
liners and any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing
operations shall be removed prior to abandonment. The filling must
be observed by the Village Building Inspector, and said Building
Inspector shall be provided with 48 hours' prior notice of the filling
of the well.
251. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
252. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-3 EAST TROY CODE § 475-3
1:542
§ 475-4. Emergency water regulation. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
The Director of Public Works is authorized to create, implement and
maintain regulations on the outdoor use of water provided by the East Troy
Water Utility as may be necessary to conserve the capacity and pressure of
the water supply for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
These regulations may apply to, but are not limited to, the sprinkling of
lawns, gardens, shrubs and trees, car washing, filling of swimming pools,
bulk water purchases, and installation of new lawns; prohibition of such
uses completely in periods of emergency; irrigation of crops; and
commercial car washes that recycle water. These regulations shall be
approved by a majority vote of the Village Board and shall be filed in the
office of the Village Clerk.
§ 475-5. Water softener regulations. [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-03]
All water softeners installed in residential and commercial buildings after
April 1, 2014, shall regenerate water based upon a metering device or
sensor or be equipped with a regeneration tank within the contents of the
tank that can be removed and disposed of off site. Water softeners which
regenerate based on a time clock are prohibited.
(3) Reports and inspection. An abandonment report form, supplied by
the Department of Natural Resources, shall be submitted by the
well owner to the Village Building Inspector and the Department of
Natural Resources within 10 days of the completion of the well
abandonment. Said forms shall be available from the Village
Building Inspector.
G. Violations. It shall be unlawful to construct or use any new or existing
private water supply system in violation of any provisions of this
section. In addition, it shall be unlawful to resist, obstruct or interfere
with the Village Building Inspector in the discharge of his/her duties or
to neglect, refuse or fail to obey the Building Inspector's orders
pertaining to his/her duties. The Building Inspector shall investigate
violations of this section and is specifically authorized to issue citations
therefor.
§ 475-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-5
1:543
Part III: Land Use and Development
Chapter 483
EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 210.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 495.
Wellhead protection — See Ch. 502.
§ 475-5 EAST TROY CODE § 475-5
1:544
ARTICLE I
Construction Site Erosion Control
§ 483-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Construction Site Erosion Control
Ordinance" and may be referred to herein as "this article."
§ 483-2. Authority.
§ 483-3. Jurisdiction.
This article applies to land disturbing construction activity on construction
sites located within the municipal boundaries of the Village of East Troy.
§ 483-4. Legislative findings.
The Village Board finds that runoff from land disturbing construction
activities can carry sediment and other pollutants to the waters of the state
in the Village of East Troy.
§ 483-5. Purpose.
This article is intended to further the maintenance of safe and healthful
conditions; prevent and control water pollution; prevent and control soil
erosion; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building
sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and
scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth, by minimizing the
amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or discharged
from land disturbing construction activity to waters of the state in the
Village of East Troy.
§ 483-6. Applicability.
A. This article is adopted by the Village Board under the authority granted
by § 61.354, Wis. Stats. This article supersedes all provisions of an
ordinance previously enacted under § 61.35, Wis. Stats., that relate to
construction site erosion control. Except as otherwise specified in
§ 61.354, Wis. Stats., § 61.35, Wis. Stats., applies to this article and to
any amendments to this article.
B. The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the Village of East Troy.
C. The requirements of this article do not preempt more stringent erosion
and sediment control requirements that may be imposed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules,
permits, or approvals, including those authorized under §§ 281.16 and
283.33, Wis. Stats., or targeted nonagricultural performance standards
promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources under § NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 483-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-6
1:545
§ 483-7. Compliance with permit required.
Except as specifically provided in this article, all land disturbing
construction activities must be performed in compliance with a permit
issued by the Village Engineer.
§ 483-8. Liability.
The Village of East Troy and its officials, agencies, employees, agents, and
assigns shall not be liable for any damage or loss of property value that may
occur as a result of reliance upon and conformance with this article.
A. General applicability. This article applies to the following:
(1) A construction site which has five or more acres of land disturbing
construction activity.
(2) A construction site which has one or more acres of land disturbing
construction activity after March 10, 2003.
(3) A construction site of any size that, in the opinion of the Village
Engineer, is likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity
of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, causes
undue channel erosion, increases water pollution by scouring or
the transportation of particulate matter, or endangers property or
public safety.
B. Exemptions. This article does not apply to the following:
(1) Land disturbing construction activity that includes the construction
of a building and is otherwise regulated by the Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services in Chs. SPS 320 to
SPS 325 or SPS 361 to SPS 366, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes or
regulations from the requirement to have a national pollutant
discharge elimination system permit issued under 40 CFR 122 for
land disturbing construction activity.
(3) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
(4) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
(5) Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of land
disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility.
(6) Activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under
§ 227.01(1), Wis. Stats., but also including the office of district
attorney, which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a
memorandum of understanding entered into under § 281.33(2),
Wis. Stats.
§ 483-6 EAST TROY CODE § 483-9
1:546
§ 483-9. Definitions.
The following terms used in this article shall have the meanings indicated:
AGRICULTURAL FACILITIES AND PRACTICES — The meaning given in
§ 281.16(1), Wis. Stats.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A calendar year of precipitation,
excluding snow, which is considered typical.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize
soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
BUSINESS DAY — A day the office of the Village Engineer is routinely and
customarily open for business.
CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land disturbing
construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
(Also see "stop-work order.")
CONSTRUCTION SITE — An area upon which one or more land disturbing
construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger
common plan of development or sale where multiple separate and distinct
land disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different
times on different schedules but under one plan.
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by the
action of wind, water, ice, or gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan developed to address
pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of soil particles or rock
fragments during construction.
FINAL STABILIZATION — All land disturbing construction activities at the
construction site have been completed and a uniform, perennial, vegetative
cover has been established, with a density of at least 70% of the cover,
for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or
employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
LAND DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and
lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters
of the state. "Land disturbing construction activity" includes clearing and
grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading
activities.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP) — A level of implementing best
management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified
in this article which takes into account the best available technology, costeffectiveness,
and other competing issues, such as human safety and
welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic properties, and
geographic features. Maximum extent practicable (MEP) allows flexibility
in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the
performance standard and site conditions.
§ 483-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-9
1:547
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
PERMIT — A written authorization made by the Village Engineer to the
applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge
post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
POLLUTANT — The meaning given in § 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
POLLUTION — The meaning given in § 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any entity holding fee title to the property or
performing services to meet the performance standards of this article
through a contract or other agreement.
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation, including rain, snow, or ice melt
or similar water, that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized
flow.
SEDIMENT — Settleable solid material that is transported by runoff,
suspended within runoff, or deposited by runoff away from its original
location.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances,
including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the
following criteria:
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land disturbing construction activity is proposed in the permit
application.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the Village Engineer that
requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped. (Also see
"cease and desist order.")
TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design, predicted
performance and operation, and maintenance specifications for a material,
device, or method.
VILLAGE ENGINEER — The individual so designated by the Village Board.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The meaning given in § 281.01(18), Wis. Stats.
WIS. ADM. CODE — An abbreviation for Wisconsin Administrative Code.
WIS. STATS. — An abbreviation for Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 483-10. Technical standards.
A. Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
B. Is not part of a combined sewer system.
C. Is not draining to a stormwater treatment device or system.
D. Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
§ 483-9 EAST TROY CODE § 483-10
1:548
§ 483-11. Performance standards.
A. Best management practices used to comply with this article shall meet
the design criteria, standards, and specifications based on any of the
following:
(1) Applicable design criteria, standards, and specifications identified
in Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice
Handbook (WDNR Pub. WR-222 November 1993 Revision).
(2) Other design guidance and technical standards identified or
developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
under Subchapter V of Ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
(3) Other technical standards as approved by the Village Engineer.
B. For the purposes of this article, average annual basis is calculated using
the appropriate average annual rainfall or runoff factor, also referred to
as the R factor, or an equivalent design storm using a Type II
distribution, with consideration given to the geographic location of the
site and the period of disturbance.
A. Generally. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed to
achieve, to the maximum extent practicable, a reduction of 80% of the
sediment load carried in runoff, on an average annual basis, as
compared with no sediment or erosion controls until the construction
site has undergone final stabilization. (Soil loss prediction tools that
estimate the sediment load leaving the construction site under varying
land and management conditions, or methodology identified in
Subchapter V of Ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code, may be used to calculate
sediment reduction.) No person shall be required to exceed an eightypercent
sediment reduction to meet the requirements of this section.
Erosion and sediment control best management practices may be used
alone or in combination to meet the requirements of this section. Credit
toward meeting the sediment reduction shall be given for limiting the
duration or area, or both, of land disturbing construction activity, or
other appropriate mechanism.
(1) If best management practices cannot be designed and implemented
to reduce the sediment load by 80%, on an average annual basis,
the plan shall include a written and site-specific explanation as to
why the eighty-percent reduction goal is not attainable, and the
sediment load shall be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
(2) Where appropriate, the plan shall include sediment controls to do
all of the following to the maximum extent practicable:
(a) Prevent tracking of sediment from the construction site onto
roads and other paved surfaces.
(b) Prevent the discharge of sediment as part of site dewatering.
§ 483-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-11
1:549
§ 483-12. Administration.
§ 483-13. Application and review procedure.
(c) Protect the separate storm sewer drain inlet structure from
receiving sediment.
(3) The use, storage, and disposal of chemicals, cement, and other
compounds and materials used on the construction site shall be
managed during the construction period to prevent their entrance
into waters of the state. However, projects that require the
placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as
constructing bridge footings or best management practices
installations, are not prohibited by this subsection.
(4) Velocity dissipation devices shall be placed at discharge locations
and along the length of any outfall channel, as necessary, to provide
a nonerosive flow from the structure to a watercourse so that the
natural physical and biological characteristics and functions are
maintained and protected.
B. Location. The best management practices used to comply with this
article shall be located prior to runoff entering waters of the state.
C. Alternate requirements. The Village Engineer may establish
requirements more stringent than those set forth in this article if he or
she determines, on a case-by-case basis, that an added level of
protection is needed to protect sensitive resources.
A. The Village Engineer has the authority to administer and enforce the
provisions of this article and may authorize subordinates to perform the
duties enumerated herein.
B. The Village Engineer is authorized to prepare an application form and
may amend it from time to time.
A. The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an
application for an erosion control permit.
(1) Presubmittal meeting. The applicant or the applicant's agent may
meet with the Village Engineer to review applicable regulations
and procedures and the project.
(2) Submittal of application materials. The applicant shall submit a
completed application and other required materials to the Village
Engineer along with the application fee as may be established by
the Village Board.
(3) Completeness check. Within 10 business days of submittal, the
Village Engineer shall determine whether the application is
complete or incomplete. If the Village Engineer determines that the
application is incomplete, he or she shall notify the applicant of the
§ 483-11 EAST TROY CODE § 483-13
1:550
§ 483-14. Permission to inspect site.
By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the Village
Engineer to enter the site to obtain information required for the review of
the erosion and sediment control plan. Further, issuance of a permit under
the authority of this article authorizes the Village Engineer to enter the site
to ensure compliance with the same.
§ 483-15. Imposition of conditions.
In addition to the requirements set forth in this article, the Village Engineer
may impose one or more conditions of approval when needed to assure
compliance with the performance standards in § 483-11 of this article.
§ 483-16. Financial guarantee.
As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the Village Engineer
may require the applicant to provide a surety bond, an irrevocable letter
of credit, or other acceptable financial guarantee in an amount deemed
appropriate by the Village Engineer to ensure execution of the approved
erosion control plan and any permit conditions.
§ 483-17. Obligation of responsible party.
If the Village Engineer approves an erosion and sediment control plan, the
responsible party shall comply with each of the following requirements:
deficiencies. If the application is incomplete, the applicant has
three months to resubmit the application or forfeit the application
fee. The Village Engineer shall take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete
application shall be retained as a public record.
(4) Review and decision. The Village Engineer shall render a decision
based on the requirements of this article within six business days of
when the application is deemed complete. If the application is
denied, the Village Engineer shall state in writing the reasons for
denial.
B. The Village Engineer may request additional information from the
applicant. If additional information is submitted, the Village Engineer
shall have six business days from the date the additional information is
received to render a decision.
A. Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment control plan at the
construction site.
B. Notify the Village Engineer within 48 hours of commencing any land
disturbing construction activity.
C. Install all best management practices as identified in the approved
erosion and sediment control plan and maintain them throughout the
§ 483-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-17
1:551
§ 483-18. Duration of permit.
A permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period of 180 calendar
days, or the length of the building permit or other approval, whichever
is longer, from the date of issuance. The Village Engineer may extend
the period one or more times for up to an additional 180 calendar days.
The Village Engineer may require additional BMPs as a condition of the
extension if they are necessary to meet the requirements of this article.
§ 483-19. Erosion and sediment control plan.
duration of the construction activities until the site has undergone final
stabilization.
D. Notify the Village Engineer of completion of any best management
practices within 14 calendar days after their installation.
E. Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, best
management practices, and other facilities identified in the erosion and
sediment control plan.
F. Notify the Village Engineer if there is a change in design, construction,
operation, or maintenance at the site which has the reasonable
potential for the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state and
which has not otherwise been addressed in the plan.
G. Notify the Village Engineer if the actions required by the plan do not
adequately reduce the impacts of pollutants carried by construction site
runoff.
H. Obtain permission in writing from the Village Engineer prior to any
modification of an approved erosion and sediment control plan.
I. Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and
drainageways resulting from land disturbing construction activities and
document repairs in a site erosion control log.
J. Inspect any best management practices within 24 hours after each rain
of 0.5 inch or more which results in runoff during active construction
periods and at least once each week make needed repairs and
document the findings of the inspections in a site erosion control log
with the date of inspection, the name of the person conducting the
inspection, and a description of the present phase of the construction at
the site.
K. Allow the Village Engineer to enter the site for the purpose of
inspecting compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan or for
performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with
the control plan.
A. Preparation. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared by
an individual qualified to prepare such plan.
§ 483-17 EAST TROY CODE § 483-19
1:552
B. Generally. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed and
implemented to meet the performance standards in § 483-11 of this
article from the commencement of land disturbing construction
activities up to final stabilization of the site.
C. Standard erosion and sediment control plan. A standard erosion and
sediment control plan shall include, at a minimum, the following items:
(1) The name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site
and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with
the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm.
(2) The start and end dates for construction.
(3) Description of the site and the nature of the construction activity,
including representation of the limits of land disturbance on a
United States Geological Service 7.5 minute series topographic
map, or equivalent.
(4) A sequence of construction of the development site, including
stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities,
infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping.
Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will
begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of
clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control
measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation.
(5) Estimates of the total area of the site and the total area of the site
that is expected to be disturbed by construction activities.
(6) Estimates, including calculations, if any, of the runoff coefficient of
the site before and after construction activities are completed.
(7) Calculations to show the expected percent reduction in the average
annual sediment load carried in runoff as compared to no sediment
or erosion controls.
(8) Existing data describing the surface soil and subsoils.
(9) Depth to groundwater, as indicated by Natural Resources
Conservation Service soil information where available.
(10)Name of the immediate named receiving water from the United
States Geological Service 7.5 minute series topographic maps.
(11) A description of appropriate controls and measures that will be
performed at the site to prevent pollutants from reaching waters of
the state. The plan shall clearly describe the appropriate control
measures for each major activity and the timing during the
construction process that the measures will be implemented. The
description of erosion controls shall include, when appropriate, the
following minimum requirements:
§ 483-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-19
1:553
(a) Description of interim and permanent stabilization practices,
including a practice implementation schedule. Site plans shall
ensure that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable
and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized.
(b) Description of structural practices to divert flow away from
exposed soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from the site. Unless otherwise
specifically approved in writing by the Village Engineer,
structural measures shall be installed on upland soils.
(c) Management of overland flow at all sites, unless otherwise
controlled by outfall controls.
(d) Trapping of sediment in channelized flow.
(e) Staging construction to limit bare areas subject to erosion.
(f) Protection of downslope drainage inlets where they occur.
(g) Minimization of tracking at all sites.
(h) Cleanup of off-site sediment deposits.
(i) Proper disposal of building and waste materials at all sites.
(j) Stabilization of drainageways.
(k) Control of soil erosion from dirt stockpiles.
(l) Installation of permanent stabilization practices as soon as
possible after final grading.
(m) Minimization of dust to the maximum extent practicable.
(12) A site map at a scale not greater than 100 feet per inch and at a
contour interval not to exceed five feet. The following information
shall be depicted on the site map:
(a) Boundaries of the construction site.
(b) Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and engineered
drainage systems, roads, and surface waters.
(c) Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other
watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site.
(d) Any identified one-hundred-year floodplains, flood-fringes and
floodways on and immediately adjacent to the site.
(e) Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after
major grading activities.
(f) Areas of soil disturbance.
§ 483-19 EAST TROY CODE § 483-19
1:554
§ 483-20. Required revisions to approved plan.
The responsible party shall work with the Village Engineer to amend an
approved plan if:
§ 483-21. Application fees and other charges.
(g) Location of major structural and nonstructural controls
identified in the plan.
(h) Location of areas where stabilization practices will be
employed.
(i) Areas that will be vegetated following construction.
(j) The location of all surface waters (e.g., lakes, streams,
wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses) and
wetlands on and within one mile of the construction site.
(k) The locations where stormwater is discharged to a surface
water or wetland.
(l) An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the entire
construction site map.
D. Erosion and sediment control plan statement. For each construction
site identified under § 483-6A(3) of this article, an erosion and sediment
control plan statement shall be prepared with the following:
(1) A description of the site including a site map described in this
section.
(2) A description of the best management practices that will be used to
meet the requirements of this article.
(3) A site development schedule.
A. There is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance at
the site which has the reasonable potential for the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the state and which has not otherwise been
addressed in the plan;
B. The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of pollutants
carried by construction site runoff; or
C. The Village Engineer notifies the applicant of changes needed in the
plan.
A. Assessment of fees. From time to time, the Village Board may by
resolution establish application fees and other charges it deems
necessary in the administration of this article.
B. Timing for payment. Application fees shall be paid at the time the
application is submitted for review.
§ 483-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-21
1:555
§ 483-22. On-site inspection.
The Village Engineer should inspect a construction site that holds a permit
under this article at least once a month during the period starting March
1 and ending October 31 and at least two times during the period starting
November 1 and ending February 28 to ensure compliance with the
approved erosion and sediment control plan. Failure of the Village Engineer
to conduct such inspections shall not invalidate any enforcement
proceeding.
§ 483-23. Other required approvals.
It is the responsibility of those undertaking development projects within
the Village to obtain all applicable permits and other approvals as may be
required by the Village of East Troy, Walworth County, and federal and state
authorities as may be required.
§ 483-24. Administrative appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals established under Chapter 510, Zoning, of this
Code shall hear and decide administrative appeals where it is alleged that
there is error in any order, decision, or determination made by the Village
Engineer in administering this article, except for cease and desist orders
obtained under § 483-26 of this article. The procedures and requirements
established in Chapter 510 shall apply.
§ 483-25. Variances.
The Zoning Board of Appeals established under Chapter 510, Zoning, of this
Code shall hear and decide variances. The procedures and requirements
established in Chapter 510 shall apply, except that in making its decision
the Board shall only grant a variance if the requested variance is not
contrary to the public interest and where owing to special conditions a
literal enforcement of the provisions of the article will likely result in an
unnecessary hardship.
§ 483-26. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
C. Doubling of application fee. If an activity which requires prior
authorization under this article is started before the authorization is
granted, the application fee is automatically doubled unless the Village
Board specifically establishes a different fee by resolution. Payment of
such fee shall not release the applicant from full compliance with this
article nor from prosecution for violation of this article.
D. Refunds. Application fees are nonrefundable, except when the
application and fee were accepted by the Village Engineer or Village
staff in error.
A. Special inspection warrant. If the Village Engineer believes that a land
disturbing construction activity regulated by this article is being done
§ 483-21 EAST TROY CODE § 483-26
1:556
so without a permit as required by this article, he or she shall obtain
a special inspection warrant pursuant to the requirements set forth in
§ 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
B. Stop-work order.
(1) The Village Engineer may post a stop-work order if any of the
following occurs:
(a) Any land disturbing construction activity regulated under this
article is being undertaken without a permit.
(b) The erosion and sediment control plan is not being
implemented in a good faith manner.
(c) The conditions of the permit are not being met.
(2) If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a
stop-work order posted under this section or fails to comply with
the erosion and sediment control plan or permit conditions, the
Village Engineer may revoke an approved permit.
(3) If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued, does not
cease the activity after being notified by the Village Engineer, or if a
responsible party violates a stop-work order posted under
Subsection B(1), the Village Engineer may request the Village
Attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with
jurisdiction. The Village Engineer may retract the stop-work order
issued under this subsection.
C. Work performed by Village. After posting a stop-work order under
Subsection B, the Village Engineer may issue a notice of intent to the
responsible party of its intent to perform work necessary to comply with
this article. The Village Engineer may go on the land and commence the
work after issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work performed
under this subsection by the Village Engineer, plus interest at the rate
authorized by the Village Board, shall be billed to the responsible party.
In the event a responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the Village
Clerk-Treasurer shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect
it as a special assessment against the property pursuant to the
procedures and requirements set forth in Subchapter VII of Ch. 66, Wis.
Stats.
D. Forfeitures. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each day
a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
E. Other remedies. Compliance with this article may also be enforced by
injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to
prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before initiating
proceedings related to a court injunction.
§ 483-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-26
1:557

ARTICLE II
Post-Construction Stormwater Management
§ 483-27. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Ordinance" and may be referred to herein as "this article."
§ 483-28. Authority.
§ 483-29. Jurisdiction.
This article applies to all lands located within the municipal boundaries
of the Village of East Troy, the boundaries of which may change through
annexations and/or detachments.
§ 483-30. Legislative findings.
The Village Board finds that uncontrolled post-construction runoff has a
significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and general
welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of
natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can:
A. This article is adopted by the Village Board under the authority granted
by § 61.354, Wis. Stats. This article supersedes all provisions of any
ordinance previously enacted under § 61.35., Wis. Stats., that relate to
stormwater management regulations. Except as otherwise specified in
§ 61.354, Wis. Stats., § 61.35, Wis. Stats., applies to this article and to
any amendments to this article.
B. The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the Village of East Troy.
C. The requirements of this article do not preempt more stringent
stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules,
permits or approvals, including those authorized under §§ 281.16 and
283.33, Wis. Stats., or targeted nonagricultural performance standards
promulgated by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under
§ NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion,
increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge,
diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperature;
B. Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life,
and recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading
of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria,
pathogens and other urban pollutants;
C. Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by
increasing pollutant loads;
§ 483-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-30
1:559
§ 483-31. Purpose and intent.
§ 483-32. Applicability.
D. Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading;
E. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
overtaxing storm sewers, drainageways, and other minor drainage
facilities;
F. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
increasing major flood peaks and volumes; and
G. Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence
and levels of flooding.
A. Purpose. The general purpose of this article is to establish long-term
post-construction runoff management requirements that will diminish
the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the aquatic
environment. Specific purposes are to:
(1) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater; prevent and
control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect
spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites,
placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and
scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth; and
(3) Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage
facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel
erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of
particulate matter; and prevent conditions that endanger
downstream property.
B. Intent. It is the intent of the Village of East Troy that this article
regulates post-construction stormwater discharges to waters of the
state. This article may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The Village of
East Troy recognizes, however, that the preferred method of achieving
the stormwater performance standards set forth in this article is
through the preparation and implementation of comprehensive,
systems-level stormwater management plans that cover hydrologic
units, such as watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such
plans may prescribe regional stormwater devices, practices or systems,
any of which may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site
prior to discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in
conformance with the performance standards developed under
§ 281.16, Wis. Stats., for regional stormwater management measures
and have been approved by the Village Board, it is the intent of this
article that the approved plan be used to identify post-construction
management measures acceptable for the community.
§ 483-30 EAST TROY CODE § 483-32
1:560
A. Generally. Where not otherwise limited by law, this article applies after
final stabilization to a site of land disturbing construction activity
meeting any of the criteria in this subsection, unless the site is
otherwise exempt under Subsection B.
(1) A post-construction site that had five or more acres of land
disturbing construction activity.
(2) A post-development construction site that had one or more acres of
land disturbing construction activity after March 10, 2003.
Note to users: The five- and one-acre land disturbance thresholds
are consistent with state and federal laws regarding applicability
of construction site erosion control permits.
B. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the requirements of this
article:
(1) A redevelopment post-construction site with no increase in exposed
parking lots or roads.
(2) A post-construction site with less than 10% connected
imperviousness based on complete development of the postconstruction
site, provided that the cumulative area of all parking
lots and rooftops is less than one acre.
(3) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
(4) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
(5) Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of land
disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
(6) Underground utility construction such as water, sewer and fiber
optic lines. This exemption does not apply to the construction of
any aboveground structures associated with utility construction.
C. Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection A, this
article applies to a post-construction site of any size that, in the opinion
of the Village Engineer, is likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe
capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water,
that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by
scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or that endangers
property or public safety.
D. This article is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency,
as defined under § 227.01(1), Wis. Stats., but also including the office of
district attorney, which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a
memorandum of understanding entered into under § 281.33(2), Wis.
Stats. [The Wisconsin Department of Transportation (WisDOT) has
entered into a memorandum of understanding with the Wisconsin
§ 483-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-32
1:561
§ 483-33. Compliance with permit required.
No responsible party may undertake a land disturbing construction activity
without receiving a post-construction runoff permit from the Village
Engineer prior to commencing the proposed activity.
§ 483-34. Liability.
The Village of East Troy and its officials, agencies, employees, agents, and
assigns shall not be liable for any damage or loss of property value that may
occur as a result of reliance upon and conformance with this article.
§ 483-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL FACILITIES AND PRACTICES — The meaning given in
§ 281.16, Wis. Stats.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A calendar year of precipitation,
excluding snow, which is considered typical.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize
sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
BUSINESS DAY — A day the office of the Village Engineer is routinely and
customarily open for business.
CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land disturbing
construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM — A system for conveying both sanitary
sewage and stormwater runoff.
CONNECTED IMPERVIOUSNESS — An impervious surface that is directly
connected to a separate storm sewer or water of the state via an impervious
flow path.
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a
specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency,
and total depth of rainfall.
DEVELOPMENT — Residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land
uses and associated roads.
DIVISION OF LAND — A division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land by the
owner or the owner's agent, for any purpose, including sale or development.
EFFECTIVE INFILTRATION AREA — The area of the infiltration system that
is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access,
berms or pretreatment.
Department of Natural Resources that satisfies § 281.33(2), Wis. Stats.,
such that activities directed and supervised by WisDOT are exempt.]
§ 483-32 EAST TROY CODE § 483-35
1:562
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by the
action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
EXCEPTIONAL RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.11, Wis.
Adm. Code.
EXTRATERRITORIAL — The unincorporated area within three miles of the
corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city or within 1.5 miles of a
fourth-class city or village.
FINAL STABILIZATION — All land disturbing construction activities at the
construction site have been completed and a uniform, perennial, vegetative
cover has been established, with a density of at least 70% of the cover,
for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or
employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE — A performance bond, maintenance bond,
surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantee submitted
to the Village of East Troy by the responsible party to assure that the
requirements of this article are carried out in compliance with the
stormwater management plan.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff all or a large
portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops,
sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and streets are examples of areas that
typically are impervious.
INFILL AREA — An undeveloped area of land located within existing
development.
INFILTRATION — The entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the
soil.
INFILTRATION SYSTEM — A device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain
garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not
include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting
of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices,
such as swales or roadside channels, designed for conveyance and pollutant
removal only.
KARST FEATURE — An area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock
dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may
include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces,
sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets.
LAND DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover that may result in runoff and
lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters
of the state. "Land disturbing construction activity" includes clearing and
grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading
activities.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legal document that provides for longterm
maintenance of stormwater management practices.
§ 483-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-35
1:563
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP) — A level of implementing best
management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified
in this article which takes into account the best available technology, costeffectiveness
and other competing issues, such as human safety and
welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and
geographic features. Maximum extent practicable (MEP) allows flexibility
in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the
performance standard and site conditions.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Development resulting from the conversion of
previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses.
OFF SITE — Located outside the property boundary described in the permit
application.
ON SITE — Located within the property boundary described in the permit
application.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The meaning given in § NR 115.03(6),
Wis. Adm. Code.
OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.10, Wis.
Adm. Code.
PERCENT FINES — The percentage of a given sample of soil which passes
through a No. 200 sieve. [Percent fines can be determined using the
American Society for Testing and Materials, Volume 04.02, Test Method
C117-95, Standard Test Method for Materials Finer than 75-µm (No. 200)
Sieve in Mineral Aggregates by Washing. Copies can be obtained by
contacting the American Society for Testing and Materials, 100 Barr Harbor
Drive, Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959, or phone 610-832-9585, or online at
http://www.astm.org.]
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
PERMIT — A written authorization made by the Village Engineer to the
applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge
post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
PERMIT ADMINISTRATION FEE — A sum of money paid to the Village
Engineer by the permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the expenses
incurred by the Village in administering the permit.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff a small portion of
the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other
similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious.
POLLUTANT — The meaning given in § 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
POLLUTION — The meaning given in § 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE — A construction site following the completion
of land disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT CONDITION — The extent and distribution of land
cover types present before the initiation of land disturbing construction
§ 483-35 EAST TROY CODE § 483-35
1:564
activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are
managed in an environmentally sound manner.
PREVENTIVE ACTION LIMIT — The meaning given in § NR 140.05(17),
Wis. Adm. Code.
REDEVELOPMENT — Areas where development is replacing older
development.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any entity holding fee title to the property or
other person contracted or obligated by other agreement to implement and
maintain post-construction stormwater BMPs.
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation, including rain, snow or ice melt or
similar water, that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances,
including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which is designed or used
for collecting water or conveying runoff, is not part of a combined sewer
system, is not draining to a stormwater treatment device or system, and
discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land disturbing construction activity occurred.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the Village Engineer which
requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan designed
to reduce the discharge of pollutants from stormwater after the site has
undergone final stabilization following completion of the construction
activity.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A comprehensive plan
designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic
units on a regional or municipal scale.
TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design, predicted
performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material,
device or method.
TOP OF THE CHANNEL — An edge, or point on the landscape, landward
from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the state, where
the slope of the land begins to be less than 12% continually for at least 50
feet. If the slope of the land is 12% or less continually for the initial 50 feet,
landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of the channel is the
ordinary high-water mark.
TR-55 — The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55,
June 1986.
TYPE II DISTRIBUTION — A rainfall type curve as established in the United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical
§ 483-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-35
1:565
Paper 149, published 1973. The Type II curve is applicable to all of
Wisconsin and represents the most intense storm pattern.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The meaning given in § 281.01(18), Wis. Stats.
WIS. ADM. CODE — An abbreviation for Wisconsin Administrative Code.
WIS. STATS. — An abbreviation for Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 483-36. Technical standards.
The following methods shall be used in designing the water quality, peak
flow shaving and infiltration components of stormwater practices needed to
meet the water quality standards of this article:
§ 483-37. Performance standards.
A. Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Subchapter V of Ch.
NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other technical standards
may be used, provided that the methods have been approved by the
Village Engineer.
C. In this article, the following year and location best represent the
average annual rainfall: Milwaukee 1969 (March 28 to December 6).
A. Responsible party. The responsible party shall implement a postconstruction
stormwater management plan that incorporates the
requirements of this section.
B. Plan. A written stormwater management plan in accordance with
§ 483-43 shall be developed and implemented for each postconstruction
site.
C. Requirements. The stormwater management plan shall include the
following:
(1) Total suspended solids. Best management practices shall be
designed, installed and maintained to control total suspended
solids carried in runoff from the post-construction site as follows:
(a) For new development, by design, reduce to the maximum
extent practicable the total suspended solids load by 80%,
based on the average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed
an eighty-percent total suspended solids reduction to meet the
requirements of this subsection.
(b) For redevelopment, by design, reduce to the maximum extent
practicable the total suspended solids load by 40%, based on
the average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
§ 483-35 EAST TROY CODE § 483-37
1:566
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed
a forty-percent total suspended solids reduction to meet the
requirements of this subsection.
(c) For infill development under five acres that occurs within 10
years after October 1, 2002, by design, reduce to the maximum
extent practicable the total suspended solids load by 40%,
based on an average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed a
forty-percent total suspended solids reduction to meet the
requirements of this subsection.
(d) For infill development that occurs 10 or more years after
October 1, 2002, by design, reduce to the maximum extent
practicable the total suspended solids load by 80%, based on
an average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed
an eighty-percent total suspended solids reduction to meet the
requirements of this subsection.
(e) Notwithstanding Subsection C(1)(a) to (d), if the design cannot
achieve the applicable total suspended solids reduction as
specified in this subsection, the stormwater management plan
shall include a written and site-specific explanation why that
level of reduction is not attained, and the total suspended
solids load shall be reduced to the maximum extent
practicable.
(f) Pollutant loading models such as SLAMM, P8 or equivalent
methodology may be used to evaluate the efficiency of the
design in reducing total suspended solids.
(2) Peak discharge.
(a) By design, BMPs shall be employed to maintain or reduce the
peak runoff discharge rates, to the maximum extent
practicable, as compared to pre-development, conditionally the
two-, ten-, fifty- and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour design
storm applicable to the post-construction site. Predevelopment
conditions shall assume "good hydrologic
conditions" for appropriate land covers as identified in TR-55
or an equivalent methodology. The meanings of "hydrologic soil
group" and "runoff curve number" are as determined in TR-55.
However, when pre-development land cover is cropland, rather
than using TR-55 values for cropland, the runoff curve
numbers in Table 1 shall be used.
§ 483-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-37
1:567
Table 1: Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve
Numbers for Cropland Areas
Hydrologic soil
group A B C D
Runoff curve
number
56 70 79 83
Note: The curve numbers represent mid-range values for soils
under a good hydrologic condition where conservation
practices are used and are selected to be protective of the
resource waters.
(b) This subsection does not apply to any of the following:
[1] A post-construction site where the change in hydrology
due to development does not increase the existing surface
water elevation at any point within the downstream
receiving water by more than 0.01 of a foot for the twoyear,
twenty-four-hour storm event.
Note to users: Hydraulic models such as HEC-RAS or
another methodology may be used to determine the
change in surface water elevations.
[2] A redevelopment post-construction site.
[3] An infill development area less than five acres.
(3) Infiltration. Best management practices shall be designed,
installed, and maintained to infiltrate runoff to the maximum extent
practicable in accordance with the following, except as provided in
Subsections C(3)(e) to (h):
(a) For residential developments one of the following shall be met:
[1] Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume shall be at least 90% of
the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an
average annual rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement,
no more than 1% of the project site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
[2] Infiltrate 25% of the post-development runoff from the
two-year, twenty-four-hour design storm with a Type II
distribution. Separate curve numbers for pervious and
impervious surfaces shall be used to calculate runoff
volumes and not composite curve numbers as defined in
TR-55. However, when designing appropriate infiltration
systems to meet this requirement, no more than 1% of the
project site is required as an effective infiltration area.
§ 483-37 EAST TROY CODE § 483-37
1:568
(b) For nonresidential development, including commercial,
industrial and institutional development, one of the following
shall be met:
[1] Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume shall be at least 60% of
the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an
average annual rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement,
no more than 2% of the project site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
[2] Infiltrate 10% of the runoff from the two-year, twenty-fourhour
design storm with a Type II distribution. Separate
curve numbers for pervious and impervious surfaces shall
be used to calculate runoff volumes and not composite
curve numbers as defined in TR-55. However, when
designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this
requirement, no more than 2% of the project site is
required as an effective infiltration area.
(c) Pre-development condition shall be the same as in Subsection
C(2).
Note to users: A model that calculates runoff volume such as
SLAMM, P8, or an equivalent methodology may be used.
(d) Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for
parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in
commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will enter an
infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to
protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled
maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in accordance
with Subsection C(3)(h). Pretreatment options may include,
but are not limited to, oil/grease separation, sedimentation,
biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips.
Note to users: To achieve the infiltration requirement for the
parking lots or roads, maximum extent practicable should not
be interpreted to require significant topography changes that
create an excessive financial burden. To minimize potential
groundwater impacts, it is desirable to infiltrate the cleanest
runoff. To achieve this, a design may propose greater
infiltration of runoff from low pollutant sources such as roofs
and less from higher pollutant source areas such as parking
lots.
(e) The runoff from the following areas is prohibited from meeting
the requirements of this subsection:
§ 483-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-37
1:569
[1] Areas associated with Tier 1 industrial facilities identified
in § NR 216.21(2)(a), Wis. Adm. Code, including storage,
loading, rooftop and parking.
[2] Storage and loading areas of Tier 2 industrial facilities
identified in § NR 216.21(2)(b), Wis. Adm. Code.
Note to users: Runoff from Tier 2 parking and rooftop
areas may be infiltrated but may require pretreatment.
[3] Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas.
[4] Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet
downgradient of karst features.
[5] Areas with less than three feet separation distance from
the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of
seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock, except
that this subsection does not prohibit infiltration of roof
runoff.
[6] Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and
institutional parking lots and roads and residential arterial
roads with less than five feet separation distance from the
bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of
seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock.
[7] Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as
specified in § NR 811.16(4), Wis. Adm. Code, or within 100
feet of a private well as specified in § NR 812.08(4), Wis.
Adm. Code, for runoff infiltrated from commercial,
industrial and institutional land uses or regional devices
for residential development.
[8] Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in § NR
720.03(2), Wis. Adm. Code, are present in the soil through
which infiltration will occur.
[9] Any area where the soil does not exhibit one of the
following soil characteristics between the bottom of the
infiltration system and the seasonal high groundwater and
top of bedrock: at least a three-foot soil layer with 20%
fines or greater or at least a five-foot soil layer with 10%
fines or greater. This does not apply where the soil medium
within the infiltration system provides an equivalent level
of protection. This subsection does not prohibit infiltration
of roof runoff.
Note to users: The areas listed in this subsection are
prohibited from infiltrating runoff due to the potential for
groundwater contamination.
§ 483-37 EAST TROY CODE § 483-37
1:570
(f) Exemptions. The following are not required to meet the
requirements of this subsection:
[1] Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.6
inch per hour measured at the site.
[2] Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet
for commercial and industrial development.
[3] Redevelopment post-construction sites.
[4] Infill development areas less than five acres.
[5] Infiltration areas during periods when the soil on the site is
frozen.
[6] Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land
uses, and arterial residential roads.
(g) Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet
flushing, laundry or irrigation, such alternate use shall be
given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by
this subsection.
(h) Preventive action limit.
[1] Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this
subsection shall, to the extent technically and
economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants
infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance
with the preventive action limit at a point of standards
application in accordance with Ch. NR 140, Wis. Adm.
Code. However, if site-specific information indicates that
compliance with a preventive action limit is not
achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed or
shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum
extent practicable.
[2] Notwithstanding Subsection C(3)(h)[1], the discharge
from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard
at the point of standards application.
(4) Protective areas.
(a) "Protective area" means an area of land that commences at the
top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the
delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the
following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the
channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest
impervious surface. However, in this subsection, "protective
area" does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream
enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot enter
the enclosure at this location.
§ 483-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-37
1:571
[1] For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource
waters, and for wetlands in areas of special natural
resource interest as specified in § NR 103.04, Wis. Adm.
Code, 75 feet.
[2] For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a
United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute series
topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever
is more current, 50 feet.
[3] For lakes, 50 feet.
[4] For highly susceptible wetlands, 50 feet. Highly
susceptible wetlands include the following types: fens,
sedge meadows, bogs, low prairies, conifer swamps, shrub
swamps, other forested wetlands, fresh wet meadows,
shallow marshes, deep marshes and seasonally flooded
basins. Wetland boundary delineations shall be made in
accordance with § NR 103.08(1m), Wis. Adm. Code. This
subsection does not apply to wetlands that have been
completely filled in accordance with all applicable state
and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands
that have been partially filled in accordance with all
applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured
from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been
placed.
[5] For less susceptible wetlands, 10% of the average wetland
width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less
susceptible wetlands include degraded wetlands
dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass.
[6] In Subsection C(4)(a)[1], [4] and [5], determinations of the
extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be
made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff
susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the
standards and criteria in § NR 103.03, Wis. Adm. Code.
[7] For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas
greater than 130 acres, 10 feet.
(b) This subsection applies to post-construction sites located
within a protective area, except those areas exempted
pursuant to Subsection C(4)(d).
(c) The following requirements shall be met:
[1] Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective
area to the maximum extent practicable. The stormwater
management plan shall contain a written site-specific
explanation for any parts of the protective area that are
disturbed during construction.
§ 483-37 EAST TROY CODE § 483-37
1:572
[2] Where land disturbing construction activity occurs within
a protective area, and where no impervious surface is
present, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover
of 70% or greater shall be established and maintained. The
adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be
sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish
habitat and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland
flow areas under sheet flow conditions. Nonvegetative
materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on the
bank as necessary to prevent erosion, such as on steep
slopes or where high velocity flows occur.
Note to users: It is recommended that seeding of
nonaggressive vegetative cover be used in the protective
areas. Vegetation that is flood and drought tolerant and
can provide long-term bank stability because of an
extensive root system is preferable. Vegetative cover can
be measured using the line transect method described in
the University of Wisconsin Extension publication number
A3533, titled "Estimating Residue Using the Line
Transect Method."
[3] Best management practices such as filter strips, swales, or
wet detention basins that are designed to control
pollutants from nonpoint sources may be located in the
protective area.
Note to users: Other regulations, such as Ch. 30, Wis.
Stats., and Chs. NR 103, 115, 116 and 117, Wis. Adm.
Code, and their associated review and approval process
may apply in the protective area.
(d) This subsection does not apply to:
[1] Redevelopment post-construction sites;
[2] Infill development areas less than five acres;
[3] Structures that cross or access surface waters, such as
boat landings, bridges and culverts;
[4] Structures constructed in accordance with § 59.692(1v),
Wis. Stats.; or
[5] Post-construction sites from which runoff does not enter
the surface water, except to the extent that vegetative
ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability.
§ 483-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-37
1:573
Note to users: A vegetated protective area to filter runoff
pollutants from post-construction sites described in
Subsection C(4)(d)[5] is not necessary since runoff is not
entering the surface water at that location. Other
practices, necessary to meet the requirements of this
section, such as a swale or basin, will need to be designed
and implemented to reduce runoff pollutants before the
runoff enters a surface water of the state.
(5) Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle
maintenance areas shall, to the maximum extent practicable, have
BMPs designed, installed and maintained to reduce petroleum
within runoff, such that the runoff that enters waters of the state
contains no visible petroleum sheen.
Note to users: A combination of the following BMPs may be used:
oil and grease separators, canopies, petroleum spill cleanup
materials, or any other structural or nonstructural method of
preventing or treating petroleum in runoff.
(6) Swale treatment for transportation facilities.
(a) Applicability. Except as provided in Subsection C(6)(b),
transportation facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance
and pollutant removal meet all of the requirements of this
section, if the swales are designed to the maximum extent
practicable to do all of the following:
[1] Be vegetated. However, where appropriate, nonvegetative
measures may be employed to prevent erosion or provide
for runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or
check dams.
Note to users: It is preferred that tall and dense
vegetation be maintained within the swale due to its
greater effectiveness at enhancing runoff pollutant
removal.
[2] Carry runoff through a swale for 200 feet or more in length
that is designed with a flow velocity no greater than 1.5
feet per second for the peak flow generated using either a
two-year, twenty-four-hour design storm or a two-year
storm with a duration equal to the time of concentration as
appropriate. If a swale of 200 feet in length cannot be
designed with a flow velocity of 1.5 feet per second or less,
then the flow velocity shall be reduced to the maximum
extent practicable.
§ 483-37 EAST TROY CODE § 483-37
1:574
Note to users: Check dams may be included in the swale
design to slow runoff flows and improve pollutant
removal. Transportation facilities with continuous
features such as curb and gutter, sidewalks or parking
lanes do not comply with the design requirements of this
subsection. However, a limited amount of structural
measures such as curb and gutter may be allowed as
necessary to account for other concerns such as human
safety or resource protection.
Note to users: The Department of Natural Resource's
regional stormwater staff can determine if additional
BMPs, beyond a water quality swale, are needed under
this paragraph.
(b) Exemptions. The Village Engineer may, consistent with water
quality standards, require that other provisions of this section
be met on a transportation facility with an average daily travel
of vehicles greater than 2,500 and where the initial surface
water of the state that the runoff directly enters is any of the
following:
[1] An outstanding resource water;
[2] An exceptional resource water;
[3] Waters listed in Section 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water
Act that are identified as impaired, in whole or in part, due
to nonpoint source impacts; or
[4] Waters where targeted performance standards are
developed under § NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code, to meet
water quality standards.
D. General considerations for on-site and off-site stormwater management
measures. The following considerations shall be observed in managing
runoff:
(1) Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales,
natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural
groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the
extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section.
(2) Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be
provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream
drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream
property or public safety.
E. Location and regional treatment option.
(1) The BMPs may be located on site or off site as part of a regional
stormwater device, practice or system.
§ 483-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-37
1:575
(2) Post-construction runoff within a nonnavigable surface water that
flows into a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, is not required to
meet the performance standards of this article. Post-construction
BMPs may be located in nonnavigable surface waters.
(3) Except as allowed under Subsection E(4), post-construction runoff
from new development shall meet the post-construction
performance standards prior to entering a navigable surface water.
(4) Post-construction runoff from any development within a navigable
surface water that flows into a BMP is not required to meet the
performance standards of this article if the BMP was constructed
prior to the effective date of this article and the BMP either
received a permit issued under Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., or the BMP did
not require a Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., permit and the BMP is designed to
provide runoff treatment from future upland development.
(5) Runoff from existing development, redevelopment and infill areas
shall meet the post-construction performance standards in
accordance with this subsection.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, BMPs shall be located to
treat runoff prior to discharge to navigable surface waters.
(b) Post-construction BMPs for such runoff may be located in a
navigable surface water if allowable under all other applicable
federal, state and local regulations, such as Ch. NR 103, Wis.
Adm. Code, and Ch. 30, Wis. Stats.
Note to users: This allows the location of BMPs in navigable
surface waters where necessary to augment management
practices upstream of the navigable surface water to meet the
performance standards.
(6) The discharge of runoff from a BMP, such as a wet detention pond,
or after a series of such BMPs is subject to this article.
Note to users: This section does not supersede any other
applicable federal, state or local regulation, such as Ch. NR 103,
Wis. Adm. Code, and Ch. 30, Wis. Stats.
(7) The Village Engineer may approve off-site management measures,
provided that all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The Village Engineer determines that the post-construction
runoff is covered by a stormwater management system plan
that is approved by the Village of East Troy and that contains
management requirements consistent with the purpose and
intent of this article.
(b) The off-site facility:
[1] Is in place;
§ 483-37 EAST TROY CODE § 483-37
1:576
§ 483-38. Administration.
§ 483-39. Application and review procedure.
[2] Is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of
stormwater control equal to or greater than that which
would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the
performance standards of this article; and
[3] Has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term
operation and maintenance.
(8) Where a regional treatment option exists such that the Village
Engineer exempts the applicant from all or part of the minimum onsite
stormwater management requirements, the applicant shall be
required to pay a fee in an amount determined in negotiation with
the Village Board. In determining the fee for post-construction
runoff, the Village Engineer shall consider an equitable distribution
of the cost for land, engineering design, construction, and
maintenance of the regional treatment option.
F. Alternate requirements. The Village Engineer may establish
stormwater management requirements more stringent than those set
forth in this section if he or she determines that an added level of
protection is needed to protect sensitive resources.
A. The Village Engineer has the authority to administer and enforce the
provisions of this article and may authorize subordinates to perform the
duties enumerated herein.
B. The Village Engineer is authorized to prepare an application form and
may amend it from time to time.
A. The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an
application for a stormwater permit.
(1) Presubmittal meeting. The applicant or the applicant's agent may
meet with the Village Engineer to review applicable regulations
and procedures and the project.
(2) Submittal of application materials. The applicant shall submit a
completed application and other required materials to the Village
Engineer along with the application fee as may be established by
the Village Board.
(3) Completeness check. Within 10 business days of submittal, the
Village Engineer shall determine whether the application is
complete or incomplete. If the Village Engineer determines that the
application is incomplete, he or she shall notify the applicant of the
deficiencies. If the application is incomplete, the applicant has
three months to resubmit the application or forfeit the application
fee. The Village Engineer shall take no further steps to process the
§ 483-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-39
1:577
§ 483-40. Permit requirements.
application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete
application shall be retained as a public record.
(4) Review and decision. The Village Engineer shall render a decision
based on the requirements of this article within six business days of
when the application is deemed complete. If the application is
denied, the Village Engineer shall state in writing the reasons for
denial.
B. The Village Engineer may request additional information from the
applicant. If additional information is submitted, the Village Engineer
shall have six business days from the date the additional information is
received to render a decision.
A. All permits issued under this article are subject to the following
conditions, and holders of permits issued under this article shall be
deemed to have accepted these conditions. The Village Engineer may
suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition, following
written notification of the responsible party. An action by the Village
Engineer to suspend or revoke an approved permit may be appealed in
accordance with § 483-47.
(1) Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party
of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state,
and local laws and regulations.
(2) The responsible party shall design and install all structural and
nonstructural stormwater management measures in accordance
with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit.
(3) The responsible party shall notify the Village Engineer at least
three business days before commencing any work in conjunction
with the stormwater management plan and within five business
days upon completion of the stormwater management practices. If
required as a special condition under Subsection B, the responsible
party shall make additional notification according to a schedule set
forth by the Village Engineer so that practice installations can be
inspected during construction.
(4) Practice installations required as part of this article shall be
certified "as built" by a licensed professional engineer. Completed
stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection by
the Village Engineer to determine if they are in accordance with
the approved stormwater management plan and this article. The
Village Engineer shall notify the responsible party in writing of any
changes required in such practices to bring them into compliance
with the conditions of the approved permit.
(5) The responsible party shall notify the Village Engineer of any
significant modifications it intends to make to an approved
§ 483-39 EAST TROY CODE § 483-40
1:578
§ 483-41. Financial guarantee.
stormwater management plan. The Village Engineer may require
that the proposed modifications be submitted to it for approval
prior to incorporation into the stormwater management plan and
execution by the responsible party.
(6) The responsible party shall maintain all stormwater management
practices in accordance with the stormwater management plan
until the practices either become the responsibility of the Village of
East Troy or are transferred to subsequent private owners as
specified in the approved maintenance agreement.
(7) The responsible party authorizes the Village of East Troy to
perform any work or operations necessary to bring stormwater
management measures into conformance with the approved
stormwater management plan and consents to a special
assessment or charge against the property as authorized under
Subchapter VII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats., or to charging such costs
against the financial guarantee posted under § 483-41.
(8) If so directed by the Village Engineer, the responsible party shall
repair at the responsible party's own expense all damage to
adjoining municipal facilities and drainageways caused by runoff,
where such damage is caused by activities that are not in
compliance with the approved stormwater management plan.
(9) The responsible party shall permit property access to the Village
Engineer or designee for the purpose of inspecting the property for
compliance with the approved stormwater management plan and
the permit.
(10) Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in
direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from
a site, the Village Engineer may require the responsible party to
make appropriate legal arrangements with affected property
owners concerning the prevention of endangerment to property or
public safety.
(11) The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and
penalties described in this article if the responsible party fails to
comply with the terms of an approved permit.
B. In addition to the requirements set forth in this article, the Village
Engineer may impose one or more conditions of approval needed to
meet the performance standards in § 483-37 or a financial guarantee as
provided for in § 483-41.
A. Establishment of the guarantee. The Village Engineer may require the
submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall be
acceptable to the Village Engineer. The financial guarantee shall be in
an amount determined by the Village Engineer to be the estimated cost
§ 483-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-41
1:579
§ 483-42. Duration of permit.
A permit issued under this article shall be valid from the date of issuance
through the date the Village Engineer notifies the responsible party that
all required stormwater management practices have passed the final
inspection.
§ 483-43. Stormwater management plan.
of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance of the
stormwater management practices during the period which the
designated party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance
responsibility. The financial guarantee shall give the Village of East
Troy the authorization to use the funds to complete the stormwater
management practices if the responsible party defaults or does not
properly implement the approved stormwater management plan, upon
written notice to the responsible party by the Village Engineer that the
requirements of this article have not been met.
B. Conditions for release. Conditions for the release of the financial
guarantee are as follows:
(1) The Village Engineer shall release the portion of the financial
guarantee established under this section, less any costs incurred by
the Village of East Troy to complete installation of practices, upon
submission of as-built plans by a licensed professional engineer.
The Village Engineer may make provisions for a partial pro rata
release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of
various development stages.
(2) The Village Engineer shall release the portion of the financial
guarantee established under this section to assure maintenance of
stormwater practices, less any costs incurred by the Village of East
Troy, at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance
is passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance
agreement.
A. Preparation. A stormwater management plan shall be prepared by an
individual qualified to prepare such plan.
B. Generally. A stormwater management plan shall be designed and
implemented to meet the technical and performance standards
enumerated in this article.
C. Standard stormwater management plan. A stormwater management
plan shall include, at a minimum, the following items:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their
designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice
design and certification; person(s) responsible for installation of
stormwater management practices; and person(s) responsible for
§ 483-41 EAST TROY CODE § 483-43
1:580
maintenance of stormwater management practices prior to the
transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party.
(2) A proper legal description of the property proposed to be
developed, referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to
block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat.
(3) Pre-development site conditions, including:
(a) One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet. The site maps shall show the following: site
location and legal property description; predominant soil types
and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition;
topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed five
feet; topography and drainage network. including enough of
the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto,
through, and from the site; watercourses that may affect or be
affected by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all
stormwater conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used
in hydrology determinations to show compliance with
performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels,
ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent
to the site; limits of the one-hundred-year floodplain; and
location of wells and wellhead protection areas covering the
project area and delineated pursuant to § NR 811.16, Wis.
Adm. Code.
(b) Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to
show compliance with performance standards. All major
assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be
clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required
map(s).
(4) Post-development site conditions, including:
(a) Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural
topography and land cover features to minimize changes in
peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and
wetlands.
(b) Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management
measures in the development area imposed by wellhead
protection plans and ordinances.
(c) One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet showing the following: post-construction
pervious areas, including vegetative cover type and condition;
impervious surfaces, including all buildings, structures, and
pavement; post-construction topographic contours of the site
at a scale not to exceed five feet; post-construction drainage
network, including enough of the contiguous properties to
§ 483-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-43
1:581
show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site;
locations and dimensions of drainage easements; locations of
maintenance easements specified in the maintenance
agreement; flow path and direction for all stormwater
conveyance sections; location and type of all stormwater
management conveyance and treatment practices, including
the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area; location and
type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the
drainage and treatment practices to the nearest adequate
outlet, such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural
drainageway; watershed boundaries used in hydrology and
pollutant loading calculations; and any changes to lakes,
streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses
on and immediately adjacent to the site.
(d) Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to
show compliance with performance standards. The
computations shall be made for each discharge point in the
development, and the geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required
map(s).
(e) Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for
the placement and design of stormwater management
measures.
(f) Detailed drawings, including cross sections and profiles, of all
permanent stormwater conveyance and treatment practices.
(5) A description and installation schedule for the stormwater
management practices needed to meet the performance standards
in § 483-37.
(6) A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater
management practice, including the required maintenance
activities and maintenance activity schedule.
(7) Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of
each stormwater management practice.
(8) Other information requested in writing by the Village Engineer to
determine compliance of the proposed stormwater management
measures with the provisions of this article.
D. Certification. All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and
drawings shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer to be
prepared in accordance with accepted engineering practice and
requirements of this article.
E. Alternate requirements. The Village Engineer may prescribe alternative
submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site
stormwater management performance standards under § 483-37E.
§ 483-43 EAST TROY CODE § 483-44
1:582
§ 483-44. Maintenance agreement.
A. Maintenance agreement required. The responsible party shall prepare
and submit a maintenance agreement to provide for the long-term
maintenance of stormwater practices. The maintenance agreement
shall be recorded with the Walworth County Register of Deeds as a
property deed restriction so that it is binding upon all subsequent
owners of the land served by the stormwater management practices.
B. Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the
following information and provisions and be consistent with the
maintenance plan required by § 483-43C(6):
(1) Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the
drainage area served by the facilities.
(2) A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the
stormwater management system consistent with the approved
stormwater management plan.
(3) Identification of the responsible party(s), organization or city,
county, town or village responsible for long-term maintenance of
the stormwater management practices identified in the approved
stormwater management plan.
(4) Requirement that the responsible party(s), organization, or city,
county, town or village shall maintain stormwater management
practices in accordance with the schedule included in Subsection
B(2).
(5) Authorization for the Village Engineer to access the property to
conduct inspections of stormwater management practices as
necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and
operated in accordance with the agreement.
(6) A requirement for the Village Engineer to maintain public records
of the results of the site inspections, to inform the party responsible
for maintenance of the inspection results, and to specifically
indicate any corrective actions required to bring the stormwater
management practice into proper working condition.
(7) Agreement that the party designated under Subsection B(3) as
responsible for long-term maintenance of the stormwater
management practices shall be notified by the Village Engineer of
maintenance problems which require correction. The specified
corrective actions shall be undertaken within a reasonable time
frame as set by the Village Engineer.
(8) Authorization for the Village Engineer to perform the corrective
actions identified in the inspection report if the responsible party
designated under Subsection B(3) does not make the required
corrections in the specified time period. The Village Engineer shall
§ 483-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-44
1:583
§ 483-45. Application fees and other charges.
§ 483-46. Other required approvals.
It is the responsibility of those undertaking development projects within
the Village to obtain all applicable permits and other approvals as may be
required by the Village of East Troy, Walworth County, and federal and state
authorities.
§ 483-47. Administrative appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals established under Chapter 510, Zoning, of this
Code shall hear and decide administrative appeals where it is alleged that
there is error in any order, decision, or determination made by the Village
Engineer in administering this article, except for cease and desist orders
obtained under § 483-49. The procedures and requirements established in
Chapter 510 shall apply.
§ 483-48. Variances.
The Zoning Board of Appeals established under Chapter 510, Zoning, of this
Code shall hear and decide variances. The procedures and requirements
established in Chapter 510 shall apply, except that in making its decision
the Board shall only grant a variance if the requested variance is not
contrary to the public interest and where owing to special conditions a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will likely result in an
unnecessary hardship.
enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect the money as a
special charge against the property pursuant to Subchapter VI of
Ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
(9) Any other provision as may be necessary to accomplish the
purposes of this article.
A. Assessment of fees. From time to time, the Village Board may by
resolution establish application fees and other charges it deems
necessary in the administration of this article.
B. Timing for payment. Application fees shall be paid at the time the
application is submitted for review.
C. Doubling of application fee. If an activity which requires prior
authorization under this article is started before the authorization is
granted, the application fee is automatically doubled unless the Village
Board specifically establishes a different fee by resolution. Payment of
such fee shall not release the applicant from full compliance with this
article nor from prosecution for violation of this article.
D. Refunds. Application fees are nonrefundable, except when the
application and fee were accepted by the Village Engineer or Village
staff in error.
§ 483-44 EAST TROY CODE § 483-49
1:584
§ 483-49. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Any land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff
initiated after the effective date of this article by any person, firm,
association, or corporation subject to the provisions of this article shall
be deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
B. The Village Engineer shall notify the responsible party by certified mail
of any noncomplying land disturbing construction activity or postconstruction
runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the
violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and
additional enforcement action which may be taken.
C. Upon receipt of written notification from the Village Engineer under
Subsection B, the responsible party shall correct work that does not
comply with the stormwater management plan or other provisions of
this permit. The responsible party shall make corrections as necessary
to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the Village
Engineer in the notice.
D. If the violations of a permit issued pursuant to this article are likely to
result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the state,
the Village Engineer may enter the land and take emergency actions
necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the Village
Engineer plus interest and legal costs shall be billed to the responsible
party.
E. The Village Engineer is authorized to post a stop-work order on all land
disturbing construction activity that is in violation of this article or to
request the Village Attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any
court with jurisdiction.
F. The Village Engineer may revoke a permit issued under this article for
noncompliance with the provisions of this article.
G. Any permit revocation, stop-work order, or cease and desist order shall
remain in effect unless retracted by the Village Engineer or by a court
with jurisdiction.
H. The Village Engineer is authorized to refer any violation of this article,
or of a stop-work order or cease and desist order issued pursuant to this
article, to the Village Attorney for the commencement of further legal
proceedings in any court with jurisdiction.
I. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who or which does not
comply with the provisions of this article shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in § 1-4 of this Code per offense, together with the costs of
prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 483-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-49
1:585
§ 483-50. Compliance with FAA standards. [Added 6-4-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-05]
J. Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by
injunction in any court with jurisdiction. [Injunctional orders are
authorized pursuant to § 62.23(8), Wis. Stats.] It shall not be necessary
to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting
to injunctional proceedings.
K. When the Village Engineer determines that the holder of a permit
issued pursuant to this article has failed to follow practices set forth in
the approved stormwater management plan or has failed to comply with
schedules set forth in the approved stormwater management plan, the
Village Engineer or designee may enter upon the land and perform the
work or other operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands
into conformance with requirements of the approved plan. The Village
Engineer shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of
performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from
any financial security posted pursuant to § 483-41 of this article. Where
such a security has not been established, or where such a security is
insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be
entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and
collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the
work is completed.
A. Development projects located within 10,000 feet of the East Troy
Airport, as depicted in Exhibit A,253 must comply with the most current
version of FAA advisory circular 150/5200-33B. Among other
requirements, stormwater management practices may not include any
pond that does not drain within 48 hours.
B. Existing stormwater facilities within 10,000 feet of the East Troy
Airport that do not necessarily comply with FAA standards are allowed
to continue as set forth in the aforementioned publication.
253. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Village offices.
§ 483-49 EAST TROY CODE § 483-50
1:586
Chapter 486
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
§ 486-1. Declaration of public policy and purpose.
The Village Board hereby declares as a matter of public policy that the
protection, preservation, perpetuation and use of places, areas, buildings,
structures and other objects having special historical, community or
aesthetic interest or value is a public advantage and is promoted in the
interest of the people. The purpose of this chapter is to:
§ 486-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMMITTEE — The Historic Preservation Committee created hereunder,
which for purposes of this chapter shall be the Plan Commission.
CULTURAL RESOURCES — Any work of man or nature that is primarily
of interest for its historical, archaeological, natural, scientific or aesthetic
value, including but not limited to historic houses and other structures
such as barns, schools, kilns, archaeological sites, American Indian burial
grounds and earthworks, buildings identified as the work of an architect,
developer or master builder whose work has influenced the Village, and
structures noteworthy because of their design, detail, materials or
craftsmanship, or association with historic persons or events.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area of the Village which contains one or more
designated sites, structures or landmarks. The historic district's boundaries
shall be shown on the Village Zoning Map.
A. Safeguard the cultural resources of the Village of East Troy by
preserving sites, structures, landmarks and districts which reflect
elements of the Village's cultural, social, economic, political, visual or
architectural history.
B. Protect and enhance the Village's attractions to visitors and residents
and serve as a support and stimulus to business, industry and tourism.
C. Foster civic pride in the beauty and notable achievements of the past.
D. Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of the
Village.
E. Promote the use and preservation of historic sites, structures,
landmarks and districts for the education and general welfare of the
people of the Village with respect to the cultural, civic, architectural
and historic heritage of the Village.
§ 483-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 486-2
1:587
HISTORIC SITE — Any area, place, structure, land or other object which
has been duly designated by the Village Board; this includes prehistoric
aboriginal sites.
LANDMARK — A natural or man-made feature of local or regional interest
which is associated with a particular historic or prehistoric event.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made building which has special character,
historic interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural
characteristics of the Village.
§ 486-3. Historic Preservation Committee; designation of sites,
structures, landmarks and districts.
A. Composition.
(1) Unless a Historic Preservation Committee is created by the Village
Board, the Plan Commission shall serve in that capacity for
purposes of this chapter.
(2) In the event the Village Board decides not to have the Plan
Commission serve in this capacity, the Village Board shall establish
a five-member Historic Preservation Committee vested with the
authority and responsibility to propose action to safeguard and
preserve the historic heritage of the Village. In this role, the
Historic Preservation Committee will act in an advisory capacity to
the Village Board in all matters concerning properties which are
designated as historical sites, structures, landmarks and districts
within the Village.
(3) Members of the Historical Preservation Committee shall be chosen
and appointed with consideration of one or more of the following
qualities:
(a) Active interest in the historic preservation of the Village of
East Troy.
(b) Knowledge of the history of the Village and its environs.
(c) Expertise and knowledge concerning architecture and
archaeology.
(d) Ability to utilize authoritative resources concerning historic
preservation.
(4) The initial five-member committee shall be appointed to serve
terms as follows: position number one, one year; position number
two, two years; position number three, three years; position
number four, four years; and position number five, five years. As
each term expires, a new appointment or reappointment shall be
made by the Village Board for a term of five years. The Historic
Preservation Committee shall furnish recommendations to the
Village Board for consideration for new appointments.
§ 486-2 EAST TROY CODE § 486-3
1:588
(5) The Historic Preservation Committee shall elect a Chairperson to
serve a one-year term. This Chairperson may be reelected or a new
Chairperson may be elected annually.
(6) The Historic Preservation Committee shall hold regular meetings
six times annually. Additional meetings shall be held as needed to
perform the duties of the Committee. A quorum shall consist of
three members.
(7) The Village Board and Building Inspector shall be fully informed of
the decisions and recommendations of the Historic Preservation
Committee in order to distinguish and expedite actions to promote
and safeguard the Village's program of historic preservation.
B. Inventory of cultural resources. The Village Board shall direct and
empower the Historic Preservation Committee to establish and
maintain a continuing inventory of cultural resources in the Village for
consideration for placement on the historic register of the Village.
Historic sites, structures, landmarks and districts shall be chosen for
their eligibility as described under § 486-4 below.
C. Nomination of properties. Property nominated by the Historic
Preservation Committee to be designated as a historic site, structure,
landmark or part of a district shall require a public hearing under the
direction of the Village Board. Notice of the public hearing shall be
published and also mailed to the owners of the property proposed.
D. Notice to owners. The Historic Preservation Committee shall provide
full information to the property owners of the civic advantages and
responsibilities involved in accepting such designation. Approval of the
property owners shall be obtained as a prerequisite to official
designation.
E. Restrictive covenant. The owner of any historic site or structure may, at
any time following such designation of this property, enter into a
restrictive covenant on the subject property after negotiating with the
Historic Preservation Committee. The Committee may assist the owner
in preparing such covenant in the interest of preserving historic
property. The owner shall record such covenant in the County Register
of Deeds office and shall notify the Village Assessor of such covenant
and the conditions thereof.
F. Assistance with other registrations. The Historic Preservation
Committee shall provide encouragement, information and assistance to
owners of Village-designated historic properties who show interest in
seeking nomination to the National Register of Historic Places through
the State Historical Society.
G. Promotional activities. The Historic Preservation Committee shall
promote interest in the community for designation of properties as
historic sites, structures, or landmarks or as part of a historic district
§ 486-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 486-3
1:589
§ 486-4. Criteria for determining eligibility.
In determining the eligibility of any area, site, place, building, structure or
district within the Village as a historic landmark, the Historic Preservation
Committee shall consider the following factors with respect to eligibility:
§ 486-5. Register of historic sites, structures, landmarks and
districts.
The Village of East Troy shall maintain a register of historic sites,
structures, landmarks and districts.
§ 486-6. External alteration of designated property.
The owner of designated property shall report any planned external
alteration, including demolition, to the respective property to the Historic
Preservation Committee for review and recommendation. The Historic
Preservation Committee will base its recommendation according to the
guidelines set forth in the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for
Rehabilitation.
§ 486-7. Transfer of historically designated property.
and assist property owners in submitting qualifications of their
properties as historic sites for consideration of such designation.
H. Subcommittees. The Historic Preservation Committee shall have the
power to appoint subcommittees from the community and enlist the aid
of area historical societies and other organizations for assistance in
promoting the policy of the Village in the interest of historic
preservation.
I. Funding. As it deems advisable, the Historic Preservation Committee is
empowered to solicit and receive funds for the purpose of preservation
of landmarks of the Village. Funds for such purposes shall be placed in
a special Village account.
A. Its character, interest or value as a part of the history or cultural
heritage of the Village, state or United States.
B. Its association with the persons or events which have made a significant
contribution to the cultural heritage.
C. Its potential to yield information important in history or prehistory.
D. Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
type or style, or element of design, detail, materials or craftsmanship.
E. Its unique location or singular physical appearance representing an
established and familiar feature of a neighborhood or community of the
Village.
§ 486-3 EAST TROY CODE § 486-7
1:590
§ 486-8. Review of permits.
A. The Village Assessor shall notify the Historic Preservation Committee
when the ownership of any historically designated property is
transferred.
B. The Historic Preservation Committee shall inform the new owner of the
importance of his or her property and his or her responsibilities under
this chapter.
A. Notification of every application for building, zoning or demolition
permits for properties on the Village register shall be given by the
Building Inspector or his/her designee to the Historic Preservation
Committee for its review. The Committee shall make a recommendation
to the Village Board concerning the proposed permit.
B. Considering that time is of the essence, the Historic Preservation
Committee shall act promptly in its consideration of an application for
building, zoning or demolition permits in relation to designated
properties. The review and recommendation shall be forwarded to the
Village Board within 30 days. The Village Board will vote to decide if the
permit will be issued or denied.
C. The Village Board, in considering the recommendations of the Historic
Preservation Committee, shall determine if the work to be performed
adversely affects the designated historic property. In determining
whether or not there is such an adverse affect, the Village Board shall
consider the following factors:
(1) Whether the work will significantly alter the appearance of the
building or structure so as to remove features which distinguish the
historic site, structure, landmark or district as a significant cultural
resource.
(2) Whether the use of the property will destroy, disturb or endanger a
known or suspected archaeological feature.
D. The Historic Preservation Committee may also recommend to the
Village Board variations which are comparable to the proposed changes
if the Village Board determines that such variations are necessary to
alleviate financial hardship placed upon the owner of the property. The
Historic Preservation Committee will be allowed another 30 days to
determine such variances. The Committee's recommendations shall be
considered by the Village Board before a vote is taken to determine if a
building, zoning or demolition permit will be issued.254
E. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the construction,
alteration or demolition of any improvement on a designated historic
property, or in a historic district, pursuant to any court judgment to
254. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 486-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 486-8
1:591
§ 486-9. Designation of repository for documents.
The Village of East Troy Municipal Building is designated as the repository
for all studies, surveys, reports, programs and designations of all historic
sites, structures, landmarks and districts.
Chapter 490
OFFICIAL MAP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 495. Zoning — See Ch. 510.
§ 490-1. Intent.
It is the intent of the Village Board to establish an official map as allowed
by state law (1) for the purpose of serving and promoting the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the community; (2) to further the orderly
layout and use of land; (3) to facilitate the provision of transportation
facilities, recreation facilities, stormwater facilities, and other public
facilities; and (4) to facilitate the division of tracts of land into smaller
parcels.
§ 490-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted under the authority granted by § 62.23(6), Wis.
Stats.
§ 490-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
AIRPORT AFFECTED AREA — The area established by an agreement under
§ 66.1009, Wis. Stats. If a county, city, village or town has not established
such an agreement, "airport affected area" in that county, city, village or
town means the area located within three miles of the boundaries of an
airport.
WATERWAYS — Includes rivers, streams, creeks, ditches, drainage
channels, watercourses, lakes, bays, ponds, impoundment reservoirs,
retention and detention basins, marshes, and other surface water areas,
regardless of whether the areas are natural or artificial.
§ 490-4. Generally.
remedy conditions determined to be dangerous to life, health or
property. In such case, no approval from the Committee shall be
required.
§ 486-8 EAST TROY CODE § 490-4
1:592
§ 490-5. Official Map.
A. The Official Map may show streets, highways, historic districts,
parkways, parks and playgrounds laid out, adopted, and established by
law. The Village may also include the location of railroad rights-of-way,
public transit facilities, and waterways if such waterways are included
in a comprehensive surface water drainage plan. The Official Map may
depict any county facilities within the municipal boundary if so
approved by the Walworth County Board of County Supervisors.
B. The Official Map shall show the location of any airport located within
the municipal boundary of the Village and any airport affected area
located within the municipal boundary of the Village.
C. The Official Map may depict streets, highways, waterways, railroad
right-of-ways, public transit facilities, or parkways beyond the
municipal boundary a distance equal to that within which the approval
of land subdivision plats by the Village Board is required as provided by
§ 236.10(1)(b)(2), Wis. Stats.
D. The placing of any street, highway, waterway, parkway, railroad rightof-
way, public transit facility, park or playground line or lines upon the
Official Map does not constitute the opening or establishment of any
street, parkway, railroad right-of-way, public transit facility, park or
playground or alteration of any waterway, or the taking or acceptance
of any land for these purposes.
E. All notations, references, and other information shown on the Official
Map shall be as much a part of this chapter as though included herein.
A. Title. The Official Map shall be titled "Village of East Troy Official Map -
Walworth County, Wisconsin."
B. Map series. The Official Map may consist of two or more maps when
needed to clearly depict the features typically found on an Official Map.
If a map series is used, each map in the series shall include a map
number and name and a listing of all maps in the series (i.e., a map
index).
C. Official Map. The Village Clerk shall maintain one paper copy of the
Official Map which shall be signed by Village President and
countersigned by the Village Clerk. If there is a discrepancy between
this Official Map and other maps as may be made available, the map
maintained by the Village Clerk shall control in all instances.
D. Availability. The Official Map maintained by the Village Clerk shall be
available for public inspection during normal office hours. The Village
Clerk and Zoning Administrator may post the Official Map on the
Village's website and otherwise make and distribute copies in a manner
deemed appropriate.
§ 490-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-5
1:593
§ 490-6. Compliance.
§ 490-7. Filing of certificate.
The Village Clerk shall immediately record a certificate with the Walworth
County register of deeds showing the Village has adopted an Official Map,
and shall do likewise for any subsequent amendments.
§ 490-8. Amendments.
E. Preparation of a new Official Map. In the event the Official Map
maintained by the Village Clerk is damaged, lost, or destroyed and after
each amendment, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the Village
Board and shall prepare a new Official Map and submit it to the Village
President and Village Clerk for signature.
F. History of amendment. The Official Map may include a table showing
recent amendments that have been made, indicating the ordinance
number and date of action.
G. Archive of superseded maps. The Village Clerk may maintain a
permanent archive of superseded Official Maps.
H. Amendment. The procedure and requirements to amend the Official
Map are set forth in § 490-8.
A. No building permit shall hereafter be issued for any building in the bed
of any existing or proposed street, highway, drainageway, or parkway
shown on the Official Map. The building inspector may require each
applicant for a building permit to submit a plan, prepared and certified
by a professional land surveyor, showing accurately the location of any
proposed building with reference to any street, drainageway, or
parkway shown on the Official Map.
B. No permit for the erection of any building shall be issued unless a street
or highway giving access to such proposed structure is depicted on the
Official Map.
C. No division of land regulated under Chapter 495 of the Municipal Code
shall be approved unless such division conforms to the Official Map.
D. No public sewer or other municipal street utility or improvement shall
be constructed in any street, highway, or parkway within the municipal
limits until such street, highway, or parkway is depicted on the Official
Map.
A. The Village Board may amend the Official Map pursuant to the
procedures and requirements set forth in § 62.23(6), Wis. Stats., as
often as necessary to keep the map up to date.
§ 490-5 EAST TROY CODE § 490-8
1:594
§ 490-9. Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals established in Chapter 70 of the Municipal
Code shall have the power to review any administrative decision of the
Building Inspector to deny a building permit for the erection of a structure
under this chapter and to grant relief from the requirements of this chapter
as allowed in § 62.23(6)(e), (f), and (g), Wis. Stats.
§ 490-10. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 495
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plan Commission — See Ch. 15.
Building construction — See Ch. 210.
Driveways and culverts — See Ch. 244.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 340.
Sewers — See Ch. 400.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 423.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 443.
Water — See Ch. 475.
Erosion control and stormwater
management — See Ch. 483.
Zoning — See Ch. 510.
B. Changes and additions made by duly approved subdivision plats shall
not require a public hearing if the change or additions do not affect any
land outside the area being platted.
A. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in § 1-4 of
the Municipal Code.
B. No damages shall be allowed for the taking by any government agency,
for street, highway, drainageway, or parkway purposes, of any building
erected in violation of this chapter.
§ 490-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-10
1:595

ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 495-1. Authority and purpose.
A. This chapter is adopted in accordance with the authority granted by
§§ 236.13(1)(b) and 236.45, Wis. Stats., and for the purposes listed in
§§ 236.01 and 236.45, Wis. Stats.255
(1) The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements adopted to promote the health, safety, morals,
comfort, prosperity, and general welfare of the Village of East Troy.
(2) This chapter shall not repeal, impair, or modify private covenants
or public ordinances, except that it shall apply whenever it imposes
stricter restrictions on land use.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety,
convenience, and general welfare of the community. These regulations
are designed to:
(1) Lessen congestion on the highways and streets.
(2) Foster the orderly layout and use of land.
(3) Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers.
(4) Provide adequate light and air, including access to sunlight for
solar collectors and to wind for wind energy systems.
(5) Discourage overcrowding of the land.
(6) Protect the community's agricultural base.
(7) Facilitate adequate provision for transportation, public water and
sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public
necessities.
(8) Facilitate the further division of large tracts of land into smaller
parcels.
C. These regulations are made with the reasonable consideration of, but
not limited to, the present character of the Village and its environs and
the objectives of conserving the value of the land and improvements
placed thereon, providing the most appropriate environment for human
habitation, encouraging commerce and industry, protecting farming
and open spaces, and providing for the most appropriate use of land in
the Village of East Troy.
255. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-2
1:597
§ 495-2. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, agreements, rules,
regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of
this chapter shall govern.
§ 495-3. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the Village of East Troy and shall not be deemed a limitation or
repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 495-4. Title.
This chapter shall be known as, referred to, or cited as the "Village of
East Troy Subdivision Regulations" or "Village of East Troy Land Division
Ordinance."
§ 495-2 EAST TROY CODE § 495-4
1:598
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 495-5. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable in this chapter:
ALLEY — A public or private right-of-way, usually of reduced width as
compared to a street, primarily intended to provide a secondary means of
access to the side or rear of an abutting property fronting upon another
street right-of-way and not for the use of through traffic.
ARTERIAL STREET — A street which provides primary access to and
through an area. It has a secondary function of providing access to abutting
land and to collector and local streets.
BIKEWAY — A bike route completely apart from a street and restricted to
bicycle, pedestrian, and maintenance vehicle traffic.
BLOCK — An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by a
combination of streets, exterior boundary lines of the subdivision, streams,
or water bodies.
BUILDING LINE — A line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line or
public or private road right-of-way line, located a sufficient distance from
either to provide the minimum yards required by this chapter. The building
line determines the area in which buildings are permitted subject to all
applicable provisions of this chapter. This is also referred to as a "setback."
CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP — A method of permitting and recording a minor
subdivision.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which disperses traffic throughout an area
and provides access to abutting property.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan of the Village of East
Troy, Wisconsin, and as subsequently amended.
CONCEPT PLAN — A preliminary drawing, made to approximate scale, of a
proposed land division for discussion purpose.
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT — A real estate development in which a
condominium form of ownership pursuant to Ch. 703, Wis. Stats., is utilized.
CONSOLIDATION — Legally merging two or more recorded parcels into a
single parcel.
CONVEYANCE — Where the title or any part thereof is transferred by the
execution of a land contract, option to purchase, offer to purchase and
acceptance, deed or certified survey.
CUL-DE-SAC — A short street having but one end open to traffic and the
other end being permanently terminated in a vehicular turnaround.
DEAD-END STREET — A street permanently or temporarily closed at one
end, with or without turnarounds.
§ 495-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-5
1:599
DIVISION OF LAND — A division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land by the
owner or the owner's agent, for any purpose, including sale or development.
DRAINAGEWAY — An open area of land, either in an easement or dedicated
right-of-way, the primary purpose of which is to carry stormwater on the
surface in lieu of an enclosed storm sewer. Drainageways may serve
multiple purposes in addition to their principal use, including but not
limited to maintenance, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers,
stormwater detention, park development and other related uses.
Drainageways may also be referred to as "greenways."
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms providing or intended to
provide permanent living quarters for not more than one family.
EASEMENT — Written authorization, recorded in the Register of Deeds
office, from a landowner authorizing another party to use any designated
part of the landowner's property for a specified purpose.
EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION — The area outside of the Village
limits in which the Village of East Troy may exercise extraterritorial powers
of planning, land division, and/or zoning review.
FINAL PLAT — See "plat, final."[Amended 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-13]
FRONTAGE ROAD — A minor street auxiliary to and located on the side
of an arterial street for control of access and for service to the abutting
development.
HALF STREET — A street either existing or proposed to be half of the
required right-of-way width, with the intention that the adjoining half will be
platted at the time the adjoining lands are subdivided, or an existing street
of which, due to reasons of ownership, only half of the right-of-way is within
the boundaries of a proposed land division or annexation.
IMPROVEMENT, PRIVATE — Any improvement that is to be kept and
managed by the property owners within the development.[Added
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13]
IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC — An improvement that is to be dedicated to
the Village of East Troy or any other governmental division, which shall
thereafter be responsible for the ongoing maintenance and operation of
such improvement, and otherwise private improvements that are required
to be made by the Village of East Troy as part of the development project
or for which the Village of East Troy has enforcement authority.[Amended
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13]
LAND DIVISION — See "division of land."[Added 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-13]
LETTER OF CREDIT — An irrevocable written agreement guaranteeing
payment for improvements, entered into by a bank, savings and loan, or
other financial institution acceptable to the Village, which secures a
subdivider's obligation to pay the cost of designing, constructing, and
installing required public improvements in a timely manner and certain
§ 495-5 EAST TROY CODE § 495-5
1:600
other obligations in connection with an approved development.[Added
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13]
LOCAL STREET — A street which provides access to individual properties.
LOT — A parcel of land that is undivided by any street or private road and
occupied by or designated to be developed for one building or principal
use and contains the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to
such building, use, or development, including such open spaces and yards
as designed and arranged or required by this chapter for such building, use,
or development.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property boundaries of a
recorded lot.
LOT, CORNER — A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or
more intersection streets or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135°.
LOT DEPTH — The average distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line of a lot.
LOT LINE — The property line (including the vertical plane established by
the line and the ground) bounding a lot, except that where any portion of
a lot extends into the public right-of-way or a proposed public right-of-way,
the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this
chapter.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER — A corner lot which is oriented so that it has its
rear lot line coincident with or parallel to the side lot line of the interior lot
immediately to its rear.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two
substantially parallel streets (one or more of which may be a portion of a
cul-de-sac). Except for through lots which abut an arterial or nonresidential
collector street, through lots shall be prohibited under the provisions of this
chapter.
LOT WIDTH — The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines
of a lot, measured parallel to the front lot lines and at the rear of the
required front yard.256
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE — A street used or intended to be used primarily
for fast or heavy through traffic. Major thoroughfares shall include
freeways, expressways and other highways and parkways, as well as
arterial streets.
MINOR SUBDIVISION (CERTIFIED SURVEY) — The division of land by the
owner or subdivider resulting in the creation of not more than four parcels
or the division of a block, lot or outlot within a recorded subdivision plat into
not more than four parcels or building sites without changing the exterior
boundaries of said block, lot or outlot.257
256. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-5
1:601
OFFICIAL MAP — The map adopted and designated by the Village as being
the Official Map pursuant to § 62.23(6), Wis. Stats., which shows current
and proposed municipal improvement sites and rights-of-way.
OUTLOT — A parcel of land, other than a lot, so designated on a plat
or certified survey and which is not intended for building or structure
development in the proposed land division.
OWNER — The person, persons, or entity having the right of legal title to a
lot or parcel of land.
PARCEL — The area within the boundary lines of a lot.
PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY — A public way which is intended for the
convenience of pedestrians only; it may also provide public right-of-way for
utilities.
PERFORMANCE BOND — A surety bond issued by an insurance company
or a bank guaranteeing performance of a contract or obligation through
forfeiture of the bond if said contract or obligation is unfulfilled.[Added
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13]
PERSON — Includes the plural as well as the singular and may mean any
individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or
any other legal entity.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A designed grouping of varied and
compatible land uses, such as housing, recreation, commercial, and
industrial parks, all within one contained development or subdivision.
PLAT — The map or drawing on which the plat of subdivision is presented
to the Village for approval.
PLAT, FINAL — The final map or drawing on which a plan of subdivision
is presented for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the
Register of Deeds office for recording.[Added 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-13]
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The preliminary plat map or drawing indicating
the proposed layout of the subdivision.[Added 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-13]
PRELIMINARY PLAT — See "plat, preliminary."[Amended 12-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-13]
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT — See "improvement, private."[Added
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13]
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS — Contracts entered into between private
parties or between private parties and public bodies pursuant to § 236.293,
Wis. Stats., which constitute a restriction on the use of all private or platted
property within a subdivision for the benefit of the public or property
owners and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of
development which would tend to impair stability of values.
257. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-5 EAST TROY CODE § 495-5
1:602
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — See "improvement, public."[Added
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13]
REPLAT — The process of changing, or a map or plat which changes, the
boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing
of a large block, lot or outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without
changing exterior boundaries of said block, lot or outlot is not a replat.
REVERSE FRONTAGE ROAD — Reverse frontage roads run parallel to
a higher volume road and are behind the adjacent buildings, instead of
between the buildings and the major road.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A public way dedicated to the public for its intended use.
SHORELANDS — Lands within the following distances from the ordinary
high-water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or
flowage and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the
floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
STREET — Unless specifically designated otherwise by the Village, any
public or private way that is dedicated or permanently open to pedestrian
and vehicular use.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
a more or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something
having a permanent location on the ground, excepting public utility fixtures
and appurtenances.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, agent, partnership or entity
of any sort which divides or proposes to divide, by plat or certified survey,
or replat land in any manner, including such heirs and assigns as may be
responsible for the obligations of the subdivider under the provisions of this
chapter.
SUBDIVIDER'S AGREEMENT — A contract between the subdivider and the
Village of East Troy that enumerates the rights and obligations of both
parties with respect to a development project.[Added 12-15-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-13]
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land by any means
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including
changes in existing lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development.
URBAN SERVICE AREA — Those areas in and around existing communities
which are most suitable for urban development and capable of being
provided with a full range of urban services.
URBAN SERVICES — Those additional public services normally provided
or needed in urban areas, including public water supply and distribution
systems, sanitary sewerage systems, police and fire protection, solid waste
collection, urban storm drainage systems, streets with curbs and gutters,
streetlighting, neighborhood facilities such as parks and schools, and urban
transportation facilities such as sidewalks and trails, on-street bicycle lanes,
taxi service, and mass transit.
§ 495-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-5
1:603
VILLAGE — The Village of East Troy, Walworth County, Wisconsin, and,
where appropriate, its Village Board, commissions, committees and
authorized officials.
WETLANDS — An area that is saturated by surface water or groundwater,
with vegetation adapted for life under those soil conditions. See also
§ 23.32(1), Wis. Stats.
WISCONSIN ADMINISTRATIVE CODE — The rules of administrative
agencies having rule-making authority in Wisconsin, published in a looseleaf,
continual revision system, as directed by § 35.93 and Ch. 227, Wis.
Stats., including subsequent amendments to those rules.
§ 495-5 EAST TROY CODE § 495-5
1:604
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 495-6. Compliance required; jurisdiction.
A. No person shall divide any land located within the jurisdictional limits
of these regulations which results in a subdivision, land division, land
conveyance, consolidation, or a replat as defined herein; no such
subdivision, land division, land conveyance, consolidation, or replat
shall be entitled to recording; and no street shall be laid out, nor
improvements made to land, nor building permits issued for any land
division without compliance with all requirements of this chapter and
the following:
(1) The provisions of Ch. 236, Wis. Stats.
(2) The rules of the Wisconsin Administrative Code for private on-site
waste treatment systems for subdivisions not served by public
sewer.
(3) The rules of the Wisconsin Administrative Code for subdivisions
which abut a state trunk highway or connecting highway (see Ch.
Trans 233, Wis. Adm. Code).
(4) The rules of the Wisconsin Administrative Code for the Floodplain
Management Program (see Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code) and the
Shoreland-Wetlands Protection Program (see Ch. NR 115, Wis.
Adm. Code).
(5) Comprehensive plans or components of such plans prepared by
state, regional, county or municipal agencies duly adopted by the
Village Board.
(6) All applicable local and county ordinances that are in effect when
the subdivider submits a preliminary plat, or a final plat if no
preliminary plat is submitted, including zoning, sanitary, building
and official mapping ordinances.
(7) The Village of East Troy Comprehensive Plan and Official Map, or
components thereof.
(a) Whenever a parcel to be subdivided embraces any part of a
street, highway, or greenway designated in said
Comprehensive Plan or Official Map, such part of such
proposed public way shall be platted and dedicated by the
subdivider in the location and at a width indicated along with
all other streets in the subdivision.
(b) Where a proposed public ground shown on the Comprehensive
Plan or Official Map is located, in whole or in part, within the
proposed subdivision, such proposed public ground shall be
dedicated to the public when dedication is required by this
§ 495-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-6
1:605
chapter or reserved for a period of up to five years from
the date of approval of the final plat for acquisition by the
Village of East Troy, or any other appropriate agency having
the authority to purchase said property, and the subdivider
shall enter into an agreement which provides for the purchase
of the lands held in reserve prior to the conclusion of the fiveyear
period.
(8) All applicable rules contained in the Wisconsin Administrative Code
not listed in this subsection.
(9) The Village's sewer and water rules on file with the Public Service
Commission of the State of Wisconsin concerning sewer and water
installations and services. These rules, and the Village's Sewer Use
Ordinance (Chapter 400, Sewers, of this Code), are incorporated
herein by reference and made a part hereof as though fully set
forth herein.
B. Extraterritorial jurisdiction. Jurisdiction of these regulations shall
include all lands within the corporate limits of the Village, as well as the
unincorporated area within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
Village of East Troy. The Village of East Troy has elected to approve
plats and certified survey maps under its extraterritorial jurisdiction as
provided in Chapters 236 and 66, Wisconsin Statutes. Refer to § 495-16
of this chapter.
C. Jurisdiction. [Amended 11-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
(1) The provisions of this chapter, as they apply to divisions of tracts of
land within the Village boundaries, shall not apply to:
(a) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order.
(b) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages, or
easements.
(c) Sales or exchanges of parcels of land between owners of
adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created
and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimize sizes
and meet all specifications required by this chapter, the Village
zoning regulations, or other applicable laws and ordinances,
subject to the procedures and requirements set forth in
§ 495-18 of this chapter.
(2) This subsection does not apply to land divisions within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village. Such land divisions are
specifically governed by § 495-16 of this chapter.
D. Certified survey map. Any division of land other than a subdivision as
defined in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats., shall be surveyed and a certified
survey map prepared as provided in § 236.34, Wis. Stats., subject to
approval of the Village Board.
§ 495-6 EAST TROY CODE § 495-6
1:606
§ 495-7. Land suitability; existing trees and plants.
E. Compliance; issuance of permits. The Village of East Troy shall not
recognize, and no building or other permits shall be issued by the
Village authorizing the building on or occupancy or improvement of,
any parcel of land not on record as of the effective date of this chapter
until the provisions and requirements of this chapter have been fully
complied with and a resolution approving the land division has been
adopted by the Village Board.
F. Applicability to condominiums. This chapter is expressly applicable to
condominium developments within the Village's jurisdiction, pursuant
to § 703.27(1), Wis. Stats. For purposes of this chapter, a condominium
unit and any associated limited common elements shall be deemed to be
equivalent to a lot or parcel created by the act of subdivision.
G. Recording of plats. Plats approved by the Village Board must be offered
for record, together with the adopting resolution, to the Register of
Deeds within 12 months after the date of the last approval and within
36 months after the first approval. Land divisions shall not be
recognized by the Village until recorded with the Register of Deeds. The
volume, page and document numbers of the recording shall be filed
with the Village Clerk-Treasurer and Building Inspector prior to
issuance of any permits. The subdivider shall file six certified copies of
the approved land division with the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
H. Recording of certified survey maps. Certified surveys approved by the
Village Board must be offered for record, together with the adopting
resolution, to the Register of Deeds within 12 months after the date of
the last approval and within 36 months after the first approval. Land
divisions shall not be recognized by the Village until recorded with the
Register of Deeds. The volume, page and document numbers of the
recording shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer and Building
Inspector prior to issuance of any permits. The subdivider shall file six
certified copies of the approved land division with the Village Clerk-
Treasurer.258
A. Suitability. No land shall be subdivided for residential, commercial, or
industrial use which is held unsuitable for such use by the Village
Board, upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission, for reason of
flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation,
unfavorable topography, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the
health, safety, or welfare of the future residents of the proposed
subdivision or of the community. The Village Board, in applying the
provisions of this section, shall in writing recite the particular facts
upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for
residential use and afford the subdivider an opportunity to present
evidence regarding such unsuitability. Thereafter, the Village Board,
258. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-7
1:607
§ 495-8. Condominium developments.
upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission, may affirm, modify,
or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
B. Existing flora. The subdivider shall make every effort to protect and
retain all existing trees, shrubbery, vines and grasses not actually lying
in public roadways, drainageways, building foundation sites, private
driveways, soil absorption waste disposal areas, paths, and trails. Such
trees are to be protected and preserved during construction, in
accordance with sound conservation practices, possibly including the
preservation of trees by well islands or retaining walls whenever
abutting grades are altered, pursuant to a landscaping plan filed by the
subdivider.
A. Purpose.
(1) The Village Board hereby finds that certain issues arise in
condominium developments that require limited applicability of
this chapter to condominium developments. The State Legislature
has recognized that subdivision ordinances may apply to
condominiums but that subdivision ordinances shall not impose
burdens upon condominiums that are different from those imposed
on other property of a similar character not subject to a declaration
of condominium.
(2) The factor that makes this chapter applicable to a condominium
development is the creation of multiple distinct property entities at
or near the ground surface, subject to property taxation as
separate parcels, with each property entity having different
ownership and management. The Village of East Troy determines
that this factor makes a condominium development dissimilar, both
physically and in ownership, from developments in which the land
and improvements are under unitary ownership, management, and
control.
(3) Thus, the Village Board hereby finds that new condominium
developments can place impacts on community resources in the
same manner as other new developments which are characterized
by division of land into lots. These impacts include:
(a) Additional population density.
(b) Possibility of use of particular land in a manner unsuitable to
the land's characteristics.
(c) Additional demands upon Village area parks, recreation areas,
utility facilities, and schools.
(d) Additional traffic and street use.
§ 495-7 EAST TROY CODE § 495-8
1:608
B. Portions of chapter applicable to condominium developments. The
following sections of this chapter shall apply to condominium
developments:
(1) Section 495-7 relating to land suitability and construction
practices.
(2) Sections 495-9 through 495-11 relating to preliminary plat
approval. A condominium plat prepared pursuant to § 703.11, Wis.
Stats., shall be reviewed in the same manner as a preliminary
subdivision plat as set forth in this chapter. This stage of approval
shall be the only approval required for a condominium
development. The technical requirements for preliminary plats set
forth in § 495-20 shall not apply, since condominiums have separate
technical standards set forth in § 703.11, Wis. Stats.
(3) Article VI relating to required improvements.
(4) Article VII relating to design standards for improvements.
(5) Article VIII relating to park and public land dedication
requirements.
(6) Article IX relating to fees for review.
C. Additional information. The plat shall show correctly on its face, in
addition to the information required by § 703.11, Wis. Stats., and
Article IV of this chapter:
(1) The exact location of any building on the property and common
element locations.
(2) Floor plans of all unique units which also show any limited common
elements that go with the units.
(3) Any other information that the Village requires to complete the
review of the condominium plat.
D. Condominium plat review fee.259
(1) The developer shall pay a fee set by the Village Board to the Village
Clerk-Treasurer at the time of first application for approval of any
condominium plats to assist in defraying the cost of review.
(2) A reapplication fee set by the Village Board shall be paid to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer at the time of reapplication for approval of
any condominium plat which has previously been reviewed.
E. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following condominiums:
259. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-8
1:609
(1) Any condominium plat recorded prior to the effective date of this
chapter.
(2) Any conversion of a structure or structures in existence on the
effective date of this chapter to a condominium after the effective
date of this chapter.
§ 495-8 EAST TROY CODE § 495-8
1:610
ARTICLE IV
Land Division Review and Approval
§ 495-9. Preliminary consultation. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
Before filing a preliminary plat or certified survey map (minor land division),
the subdivider is encouraged to consult with the Plan Commission for
advice regarding general subdivision requirements. Information on meeting
dates, agenda deadlines, and filing requirements may be obtained from
the Village Clerk. The subdivider shall also submit a location map showing
the relationship of the proposed subdivision to traffic arteries and existing
community facilities. This consultation is neither formal nor mandatory but
is intended to inform the subdivider of the purpose and objectives of these
regulations, the Comprehensive Plan, and duly adopted Comprehensive
Plan implementation devices of the Village and to otherwise assist the
subdivider in planning the development. In so doing, both the subdivider
and planning agency may reach mutual conclusions regarding the general
program and objectives of the proposed development and its possible
effects on the neighborhood and community. The subdivider will gain a
better understanding of the subsequent required procedures.
§ 495-10. Submission of preliminary plat.
A. Submission. Before submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider
shall prepare a preliminary plat and a letter of application. The
preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter. The
subdivider shall file five copies of the preliminary plat and the
application with the Village Clerk at least 25 days prior to the meeting
of the Plan Commission at which action is desired. The
Village Clerk shall submit a copy of the preliminary plat to the Plan
Commission and to the Village Engineer and Village Attorney for review
and written report of their recommendations and reactions to the
proposed plat. An abstract of title or registered property report shall be
referred to the Village Attorney at this time for examination and report.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Public improvements. Simultaneously with the filing of the preliminary
plat, the subdivider shall file with the Village Clerk a report addressing
sewer and water service feasibility, drainage facilities, and centerline
profiles showing proposed streets in the subdivision. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
C. Restrictive covenants. A draft of the legal instruments and rules for
proposed property owners' associations, when the subdivider proposes
that common property within a subdivision would be either owned or
maintained by such an organization of property owners or a subunit of
the Village pursuant to § 236.293, Wis. Stats., and proposed deed
restrictions or restrictive covenants, shall be submitted at the time of
§ 495-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-10
1:611
filing the preliminary plat with the Village Clerk. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
D. Environmental assessment.
(1) An environmental assessment checklist (see § 495-17) shall be
completed by the subdivider for review by the Plan Commission
with the preliminary plat, or preferably as part of the preliminary
consultation, for any subdivision or minor land division which the
Village has authority to approve.
(2) The purpose of this environmental assessment checklist is to
provide the basis for an orderly, systematic review of the effects of
all new subdivisions upon the community environment in
accordance with the principles and procedures of Wisconsin
Statutes set for local subdivision regulation. The Plan Commission
will use these procedures in determining land suitability. The goals
of the community in requiring this checklist are to eliminate or
reduce pollution and siltation to an acceptable standard, assure
ample living space per capita, preserve open space and parks for
recreation, provide adequately for stormwater control, maintain
scenic beauty and aesthetic surroundings, administer to the
economic and cultural needs of the citizens, and provide for the
effective and efficient flow of goods and services.
(3) The environmental assessment checklist shall apply to all
reviewable subdivisions and land divisions by certified survey. The
Plan Commission may waive the requirement for the filing of an
environmental assessment checklist for land division by certified
survey of less than five acres total area.
E. Certification. The surveyor preparing the preliminary plat shall certify
on the face of the plat that it is a correct representation of all existing
land divisions and features and that it is in full compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
F. Filing requirements. The following shall also be filed with the
preliminary plat:
(1) A statement of the proposed use of lots, including type of
residential buildings with number of proposed dwelling units and
types of business or industry, as to reveal the effect of the
development on traffic, fire hazards, environmental impact, and
congestion of population.
(2) If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan
for the areas, including dimensions.
(3) Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to the proposed
subdivision, the Plan Commission and/or Village Board may require
that the subdivider submit a preliminary plat of the remainder of
the property so as to show the possible relationships between the
§ 495-10 EAST TROY CODE § 495-10
1:612
§ 495-11. Preliminary plat review and approval.
proposed subdivision and future subdivisions. In any event, all
subdivisions must be shown to relate well with existing or potential
adjacent subdivisions.
G. Street plans and profiles. The subdivider shall provide street plans and
profiles showing existing ground surface and proposed and established
street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond
the limits of the proposed subdivision when required.
H. Soil testing. The subdivider may be required to provide a preliminary
soils report, listing the types of soil in the proposed subdivision, their
effect on the subdivision and a proposed soil testing and investigation
program. Pursuant to the public policy concerns prescribed in § 495-7,
the Village Board may require that borings and soundings be made in
specified areas to ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and water conditions,
including depth to bedrock and depth to groundwater table.
I. Drafting standards. The subdivider shall submit to the Village Clerk,
and to those agencies having the authority to object to plats under
provisions in Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes, copies of a
preliminary plat (or certified survey map) based upon an accurate
exterior boundary survey by a professional land surveyor. The plat shall
clearly depict the proposed subdivision at a scale of not more than one
inch per 100 feet; two-foot contour intervals; grading, tree planting,
paving, installation of facilities and dedications of land; and easements.
The subdivider shall also indicate when improvements will be provided.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
A. Referral to objecting agencies. [Amended 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-13]
(1) The subdivider shall, within two days after filing with the Village,
transmit two copies to the Plat Review Program, Wisconsin
Department of Administration (WisDOA), and two copies to the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation (WisDOT), if the
subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway or a connecting
street, and two copies to the State Department of Safety and
Professional Services (WisDSPS) if the subdivision is not served by
public sewer and a provision for that service has not been made.
The subdivider shall file with the Village Clerk an affidavit
indicating that he/she has fully complied with the requirement of
filing with WisDOA, WisDOT and WisDSPS, which are considered to
be objecting agencies. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(2) Within 20 days of the date of receiving the copies of the plat, any
state agency having authority to object under Subsection A(1)
above shall notify the subdivider and all approving or objecting
§ 495-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-11
1:613
authorities of any objection based upon failure of the plat to comply
with the statutes or rules which its examination is authorized to
cover or, if all objections have been satisfied, it shall so certify
on the face of a copy of the plat and return that copy to the
approving authority from which it was received. The plat shall not
be approved or deemed approved until all objections have been
satisfied. If the objecting agency fails to act within the twenty-day
limit, it shall be deemed to have no objection to the plat.
(3) In lieu of the procedure under Subsection A(1) above, the
subdivider may submit the original plat to WisDOA, which shall
forward two copies to each of the agencies authorized to object.
The Wisconsin Department of Administration (WisDOA) shall have
the required number of copies made at the subdivider's expense.
Within 20 days of the date of receiving the copies of the plat, any
agency having authority to object shall notify the subdivider and all
agencies having the authority to object of any objection based upon
failure of the plat to comply with the statutes or rules which its
examination is authorized to cover or, if there is no objection, it
shall so certify on the face of a copy of the plat and return that copy
to the WisDOA. After each agency and the WisDOA have certified
that they have no objection or that their objections have been
satisfied, WisDOA shall so certify on the face of the plat. If an
agency fails to act within 20 days from the date of the receipt of
copies of the plat, and the WisDOA fails to act within 30 days of
receipt of the original plat, it shall be deemed that there are no
objections to the plat and, upon demand, it shall be so certified on
the face of the plat by WisDOA.
B. Review by other Village agencies. The Village Clerk shall transmit a
copy of the preliminary plat to the Village Engineer, Village Attorney,
Village Zoning Administrator and to all affected Village boards,
commissions, or departments, and all affected local utility companies,
for their review and recommendations concerning matters within their
jurisdiction. Their recommendations, if any, shall be transmitted to the
Plan Commission within 15 days from the date the plat is filed. The
preliminary plat shall then be reviewed by the Plan Commission for
conformance with this chapter and all ordinances, rules and regulations
and the Comprehensive Plan. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
C. Plan Commission review. After review of the preliminary plat and
negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the
kind and extent of public improvements which will be required, the Plan
Commission shall, within 60 days of filing, or within such time as
extended by agreement with the subdivider of its submission, approve,
approve conditionally, or reject the plat. The subdivider shall be notified
in writing of any conditions for approval or the reasons for rejection.
Such action of the Plan Commission shall be submitted to the Village
Board for approval, and the subdivider shall be notified in writing of any
§ 495-11 EAST TROY CODE § 495-11
1:614
§ 495-12. Final plat review and approval. [Amended 12-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-13]
changes or modifications in the action of the Plan Commission and the
reasons therefor.
D. Board action. After receipt of the Plan Commission's recommendation,
the Village Board shall, within 90 days of the date the plat was filed with
the Village Clerk, approve, approve conditionally, or reject such plat
and shall state, in writing, any conditions of approval or reasons for
rejection, unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider.
Failure of the Village Board to act within 90 days of filling of the plat or
extension thereof shall constitute an approval of the preliminary plat,
unless other authorized agencies object to the plat. The
Village Clerk shall communicate to the subdivider the action of the
Village Board. If the preliminary plat is approved, the
Village Clerk shall endorse it for the Village Board. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
E. Effect of preliminary plat approval. Approval or conditional approval of
a preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the final
plat, except that if the final plat is submitted within 36 months of a
preliminary plat approval and conforms substantially to the preliminary
plat layout, the final plat shall be entitled to approval. Conditional
approval may be granted subject to satisfactory compliance with
pertinent provisions of this chapter and Ch. 236, Wis. Stats. The
preliminary plat shall be deemed an expression of approval or
conditional approval of the layout submitted as a guide to the
preparation of the final plat, which will be subject to further
consideration by the Plan Commission and Village Board at the time of
its submission.
F. Preliminary plat amendment. Should the subdivider desire to amend
the preliminary plat as approved, he/she may resubmit the amended
plat which shall follow the same procedure, except for the fee, unless
the amendment is, in the opinion of the Village Board, of such scope as
to constitute a new plat, in which such case it shall be refiled.
A. Filing requirements.
(1) The subdivider shall prepare a final plat and a letter of application
in accordance with this chapter and shall file one paper and one
electronic copy of the plat and the application with the
Village Clerk at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the Plan
Commission at which action is desired. The owner or subdivider
shall file one paper and one electronic copy of the final plat not
later than 36 months after the date of approval of the preliminary
plat; otherwise, the preliminary plat and final plat will be
considered void unless an extension is requested in writing by the
subdivider and for good cause granted by the Village. The owner or
subdivider shall also submit at this time a current certified abstract
§ 495-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-12
1:615
of title or registered property report and such other evidence as
the Village Attorney may require showing title or control in the
application. A written transmittal letter shall identify all substantial
changes that have been made to the plat since the approval of the
preliminary plat. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(2) The subdivider shall, within two days after filing with the Village,
transmit two copies to the Plat Review Program, Wisconsin
Department of Administration (WisDOA), and two copies to the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation (WisDOT), if the
subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway or a connecting
street, and two copies to the State Department of Safety and
Professional Services (WisDSPS) if the subdivision is not served by
public sewer and a provision for that service has not been made.
The subdivider shall file with the Village Clerk an affidavit
indicating that the plat fully complies with the requirement of filing
with WisDOA, WisDOT and WisDSPS, which are considered to be
objecting agencies. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(3) The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and
to the requirements of all applicable ordinances and state laws and
shall be submitted for certification of those agencies having the
authority to object to the plat as provided by § 236.12(2), Wis.
Stats.
(4) Simultaneously with the filing of the final plat or map, the owner
shall file with the Village Clerk one paper and one electronic copy
of plans and specifications of public improvements required by this
chapter and a signed copy of the subdivider's agreement as may be
required by this chapter. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
(5) The Village Clerk shall refer two copies of the final plat to the Plan
Commission, one copy to the Village Engineer, one copy to the
Village Attorney, and a copy each to the telephone and power and
other utility companies. The abstract of title or registered property
report and final plat shall be referred to the Village Attorney for his/
her examination and report. The Village Clerk shall also refer final
plans and specifications for public improvements required by this
chapter to the Village Engineer for review. [Amended 12-16-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-18]
B. Village staff review.
(1) A professional engineer, a planner, or another person charged with
the responsibility to review plats shall provide the Plan Commission
and Village Board with his or her conclusions as to whether the
final plat conforms substantially to the preliminary plat and with
his or her recommendation on approval of the final plat.
§ 495-12 EAST TROY CODE § 495-12
1:616
(2) Village staff may only recommend approval of the final plat upon a
determination that all required public and private improvements
have been provided as set forth in § 495-23.
(3) The recommendations of the Village Attorney and Village Engineer
shall be made within 30 days of the filing of the final plat. The
Village Engineer shall examine the plat or map and the final plans
and specifications of public improvements for technical details and,
if he/she finds them satisfactory, shall so certify in writing to the
Plan Commission. If the plat, map, or the plans and specifications
are not satisfactory, the Village Engineer shall return them to the
owner and so advise the Plan Commission.
C. Plan Commission review.
(1) The Plan Commission shall examine the final plat as to its
conformance with the approved preliminary plat, any conditions of
approval of the preliminary plat, this chapter, and all applicable
ordinances, rules, regulations, comprehensive plans which may
affect it and shall recommend approval, conditional approval, or
rejection of the plat to the Village Board. The recommendations of
the Plan Commission shall be made within 30 days of the filing of
the final plat.
(2) The Plan Commission may only recommend approval of the final
plat upon a determination that all required public and private
improvements have been provided as set forth in § 495-23.
(3) The objecting agencies shall, within 20 days of the date of receiving
their copies of the final plat, notify the subdivider and all other
approving and objecting agencies of any objections. If there are no
objections, they shall so certify on the face of the copy of the plat
and shall return that copy to the Village. If an objecting agency fails
to act within 20 days, it shall be deemed to have no objection to the
plat.
(4) If the final plat is not submitted within 36 months of the last
required approval of the preliminary plat, the Village Board may
refuse to approve the final plat or may extend the time for
submission of the final plat.
(5) The Plan Commission shall, within 30 days of the date of filing of
the final plat with the Village Clerk, recommend approval,
conditional approval, or rejection of the plat and shall transmit the
final plat and application, along with its recommendations, to the
Village Board. The Plan Commission may hold the matter in
abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate information.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
D. Board review and approval.
§ 495-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-12
1:617
§ 495-13. Land divisions by certified survey map. [Amended
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13]
(1) The Village Board shall, within 60 days of the date of filing the
original final plat with the Village Clerk, approve or reject such
plat, unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider.
If the plat is rejected, the reasons shall be stated in the minutes of
the meeting and a written statement of the reasons forwarded to
the subdivider. The Village Board may not inscribe its approval on
the final plat unless the Village Clerk certifies on the face of the
plat that the copies were forwarded to objecting agencies as
required herein, the date thereof and that no objections have been
filed within 20 days or, if filed, have been met. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(2) The Village Board may only approve the final plat upon a
determination that all required public and private improvements
have been provided as set forth in § 495-23.
(3) The Village Board shall, when it determines to approve a final plat,
give at least 10 days' prior written notice of its intention to the
clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of
the final plat.
(4) Failure of the Village Board to act within 60 days, the time having
not been extended and no unsatisfied objections having been filed,
the plat shall be deemed approved.
E. Recording. After the final plat has been approved by the Village Board,
the Village Clerk shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the plat
attesting to such approval to be duly executed and the plat returned to
the subdivider for recording with the Register of Deeds. The Register of
Deeds cannot record the plat unless it is offered within 12 months after
the date of the last approval of the plat and within 36 months after the
first approval. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
F. Copies. The subdivider shall file one paper and one electronic copy of
the final plat with the Village Clerk for distribution to the approving
agencies, affected sanitary districts, and other affected agencies for
their files. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
G. Partial platting. The final plat may, if permitted by the Village Board,
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to record at the time.
A. Generally. When it is proposed to divide land into not more than four
parcels or sites, or when it is proposed to divide a block, lot, or outlot
into not more than four parcels or sites within a recorded subdivision
plat without changing the boundaries of said block, lot, or outlot, the
subdivider shall subdivide by use of a certified survey map. In the event
a proposed land division does not meet the above requirements, the
§ 495-12 EAST TROY CODE § 495-13
1:618
proposed land division must be pursued as a subdivision plat. A
certified survey map, prepared by a professional land surveyor, shall
comply with the requirements of § 236.34, Wis. Stats., as well as all
requirements set forth in this chapter. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02]
B. Land to be included in survey. The certified survey map shall include the
entire lot, parcel, or tract of land being divided, except that the Village
Board may upon petition allow the subdivider to exclude any remainder
that is more than 40 acres.
C. Applicable requirements. The subdivider shall comply with all
requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to
Article VII (Design Standards), Article VI (Required Improvements),
and Article VIII (Park and Public Land Dedications), when a certified
survey map is used. A certification of the approval of the certified
survey map by the Village Board shall be inscribed legibly on the face of
the map. A certificate of the Village Clerk stating that there are no
unpaid special assessments or taxes on the lands shall be included on
the certified survey map. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
D. Conceptual review procedure. The following steps shall be used in the
review of a conceptual certified survey map:
(1) Presubmittal meeting. Before submitting an application, the
subdivider is encouraged to meet with the Zoning Administrator
and other Village officials to review applicable zoning and land
division requirements. This consultation is neither formal nor
mandatory but is intended to inform the subdivider of the purpose
and objectives of these regulations, the Comprehensive Plan, and
duly adopted Comprehensive Plan implementation devices of the
Village and to otherwise assist the subdivider in planning the
development.
(2) Submittal. The subdivider shall submit a completed application and
the conceptual certified survey map in the number requested by
the Village Clerk along with the application fee as may be set by
the Village Board. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(3) Review by other Village agencies. The Village Clerk shall transmit a
copy of the map to the Village Engineer, Village Attorney, Village
Zoning Administrator and to all affected Village boards,
commissions or departments for their review and
recommendations concerning matters within their jurisdiction.
Their recommendations shall be transmitted to the Plan
Commission within 10 days from the date the map is filed.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(4) Review by Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall review the
conceptual certified survey map at a regular or special meeting and
§ 495-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-13
1:619
shall approve the conceptual survey map, approve the map with
conditions, or deny the map. If the map is denied, the reason shall
be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement
forwarded to the applicant.
E. Final review procedure. After conceptual concurrence has been
granted by the Plan Commission, the subdivider shall prepare a final
certified survey map consistent with § 236.34, Wis. Stats., and this
chapter and submit it for review at least 25 days prior to the meeting at
which time certified survey map approval is requested. The following
steps shall be used in the review of a final certified survey map:
(1) Submittal. The subdivider shall submit a completed application and
the final certified survey map in the number requested by the
Village Clerk along with the application fee as may be set by the
Village Board. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(2) Referral to Plan Commission. The Village Clerk shall, within two
normal workdays after filing, transmit the copies of the application
and map to the Plan Commission. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
(3) Review by other Village agencies. The Village Clerk shall, within
two normal workdays after filing, transmit a copy of the map to the
Village Engineer, Village Attorney, Village Zoning Administrator,
and to all affected Village boards, commission or departments for
their review and recommendations concerning matters within their
jurisdiction. Their recommendations shall be transmitted to the
Plan Commission within 10 days from the date the map is filed.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(4) Plan Commission recommendation. The Plan Commission shall,
within 30 days from the date of filing of the certified survey map,
recommend approval, conditional approval, or rejection of the map
and shall transmit the map, along with its recommendations, to the
Village Board.
(5) Village Board decision. The Village Board shall approve, approve
conditionally, or reject such certified survey map within 90 days
from the date of filing of the map, unless the time is extended by
agreement with the applicant. If the map is rejected, the reason
shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written
statement forwarded to the applicant. If the map is approved, the
Village Board shall cause the Village Clerk to so certify on the face
of the original map and return the map to the applicant. The Village
Board may only approve the certified survey map upon a
determination that all required public and private improvements
have been provided as set forth in § 495-23. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
§ 495-13 EAST TROY CODE § 495-13
1:620
§ 495-14. Replat.
§ 495-15. Adequate public facilities and services.
F. Recording. The applicant shall offer for record a copy of the approved
certified survey map to the Register of Deeds within 12 months of the
date of the last approval and within 36 months after the date of the first
approval. All recording fees shall be paid by the subdivider. [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
G. Building permits. No building permits shall be issued until the certified
survey is recorded and a document recording number is filed with the
Village Building Inspector.
H. Reapprovals. Submittals of previously approved certified survey maps
for replatting or reapproval by the Village Board shall be in accordance
with § 495-14.
A. Except as provided in § 70.27(1), Wis. Stats., when it is proposed to
replat a recorded subdivision or part thereof, so as to change the
exterior boundaries of a recorded subdivision or part thereof, the
subdivider or person wishing to replat shall vacate or alter the recorded
plat as provided in §§ 236.40 through 236.44, Wis. Stats. The subdivider
or person wishing to replat shall then proceed using the approval
procedures for preliminary and final plats prescribed in this article.
B. Whenever an approved final plat is submitted for reapproval within six
months of the initial resolution approving the plat, and which is
substantially in conformance with the approved plat, and which has not
been recorded with the Register of Deeds, said plat shall be reapproved
by the Village Board. No final plats shall be reapproved by the Village
Board following the expiration of the six-month period. Such plats shall
be submitted as a new plat. All previous approvals shall be null and void
and shall have no further bearing on the subsequent review and
approval of the plat by the Village.
A. A preliminary plat, final plat, or certified survey shall not be approved
unless the Plan Commission and the Village Board determine that
adequate public facilities and public services will be available to meet
the needs of the proposed land division and that no public funds other
than those already provided in an adopted capital or operating budget
are required. The Village Board, at its discretion, may waive this
provision if the Board agrees to use bonding/borrowing for the project.
B. The applicant shall furnish any data requested by the Village Clerk, who
shall transmit this information to the appropriate Village commissions,
committees, and staff for review. The Village Clerk shall act as
coordinator of the reports from staff to the Plan Commission and Village
Board on the adequacy of water, sanitary and storm sewers, fire service,
police protection, parks, open space, recreation facilities,
§ 495-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-15
1:621
transportation facilities, and schools. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
C. Public facilities and public services for a proposed land division may be
found to be adequate when the following conditions exist:
(1) The proposed land division is located in an urban service area
where adequate sewer service is presently available for extension,
under construction, or designated by the Village Board for
extension of sewer service within the current capital budget year
and funds are specifically provided for such extension either from
public or private financing. The Plan Commission and the Village
Board shall consider the recommendations of the Village Engineer
and the appropriate committee(s) on the capacity of trunk lines and
of sewage treatment facilities and any other information presented.
(2) The proposed land division is located within an urban service area
contiguous to an arterial transmission water main of adequate
capacity for the proposed development or if the water distribution
system that is needed is under construction or scheduled for
construction within the current budget year and funds, either
public or private, are available for the program. The Plan
Commission and the Village Board shall consider the
recommendation from the Village utility providers and the Village
Engineer and the appropriate committee(s) on line capacities,
water sources and storage facilities, as well as any other
information presented.
(3) The Village Treasurer verifies to the Plan Commission and the
Village Board that adequate funds, either public or private, are
available to ensure the installation of all necessary stormwater
management facilities. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
(4) The Director of Public Works can demonstrate to the Plan
Commission and the Village Board that street maintenance and
refuse collection services, either public or private, are so situated
that adequate and timely service can be provided so as not to
involve danger or injury to the health, safety, or general welfare of
the future residents of the proposed land division or existing
Village residents.
(5) The Plan Commission verifies that the future residents of the
proposed land division can be assured park, recreation, and open
space facilities and services which meet the standards of the
Village's Comprehensive Plan.
(6) The Police Department, Emergency Services, and Fire Department
verify that timely and adequate service can be provided to the
residents. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
§ 495-15 EAST TROY CODE § 495-15
1:622
§ 495-16. Land divisions in extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(7) The proposed land division is accessible by an existing or officially
mapped, publicly maintained, all-weather roadway system
adequate to accommodate both existing traffic and that traffic to be
generated by the proposed land division in accordance with the
Official Map and Village standards.
D. Where the Plan Commission and the Village Board determine that one
or more public facilities or services are not adequate for the proposed
development but that a portion of the area could be served adequately,
or that careful phasing of the development could result in all public
facilities and public services being adequate, conditional approval may
include only such portions or may specify phasing of the development.
E. Areas within the Village capable of being served by public sewer and
water shall be required to connect to the Village of East Troy public
water distribution and/or public sewerage system if determined by the
Village Engineer to be feasible. If such connections are not determined
feasible, the proposed land division shall provide for adequate on-site
systems and such special piping provisions as may be necessary to
serve the anticipated development during the interim period until such
Village public water and/or sewerage systems are determined by the
Village Engineer to be feasibly available for connection. The subdivider
and his/her heirs and assigns shall, by written plat restriction, agree to
abandon the interim water and sewerage facilities and connect to the
Village public water and sewerage facilities upon a determination by
the Village Engineer that such facilities are available for feasible
connection.
F. The above requirements of this section shall not apply to those areas
outside the corporate limits of the Village of East Troy and within the
Village's extraterritorial limits.
A. Application required. No person, firm, or corporation shall divide any
land located within the one-and-one-half-mile extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Village of East Troy without first filing an application
with the Village for, and receiving Village approval of, a certified survey
map and/or preliminary and final plat.
B. Preapplication procedure. Before filing an application for approval of a
certified survey, the subdivider shall consult with the Plan Commission
and shall prepare a preliminary sketch for review and approval and
complete an environmental assessment checklist (see § 495-17). This
procedure will assist the applicant in appraising the objectives of these
regulations, the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map and other pertinent
Village ordinances. The preapplication information shall be submitted
to the Plan Commission for review and approval 15 days prior to the
meeting at which the application will be considered.
§ 495-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-16
1:623
C. Extraterritorial land division policies. The following policies shall
govern the Village in approving division of land within the one-and-onehalf-
mile extraterritorial jurisdiction: [Amended 11-3-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-12; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13; 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02; 8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07]
(1) The minimum lot size within the formally adopted extraterritorial
limits of the Village of East Troy shall be one acre. A smaller lot size
may be allowed if also approved by the respective Town Board. The
maximum lot size shall be 100,000 square feet, except for lots to
remain undeveloped in farmland or natural area.
(2) Before final approval by the Village of any plat located outside the
corporate limits of the Village but within its extraterritorial
jurisdiction, the subdivider shall give evidence that he/she has
complied with all street and utility improvement requirements of
the town in which the land being platted is located.
(3) For land divisions by certified survey map, the procedure for
approval by the Village shall be as specified in § 495-13. The Village
may require approval of the certified survey map by the pertinent
Town Board before acting as specified under this section.
(4) All land divisions within the one-and-one-half-mile extraterritorial
jurisdiction will be subject to the land preservation or dedication
requirements of this chapter. This specifically means the following:
(a) Any public right-of-way area identified on the Village
Comprehensive Plan or Official Map shall be dedicated in
conformance with requirements of this chapter.
(b) Any waterway or stormwater management area identified in
the Village Comprehensive Plan or Official Map shall be
dedicated in conformance with requirements of this chapter.
(c) For any lands falling within the limits of an environmental
corridor, as mapped by the Village of East Troy or by county
planning agencies, the developer will be required to record a
public open space easement specifying that the use shall be
consistent with conservancy area zoning in Chapter 510,
Zoning, of this Code.
(5) Land divisions within the one-and-one-half-mile extraterritorial
jurisdiction shall meet all of the design standards in Article VII of
this chapter, where applicable. Upon petition, the Village Board,
upon Plan Commission recommendation, may on a case-by-case
basis exempt one or more of the proposed lots from one or more of
the specific standards in § 495-46 relating to the design of lots.
(6) Land divisions by certified survey within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction will be required to follow erosion control plans in
compliance with this chapter.
§ 495-16 EAST TROY CODE § 495-16
1:624
§ 495-17. Environmental assessment checklist.
Preliminary Checklist for Environmental Assessment of Plats, Land
Divisions and Community Development Plans
(All yes answers must be explained in detail by
attaching maps and supporting documentation
describing the impacts of the proposed development.) Yes No
I Land resources. Does the site involve the
following?
A Changes in relief and drainage patterns
(attach a topographic map showing, at a
minimum, 2-foot contour intervals)
B A landform or topographic feature of local
or regional interest
C A floodplain [if yes attach 2 copies of a
typical stream valley cross section showing
the channel of the stream, the 100-year
floodplain limits and the floodway limits (if
officially adopted) of each side of the
channel and a cross section of area to be
developed]
D An area of soil instability: greater than 18%
slope and/or organic soils, peats, or mucks
at or near the surface
E An area of bedrock within 6 feet of the soil
surface
F An area with the groundwater table within
10 feet of the soil surface
G An area with fractured bedrock within 10
feet of the soil surface
H Prevention of gravel extraction
(7) The Village Board may require placement of covenants or deed
restrictions that are deemed necessary and appropriate by the Plan
Commission to protect the purpose and intent of the Village's plan
and ordinances. Any such restrictions shall be placed on the face of
the certified survey map from which the lot or lots were created.
(8) The plat or certified survey map shall include those portions of the
entire original parcel of land on which any new lots or parcels are
created.
(9) In all cases, the time period within which action is required shall
not begin until the Town Board, pertinent county reviewing
officials, and the Village of East Troy have received all maps,
drawings, and data required for plat approval, applications have
been completed, and fees have been paid.
§ 495-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-17
1:625
Preliminary Checklist for Environmental Assessment of Plats, Land
Divisions and Community Development Plans
(All yes answers must be explained in detail by
attaching maps and supporting documentation
describing the impacts of the proposed development.) Yes No
I A drainageway for 5 or more acres of land
J Lot coverage of more than 50%
impermeable surfaces
K Prime agricultural land
L Wetlands and marshes
M Land elevation above 950 (USGS datum)
N Mapped environmental corridors
II Water resources. Does the proposed project
involve any of the following?
A Location within an area traversed by a
navigable stream or dry run
B Greater than 10% change in the capacity of
a stormwater storage facility or flow of a
waterway within 1 mile
C The use of septic tank – soil absorption
fields for on-site waste disposal
D Lowering of water table by pumping or
drainage
E Raising of water table by altered drainage
patterns
F Lake frontage
III Biological resources. Does the proposed
project involve any of the following?
A Critical habitat for plants and animals of
community interest
B Endangered, unusual or rare species
C Removal of over 25% of the present trees
IV Human and scientific interest. Does the
proposed project involve any of the following?
A An area of archaeological interest
B An area of geological interest
C An area of hydrological interest
D Historic buildings or monuments
E Buildings or monuments of unique
architecture
§ 495-17 EAST TROY CODE § 495-17
1:626
Preliminary Checklist for Environmental Assessment of Plats, Land
Divisions and Community Development Plans
(All yes answers must be explained in detail by
attaching maps and supporting documentation
describing the impacts of the proposed development.) Yes No
F An area of identified community recreation
use
V Energy, transportation and communications.
A Does the development increase the traffic
flow in any collector system by more than
10%?
B Is the development traversed by an existing
or planned utility corridor? (gas, electricity,
water, sewer interceptor, communications,
storm sewer)
VI Population.
A Does the development increase by more
than 10% the school population of any
school serving the development?
VII Additional information on any of the above
that may have a significant environmental
impact.
VIII Appendices and supporting material.
§ 495-18. Prior review of sales or exchanges of land between
adjoining landowners. [Added 11-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
A. Generally. In every situation, regardless of circumstances, that a
property owner seeks to convey land in a manner that would adjust a lot
line or create or eliminate a lot line, and that conveyance does not
require a certified survey map or subdivision plat pursuant to this
chapter, and where an adjacent property owner intends to acquire such
interest in land, the proposed conveyance shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator for review before the conveyance documents are
signed and before the conveyance is recorded in the office of the
Walworth County Register of Deeds.
B. Review procedure. The general steps outlined below shall be used to
review an application for a sale or exchange between adjoining
landowners:
(1) Presubmittal meeting. Before submitting an application, the
applicant or the applicant's agent may meet with the Zoning
Administrator to review applicable regulations and procedures and
the proposed transfer.
§ 495-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-18
1:627
(2) Submittal of application materials. The applicant shall submit a
completed application and other required materials to the Zoning
Administrator along with the application fee set forth in the fee
schedule adopted from time to time by the Village Board.
(3) Staff review. Within 10 days of submittal, the Zoning Administrator
shall either determine that the application is incomplete and notify
the applicant, in writing, of any deficiencies or make a decision
based on the decision criteria contained in this section to approve
the application, approve the application with conditions, or deny
the application. The Zoning Administrator shall take no further
steps to process the application until the deficiencies are remedied.
The incomplete application shall be retained as a public record.
(4) Applicant notification. Within 15 days following his or her decision
to approve or deny the application, the Zoning Administrator shall
mail the decision notice to the applicant by regular mail.
(5) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision notice shall be
retained as a public record.
C. Review criteria. The review by the Zoning Administrator, and by the
Plan Commission on appeal, shall be limited to considering whether the
conveyance is in compliance with § 236.45(2)(am)3, Wis. Stats., and the
applicable laws cited therein, including these regulations, the Village's
zoning regulations, and other applicable laws and ordinances. Such
conveyance can only be approved if the same number of lots exist prior
to the conveyance as would exist after the conveyance. Such
conveyance can only be approved if the resulting lots would all be both
legal and conforming, even if any such lots are legal nonconforming
prior to the conveyance, because the conveyance creates new lots
which do not predate the ordinance and therefore have no legal
nonconforming rights. Such conveyance must not be approved if the
conveyance includes land that has a legal nonconforming use, because
the legal nonconforming rights are limited to use of the preexisting lot.
Such conveyance shall not be approved if any of the resulting lots and
the existing improvements on the lots would be in violation of
applicable open space requirements. Such conveyance shall not be
approved if the conveyance would make an existing conforming
structure illegal or nonconforming or would increase the extent of any
preexisting legal nonconformity of an existing structure.
D. Expiration of approval. An approval granted under this section shall
automatically expire 12 months after the date of issuance if the
transaction has not been recorded in the Walworth County Register of
Deeds office.
E. Appeal. An aggrieved person may appeal the Zoning Administrator's
final decision by filing an appeal with the Plan Commission within 30
days of such decision. Following the final decision of the Plan
Commission, an aggrieved person may appeal such decision by filing an
§ 495-18 EAST TROY CODE § 495-18
1:628
§ 495-19. Subdivider's agreement. [Added 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-13]
appeal with a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days of the final
decision.
A. Generally. If the Village Board approves a division of land, condominium
plat, or replat that involves the installation of public and/or private
improvements or if the Village's approval requires a subdivider's
agreement, the subdivider shall provide a subdivider's agreement to the
Village Board and obtain approval of the same prior to any land altering
activity or as otherwise stipulated in the approval.
B. Village costs. The subdivider is responsible for reimbursing the Village
for all costs it incurs in the review and approval of a subdivider's
agreement, including work performed by Village staff or any consultant
or contract employee retained by the Village.
C. Amendment. Once a subdivider's agreement is accepted by the
subdivider and the Village Board, such agreement may only be
amended with the approval of both parties.
D. Public record. Although a subdivider's agreement is a private contract
between two parties, it is considered a public document.
E. Model agreement. The Village Administrator, Village Attorney, and
Village Engineer are authorized to jointly develop a model subdivider's
agreement for projects in the Village of East Troy that is consistent with
the provisions of this chapter and may make revisions to such
agreement from time to time as may be needed to address changes in
this chapter, state law, or best practices. The Village Clerk shall
maintain the most current version and provide copies to subdividers
and others upon request. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
§ 495-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-19
1:629

ARTICLE V
Technical Requirements
§ 495-20. Technical requirements for preliminary plats.
A. General. A preliminary plat shall be required for all subdivisions and
shall be based upon a survey by a professional land surveyor and the
plat prepared on Mylar or paper of good quality at a scale of not more
than 100 feet to the inch and shall show correctly on its face the
following information:260
(1) Title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, which
name shall not duplicate or be alike in pronunciation of the name of
any plat heretofore recorded in the Village unless considered an
addition to the subdivision.
(2) Legal description/location of the proposed subdivision by
government lot, quarter section, township, range, county and state.
(3) Date, scale and North arrow.
(4) Names, telephone numbers and addresses of the owner, engineer,
subdivider, land surveyor preparing the plat, and any agent having
control of the land.
(5) Entire area contiguous to the proposed plat owned or controlled by
the subdivider may be required by the Plan Commission to be
included on the preliminary plat even though only a portion of said
area is proposed for immediate development. Where a subdivider
owns or controls adjacent lands in addition to those proposed for
development at that time, the subdivider shall submit a concept
plan for the development of the adjacent lands showing streets,
utilities, zoning districts and other information as may affect the
review of the preliminary plat in question. The Village Engineer
may waive these requirements where adjacent development
patterns have already been established.
B. Plat data. All preliminary plats shall show the following:
(1) Exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the
proposed subdivision referenced to a corner established in the U.S.
Public Land Survey and the total acreage encompassed thereby.
(2) Locations of all existing property boundary lines, structures,
drives, streams and watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded
areas, railroad tracks, and other significant features within the
tract being subdivided or immediately adjacent thereto.
(3) Location, right-of-way width, and names of all existing streets,
alleys, or other public ways, easements, railroad and utility rights-
260. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-20
1:631
of-way, and all section and quarter section lines within the exterior
boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto.
(4) Location, right-of-way width, and names of all proposed streets,
alleys, or other public ways and easements.
(5) Location and names of any adjacent subdivisions, parks, and
cemeteries and owners of record of abutting unplatted lands.
(6) Current Zoning Map and Future Land Use Plan Map designations
for the subject property and all abutting properties.
(7) Type, width, and elevation of any existing street pavements within
the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto,
together with any legally established center-line elevations.
(8) Location, size, and invert elevation of any existing sanitary or storm
sewers, culverts and drainpipes, the location of manholes, catch
basins, hydrants, and electric and communication facilities,
whether overhead or underground, and the location and size of any
existing water and gas mains within the exterior boundaries of the
plat or immediately adjacent thereto. If no sewers or water mains
are located on or immediately adjacent to the tract, the nearest
such sewers or water mains which might be extended to serve the
tract shall be indicated by the direction and distance from the tract,
size, and invert elevations.
(9) Corporate limit lines within the exterior boundaries of the plat or
immediately adjacent thereto.
(10) Contours within the exterior boundaries of the plat and extending
to the center line of adjacent public streets to National Map
Accuracy Standards based upon mean sea level datum at vertical
intervals of not more than two feet. At least two permanent
benchmarks shall be located in the immediate vicinity of the plat;
the location of the benchmarks shall be indicated on the plat,
together with their elevations referenced to mean sea level datum
and the monumentation of the benchmarks clearly and completely
described. Where, in the judgment of the Village Engineer, undue
hardship would result because of the remoteness of the parcel from
a mean sea level reference elevation, another datum may be used.
(11) High water elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages, and
wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the plat or located
within 100 feet therefrom.
(12)Water elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages, and
wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the plat or located
within 100 feet therefrom at the date of the survey.
(13) Floodland and shoreland boundaries and the contour line lying a
vertical distance of two feet above the elevation of the one-
§ 495-20 EAST TROY CODE § 495-20
1:632
hundred-year recurrence interval flood or, where such data is not
available, two feet above the elevation of the maximum flood of
record within the exterior boundaries of the plat or within 100 feet
therefrom.
(14) Location and results of percolation tests within the exterior
boundaries of the plat conducted in accordance with the Wisconsin
Administrative Code where the subdivision will not be served by
public sanitary sewer service.
(15) Approximate dimensions of all lots together with proposed lot and
block numbers. The area in square feet of each lot shall be
provided.
(16) Location and approximate dimensions of any sites to be reserved or
dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways, or other public
use or which are to be used for group housing, shopping centers,
church sites, or other nonpublic uses not requiring subdivision.
(17) Approximate radii of all curves.
(18) Any proposed lake and stream access with a small drawing clearly
indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to
access.
(19) Any proposed lake and stream improvement or relocation and
notice of application for approval by the Department of Natural
Resources, when applicable.261
(20) Soil tests and reports as may be required by the Village Engineer
for the design of roadways, storm drainage facilities, on-site
sewage disposal systems, erosion control facilities, and/or other
subdivision improvements and features.
(21) The Village Engineer may require that the subdivider provide
street plans and profiles showing existing ground surface and
proposed and established street grades, including extensions for a
reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision
when requested. All elevations, plans and profiles shall meet the
approval of said Engineer.
(a) Locations and widths of proposed alleys, pedestrianways and
utility easements.
(b) Layout numbers and preliminary acreage and dimensions of
lots and blocks.
(c) Minimum front, rear, side and street yard building setback
lines.
261. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-20
1:633
§ 495-21. Technical requirements for final plats.
(d) Location and size of proposed sanitary sewer lines and water
mains.
(e) Gradients of proposed streets and sewer lines (and water
mains, if required).
(f) Areas, other than streets, alleys, pedestrianways and utility
easements, intended to be dedicated or reserved for public
use, including the size of such area or areas in acres.
(g) Location and description of survey monuments.
(h) An identification system for the consecutive numbering of all
blocks and lots within the subdivision.
(i) Sites, if any, to be reserved for parks or other public uses.
(j) Sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers,
churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of singlefamily
dwellings.
(k) Provisions for surface water management, including both
minor and major system components and detention/retention
facilities, including existing and post-development onehundred-
year flood elevations, etc.
(l) Potential resubdivision and use of excessively deep (over 200
feet) or oversized lots must be indicated in a satisfactory
manner.
(m) Any wetlands, floodplains or environmentally sensitive areas
provided for by any local, state or federal law.
(22) Where the Plan Commission or Village Engineer finds that it
requires additional information relative to a particular problem
presented by a proposed development in order to review the
preliminary plat, it shall have the authority to request in writing
such information from the subdivider.
C. Additional information. The Plan Commission and/or Village Board
officials may require a proposed subdivision layout of all or part of the
contiguously owned land even through division is not planned at the
time.
A. General. A final plat prepared by a professional land surveyor shall be
required for all subdivisions. It shall comply in all respects with the
requirements of § 236.20, Wis. Stats., and this chapter.262
262. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-20 EAST TROY CODE § 495-21
1:634
B. Additional information. The final plat shall show correctly on its face, or
on a supporting document, in addition to the information required by
§ 236.20, Wis. Stats., the following:
(1) Exact street width along the line of any obliquely intersecting
street.
(2) Exact location and description of streetlighting and lighting utility
easements.
(3) Railroad rights-of-way within and abutting the plat.
(4) All lands reserved for future public acquisition or reserved for the
common use of property owners within the plat.
(5) Special restrictions required by the Village Board, upon the
recommendation of the Plan Commission, relating to access control
along public ways or to the provisions of planting strips.
(6) Certifications by attached information showing that all taxes and
special assessments currently due on the property to be subdivided
have been paid in full.
(7) Locations where the groundwater table is equal to or less than nine
feet from the proposed street center-line elevation; the subdivider
shall place the following note on the plat: "Subsoil information
indicates the presence of high groundwater conditions on Lot(s)
_________. On these lots, either basement elevations must be
elevated above the groundwater level or the basement exteriors
must be fully waterproofed."
(8) Dimensions of lot lines shall be shown in feet and hundredths; no
ditto marks shall be permitted. When lot lines are not at right
angles to the street right-of-way line, the width of the lot shall be
indicated at the building setback line in addition to the width of the
lot at the street right-of-way line.
(9) A numbered identification system for all lots and blocks.
C. Restrictive covenants. Restrictive covenants and deed registrations for
the proposed subdivision shall be filed with the final plat.
D. Property owners' association. The legal instruments creating a property
owners' association for the ownership and/or maintenance of common
lands in the subdivision shall be filed with the final plat.
E. Street dedication. Public rights-of-way for streets and other public
areas shall be dedicated to the Village with final plat approval. Such
dedications shall require the owner's certificate and the mortgagee
certificate in substantially the same form as required by § 236.21(2)(a),
Wis. Stats.
F. Survey accuracy.
§ 495-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-21
1:635
(1) The Village Board and Plan Commission, or their designees, shall
examine all final plats within the Village of East Troy and may
check for the accuracy and closure of the survey, the proper kind
and location of monuments, and legibility and completeness of the
drawing.
(2) Maximum error of closure before adjustment of the survey of the
exterior boundaries of the subdivision shall not exceed, in
horizontal distance or position, the ratio of 1:10,000 nor, in
azimuth, four seconds of arc per interior angle. If field
measurements exceed this maximum, new field measurements
shall be made until a satisfactory closure of the field measurements
has been obtained; the survey of the exterior boundary shall be
adjusted to form a closed geometric figure.
(3) All street, block and lot dimensions shall be computed as closed
geometric figures based upon the control provided by the closed
exterior boundary survey. If checks disclose an error for any
interior line of the plat greater than the ratio of 1:5,000, or an error
in measured angle greater than one minute of arc for any angle
where the shorter side forming the angle is 300 feet or longer,
necessary corrections shall be made. Where the shorter side of a
measured angle is less than 300 feet in length, the error shall not
exceed the value of one minute multiplied by the quotient of 300
divided by the length of the shorter side; however, such error shall
not in any case exceed five minutes of arc.
(4) Where the plat is located within a quarter section, the corners of
which have been relocated, monumented, and coordinated by the
Village, the tie required by § 236.20(3)(b), Wis. Stats., may be
expressed in terms of grid bearing and distance, and the material
and Wisconsin state plane coordinates of the monument marking
the relocated section or quarter corner to which the plat is tied
shall be indicated on the plat. The grid bearing and distance of the
tie shall be determined by a closed survey meeting the error of
closure herein specified for the survey of the exterior boundaries of
the subdivision.
G. Surveying and monumenting. All final plats shall meet all the surveying
and monumenting requirements of § 236.15, Wis. Stats.
H. State plane coordinate system. Where the plat is located within a
quarter section, the corners of which have been relocated,
monumented and coordinated by the Village, the plat shall be tied
directly to one of the section or quarter corners so relocated,
monumented and coordinated. The exact grid bearing and distance of
such tie shall be determined by field measurements, and the material
and Wisconsin state plane coordinates of the monument marking the
relocated section or quarter corner to which the plat is tied shall be
indicated on the plat. All distances and bearings shall be referenced to
§ 495-21 EAST TROY CODE § 495-21
1:636
§ 495-22. Technical requirements for certified survey maps.
the Wisconsin Coordinate System, South Zone, and adjusted to the
Village's control survey.
I. Certificates. All final plats shall provide all the certificates required by
§ 236.21, Wis. Stats. In addition, the surveyor shall certify that he/she
has fully complied with all provisions of this chapter.
A. Certified survey requirements. A certified survey map prepared by a
professional land surveyor shall be required for all minor subdivisions.
It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of § 236.34, Wis.
Stats.263
B. Additional information. The certified survey map shall show correctly
on its face, in addition to the information required by § 236.34, Wis.
Stats., the following:
(1) All existing buildings, watercourses, drainage ditches and other
features pertinent to proper division.
(2) All lands reserved for future acquisition.
(3) Date of the map.
(4) Graphic scale.
(5) Name and address of the owner, subdivider, and surveyor.
(6) Square footage of each parcel.
(7) Current Zoning Map and Future Land Use Plan Map designations
for the subject property and all abutting properties.
C. State plane coordinate system. Where the map is located within a
quarter section, the corners of which have been relocated,
monumented, and coordinated by the Village, the map shall be tied
directly to one of the section or quarter corners so relocated,
monumented and coordinated. The exact grid bearing and distance of
such tie shall be determined by field measurements, and the material
and Wisconsin state plane coordinates of the monument marking the
relocated section or quarter corner to which the map is tied shall be
indicated on the map. All distances and bearings shall be referenced to
the Wisconsin Coordinate System, South Zone, and adjusted to the
Village's control survey.
D. Certificates. The surveyor shall certify on the face of the certified
survey map that he/she has fully complied with all the provisions of this
chapter. The Village Board, after a recommendation by the reviewing
agencies, shall certify its approval on the face of the map.
263. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-22
1:637
E. Street dedication. Dedication of streets and other public areas shall
require, in addition, the owner's certificate and the mortgagee's
certificate in substantially the same form as required by § 236.21(2)(a),
Wis. Stats.
F. Requirements. To the extent reasonably practicable, the certified
survey shall comply with the provisions of this chapter relating to
general requirements, design standards and required improvements.
Conveyance by metes and bounds shall be prohibited where the lot(s)
involved is less than 1 1/2 acres or 300 feet in width.
§ 495-22 EAST TROY CODE § 495-22
1:638
ARTICLE VI
Required Improvements
§ 495-23. General standards for improvements. [Amended
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13]
A. General requirement. The subdivider is responsible for providing all
public and private improvements as may be required under this chapter
and/or the Village's approval. This requirement does not apply to land
divisions within the Village's extraterritorial jurisdiction.
B. Options.
(1) The required public improvements shall be installed by the
subdivider at his/her cost or:
(a) The subdivider may petition the Village for the installation of
the required public improvements through the special
assessment B bond process as provided for in § 66.0713(4),
Wis. Stats., or another acceptable special assessment process,
with the special assessments being payable at the time of lot
sale, payable in a maximum of seven annual installments
together with interest.
(b) The Village may enter into a recapture agreement with the
subdivider agreeing to require payment of recapture costs of
public improvements from those properties benefitting from
the improvements. The Village shall prohibit development on
those properties until payment has been made. The subdivider
may contract directly with adjacent property owners and/or
subdividers of adjacent land for reimbursement of the oversize
and/or off-site improvements constructed.
(c) In addition to the above, the Village may enter into an
agreement to reimburse the subdivider, at the end of the sevenyear
period, for his/her cost (at the time of construction) of
those oversized improvements constructed within the
proposed land division but which are oversized to serve lands
beyond the boundaries of the land division or other lands
within the subdivider's control and which have not, during the
seven-year period, been reimbursed to the subdivider. Said
payment shall be only for the actual additional cost of
constructing the oversized improvements within the
boundaries of the land division and shall not provide for
payment of any interest. The Village shall then establish
special assessments against those benefitting properties
outside the proposed land division boundaries or the
subdivider's control for those costs. To be eligible to proceed
under this provision, the land division must occur within areas
identified in the Village's Comprehensive Plan or other adopted
comprehensive development or public facilities plan.
§ 495-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-23
1:639
(2) Any combination of the above as approved by the Village Board.
(3) If the Village finds that Village construction of such public
improvements would not be warranted as a special assessment to
the intervening properties or as a governmental expense until some
future time, the developer shall be required, if he/she wishes to
proceed with the development, to obtain necessary easements or
rights-of-way and construct and pay for such public improvement
extensions as provided under Subsection B(1) or (2) above.
C. Tax incremental districts. The requirement of installation, by the
subdivider, of the various improvements specified in this chapter shall
be subject to appropriate modification by vote of the Village Board in
the event that all or any part of the area encompassed by the plat is
included within an established tax incremental district (TID) with an
adopted project plan.
D. Construction standards. The required public improvements shall be
installed consistent with the engineering standards and specifications
adopted by the Village Board. Where standards and specifications have
not been adopted, the improvements shall be made consistent with
established engineering practices as approved by the Village Engineer.
When new or revised standards and/or specifications have been
adopted by the Village Board, work on public improvements not begun
within 18 months of the date of final plat adoption shall be made to the
new or revised standards and/or specifications and calculations for the
construction of the required public improvements.
E. Commencement of work. No construction or installation of any public
or private improvement or any land disturbing activity shall commence
until after:
(1) The Village Board approves the preliminary plat or preliminary
certified survey map;
(2) The subdivider complies with those conditions of approval which
must be satisfied before the commencement of work as enumerated
in this chapter and/or the Village Board's approval;
(3) The Village Engineer approves all required plans or permits,
including construction plans for streets, sidewalks, water supply
facilities, sanitary sewerage facilities, stormwater management,
grading, and erosion/sediment control; and
(4) The subdivider obtains all other approvals from other authorities as
may be required to undertake the construction or installation of
any public or private improvement or any land disturbing activity.
F. Completion of work. Prior to submitting a final plat or final certified
survey map for review, all public and private improvements shall be
completed by the subdivider and approved by the Village Engineer.
Upon petition by the subdivider, the Village Board may allow the
§ 495-23 EAST TROY CODE § 495-23
1:640
§ 495-24. Financial guarantees. [Amended 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-13]
subdivider to provide a cash bond or a letter of credit to secure the
installation of any required public and/or private improvement,
provided that the subdivider's agreement for the project addresses the
use and administration of the cash bond or letter of credit. The cash
bond or a letter of credit shall be equal to 115% of the estimated cost of
improvements and other fees, costs, and other money as determined by
the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer may from time to time adjust
the amount of estimated costs of said improvements, and within 30
days of written notice of said change the subdivider shall increase the
financial security by that amount or any other amount acceptable to the
Village Board. As the required improvements are installed and accepted
or for other purposes, the Village Board may authorize reductions of the
financial security in the amount deemed appropriate.
G. Approval of contractors and subcontractors required. Contractors and
subcontractors retained by the subdivider to construct or install public
improvements and use or to prepare contracts and contract
specifications for such improvements shall be subject to the approval of
the Village Engineer.
H. Project manager. The subdivider shall designate a project manager who
shall be readily available on the project site during the construction of
the required public improvements. The project manager shall be
granted authority on behalf of the subdivider to make decisions related
to the construction of the required public improvements as they may
arise during the course of the construction. The project manager shall
also be responsible for the scheduling and coordination of the required
work to construct the required improvements. Correspondence with or
verbal orders to the designated project manager shall have the same
authority as with the subdivider directly.
A. Letter of credit. If a subdivider provides a letter of credit under this
chapter, it shall be irrevocable and the Village will not be obligated to
pay interest thereon. The form of the letter of credit is subject to the
approval of the Village Attorney and the amount of the letter of credit is
subject to the approval of the Village Engineer. A letter of credit is not
accepted by the Village until formal action by the Village Board. The
bank, savings and loan, or other financial institution issuing the letter of
credit must be authorized to do business in the State of Wisconsin and
have a financial standing acceptable to the Village Board. The provision
of a letter of credit shall in no event remove the burden of completing
any improvement covered by such letter of credit.
B. Cash bond. If a subdivider provides a cash bond under this chapter, the
Village will not be obligated to pay interest thereon. Any such cash bond
shall remain in the custody of the Village. The amount of the cash bond
is subject to the approval of the Village Engineer. A cash bond is not
accepted by the Village until formal action by the Village Board. The
§ 495-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-24
1:641
§ 495-25. Construction plan review and inspections. [Amended
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13]
provision of a cash bond shall in no event remove the burden of
completing any improvement covered by such cash bond. The
subdivider shall pay a fee to the Village to compensate the Village for
the additional work required of the Village Clerk-Treasurer to monitor
and handle the cash deposit. The amount of such fee shall be set by the
Village Board from time to time by resolution.
A. Submittal and review of construction plans. As required by § 495-23,
the Village Engineer shall review and approval all construction plans
for public improvements before any work commences on such
improvements or any land altering activity is begun. Such construction
plans shall be prepared at the subdivider's expense by a professional
engineer who is registered in the State of Wisconsin. All plans
submitted for review shall bear the seal of the engineer preparing such
plans. The engineer shall submit specifications and supporting
calculations as required by the Village Engineer to enable him/her to
review the plans. The Village Engineer shall review the plans for
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent
Village ordinances and design standards recommended by the Village
Engineer and approved by the Village Board. If the Village Engineer
rejects a construction plan, he/she shall notify the subdivider of any
deficiencies. When the deficiencies are corrected to the satisfaction of
the Village Engineer, he or she shall notify the subdivider.
B. Construction and inspection. During the course of construction, the
Village Engineer shall make such inspections as he/she or the Village
Board deems necessary to ensure compliance with the plans and
specifications as approved. The subdivider shall pay the actual cost
incurred by the Village for such inspections. This fee shall pay the
actual cost to the Village of inspectors, engineers, and other parties
necessary to ensure satisfactory work.
C. Corrective actions. If prior to final acceptance the Village Engineer
determines that any aspect of any public improvement is defective, is
not completed in a good worker-like manner, or does not comply with
approved plans, the subdivider shall correct such deficiency in a timely
manner.
D. Certification by Village Engineer. The Village Engineer shall provide a
written report to the Plan Commission and the Village Board when he or
she determines that all public improvements comply with this chapter
and approved plans and have been completed in a good worker-like
manner. The report shall also document any corrective actions taken by
the subdivider.
E. Record plans. After completing the public improvements and prior to
final acceptance of said improvements, the subdivider shall provide the
Village with two copies of record plans showing the as-built location of
§ 495-24 EAST TROY CODE § 495-25
1:642
§ 495-26. Street improvements.
The subdivider shall construct streets, roads, and alleys as outlined on
the approved plans based on the requirements of this chapter, particularly
§§ 495-43 and 495-44.
all valves, manholes, stubs, sewers, water mains, and such other
facilities the Village Engineer may require. These plans shall be
prepared on the original Mylars of the construction plans and shall
bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer registered in
Wisconsin. Such plans shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
A. General considerations. The streets shall be designed and located in
relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions
and natural terrain features such as streams and existing tree growth,
to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to
the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
B. Construction standards.
(1) Construction of all streets shall conform to the current standards
as established by the Village in this chapter and elsewhere and
shall be subject to approval of the Village Engineer before
acceptance.
(2) After the installation of temporary block corner monuments by the
subdivider and establishment of street grades by the Board, the
subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of all
streets proposed to be dedicated in accordance with plans and
standard specifications reviewed and approved by the Village
Engineer. The subdivider shall grade the roadbeds in the street
rights-of-way to subgrade.
(3) After the installation of all utility and stormwater drainage
improvements, the subdivider shall surface all roadways in streets
proposed to be dedicated to the widths prescribed. Said surfacing
shall be done in accordance with plans and standard specifications
reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer. The cost of
surfacing in excess of 36 feet (face to face of curb width) that is not
required to serve the needs of the subdivision shall be borne by the
Village. In any case, all streets shall have, as a minimum, a threeinch
blacktop mat (bituminous concrete pavement).
C. Conform to Official Map. The arrangements, width, grade and location
of all streets shall conform to the Official Map.
D. Survey monumentation. See § 495-42.264
264. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-26
1:643
§ 495-27. Curb and gutter.
After the installation of all utility and stormwater drainage improvements,
the subdivider shall construct concrete curbs and gutters or, if approved
by the Village, a system of ditches and culverts. The subdivider shall install
concrete curb and gutter along both sides of all streets and boulevards
shown on the plat. The cost of the curb and gutter and required inspection,
supervision, and engineering fees shall be paid for by the subdivider.
Wherever possible, provision shall be made at the time of construction for
driveway access curb cuts. The cost of installation of all inside curbs and
gutters for dual roadway pavements shall be borne by the Village.
§ 495-28. Sidewalks and bikeways.
E. Street construction. After the installation of all required utility and
stormwater drainage improvements, the subdivider shall prepare for
surfacing all roadways in streets proposed to be dedicated, to the
widths prescribed by these regulations, by placing crushed rock on said
roadways and, in addition, shall surface said street in a manner and
quality consistent with this chapter and plans and specifications
approved by the Village Engineer. Construction shall be to Village
standard specifications for street improvements.
F. Street cross sections. When permanent street cross sections have been
approved by the Village, the subdivider shall finish grade all shoulders
and road ditches, install all necessary culverts at intersections and, if
required, surface ditch inverts to prevent erosion and sedimentation in
accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the
Village Engineer.
A. Specifications. All required sidewalks shall satisfy the design
specifications in § 423-5 of the Village of East Troy Code. The Village
Engineer and Village Board shall determine where sidewalks and/or
bikeways are required in accordance with this section.
B. Extra-sized sidewalks. Wider than standard sidewalks may be required
by the Village Board in the vicinity of schools, commercial areas, and
other places of public assemblage, and the Village Board may require
the construction of sidewalks in locations other than required under the
preceding provisions of this chapter if such walks are necessary, in its
opinion, for safe and adequate pedestrian circulation.
C. Location. The subdivider shall be required to provide sidewalks and
bikeways to Village specifications as follows:
(1) Sidewalks and bikeways shall normally be located as far from the
traffic lane as is possible, but not closer than six inches to the rightof-
way line. Where, as a result of major obstructions, such as large
and established trees, steep hills, drainageways or major utility
lines, the construction costs of the sidewalk or bikeway in its
normal location would be prohibitive, sidewalks or bikeways may
§ 495-26 EAST TROY CODE § 495-28
1:644
§ 495-29. Sanitary sewerage system.
be located elsewhere within the street right-of-way, or within an
easement, with the approval of the Village Engineer.
(2) Sidewalks and bikeways constructed at street intersections or
within five feet of a legal crosswalk shall include provisions for curb
ramping as required by § 66.0909, Wis. Stats., and in accordance
with Village standards.
(3) In all cases where the grades of sidewalks or bikeways have not
been specifically fixed by ordinance, the sidewalks and bikeways
shall be laid to the established grade of the street. (Reference:
§ 66.0907, Wis. Stats.)
D. Bikeways.
(1) Bikeways shall be designed to serve both pedestrian and bicycle
traffic in areas where the majority of the adjoining lots do not have
frontage or access to the street, are not being served by a
bikeways, or in high traffic areas. In general, those lots which do
not front or have access on the street in question are not the
generating or terminating point for the pedestrian or bicycle
traffic.
(2) More specifically, bikeways shall be designed to transport the
majority of pedestrian or bike traffic through the area as opposed
to serving the adjoining lots as a sidewalk does.
(3) Bikeways shall not be installed in lieu of sidewalks. However, where
permitted by Village ordinance, persons may ride a bicycle upon
public sidewalks.
E. Construction standards. Bikeways shall be constructed according to
§ 495-44.
A. Specifications. All required sanitary sewerage systems shall satisfy the
design specifications in Chapter 400, Sewers, of the Village of East Troy
Code.
B. Provision. There shall be provided a sanitary sewerage system to all
lots, approved by the Village Engineer. The subdivider shall install
adequate sanitary sewer facilities and connect them to Village sewer
mains subject to specifications and inspection by the Village Engineer.
All sanitary sewers shall be in accordance with Ch. NR 110, Wis. Adm.
Code. The subdivider shall pay all the costs of all sanitary sewer work,
including the bringing of the sanitary sewer of adequate capacity and
depth from where it exists to the land division in question, as well as
providing all sanitary sewer work within the land division. Such
required improvements shall be dedicated to the Village upon such
terms and conditions as the Village Board may determine. If, at the time
of final platting, sanitary sewer facilities are not available to the plat but
§ 495-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-29
1:645
will become available within a period of 10 years from the date of
plat recording, the subdivider shall install or cause to be installed
sanitary sewers and sewer laterals to the street lot line in accordance
with this section and shall cap all laterals as may be specified by
the Village Engineer. In addition, the subdivider shall extend sanitary
sewer facilities to the limits of the subdivision property lines, unless
the Village Board determines that the land adjacent to the subdivision
is unlikely to require public sanitary sewer service within said time.
Any oversizing of sanitary sewer facilities required by the Village and
the recovery of costs associated with that oversizing shall be addressed
in a development agreement. [Amended 8-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-06]
C. Installation. Sanitary sewers, including all related items (manholes,
laterals, wyes, tees, stubs for future extensions, etc.), shall be installed
meeting the specifications and requirements of the Village. The size,
type, and installation of all sanitary sewers and laterals (including such
lift stations as may be necessary) proposed to be constructed shall be in
accordance with plans and standard specifications prepared by the
Village Engineer. Installation shall be required across the entire length
of each lot. Where sewers larger than 12 inches in diameter or deeper
than 12 feet of cover are required solely to serve areas outside the
subdivision, the landowner shall be responsible only for the costs of
installing a twelve-inch sewer of the sewers necessary to serve the area
within the subdivision. The difference in the costs of the sewers
necessary to serve the subdivision and the costs of the sewers actually
installed, as determined by the Village Engineer, shall be borne by the
developer, with the right of recoupment from property owners or
developers of the areas served outside the subdivision, without inflation
or interest adjustment in the recoupment amount.
D. Construction standards. The subdivider shall construct sanitary sewers
in a manner as to make adequate sanitary sewerage service available to
each lot within the subdivision. Where public sanitary sewers of
adequate capacity are determined by the Village Engineer to be
available, extensions of the public sanitary sewer system shall be made
so as to provide sewer service to each lot. Gravity sanitary sewers shall
be extended to the land division and to each buildable lot in accordance
with Village comprehensive sanitary sewer plans as determined by the
Village Engineer. Sewerage service lines of the sizes and materials
required by the Village Engineer shall be installed from the sanitary
sewers to the property line of every lot in the subdivision. The size,
type, and installation of all sanitary sewers proposed to be constructed
shall be in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved
by the Village Engineer. All sanitary sewer facilities shall be
floodproofed.
E. The ends of the services for each lot shall be accurately measured and
recorded with the Village Engineer and marked in the field with
appropriate staking.
§ 495-29 EAST TROY CODE § 495-30
1:646
§ 495-30. Water supply facilities.
A. Specifications. All required water supply systems shall satisfy the
design specifications in Chapter 475, Water, of the Village of East Troy
Code.
B. Provision. There shall be provided a water supply system in all areas to
be served by public sanitary sewer. The subdivider shall install and
connect Village water to serve all lots subject to specifications and
inspection by Village utilities and the State of Wisconsin. Such required
improvements shall be dedicated to the Village upon such terms and
conditions as the Village Board may determine. The subdivider shall pay
all costs of connecting adequate Village water, including bringing water
supply facilities from where they exist to the land division in question,
providing all water works within the land division, and looping the
water supply facilities in all locations deemed important and financially
feasible by the Village Engineer. In addition, the subdivider shall extend
water supply facilities to the limits of the subdivision's property lines,
unless the Village Board determines that the land adjacent to the
subdivision is unlikely to require public water service within a period of
10 years from the date of the plat recording. The subdivider shall
provide for a minimum water main diameter of eight inches and the
location of public fire hydrants along the public streets at not greater
spacing than 450 feet for residential areas or 600 feet for commercial
areas. Fire hydrants which have not passed testing or have not been in
operation shall be covered with securely attached bags to preclude
their being inadvertently used by the Fire Department in an emergency
situation. Any oversizing of water supply facilities required by the
Village and the cost associated with that oversizing shall be addressed
in a development agreement. [Amended 8-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-06]
C. Installation. The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation, and
cost thereof, of public water supply facilities. Plans for such water
facilities shall be approved by the Village Engineer. Supervision and
engineering fees shall be paid for by the subdivider. Where water mains
larger than 12 inches in diameter are required solely to serve areas
outside the subdivision, the landowner shall be responsible only for the
costs of the water mains necessary to serve the area within the
subdivision installing a twelve-inch water main. The difference in the
costs of the water mains necessary to serve the subdivision (twelve-inch
water mains) and the costs of the water mains actually installed, as
determined by the Village Engineer, shall be borne by the developer,
with the right of recoupment from property owners or developers of the
areas served outside the subdivision, without inflation or interest
adjustment in the recoupment amount. Installation shall be required all
the way across each lot.
D. Construction standards. The subdivider shall construct water mains in
such a manner as to make adequate water service available to each lot
within the land division. Extensions of the public water supply system
§ 495-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-30
1:647
§ 495-31. Stormwater drainage facilities.
§ 495-32. Other utilities.
shall be designed so as to provide public water service to each lot
and required fire flow protection to each hydrant. The size, type, and
installation of all public water mains proposed to be constructed shall
be in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by
the Village Engineer. The rules of the Village's utilities on file with the
Wisconsin Public Service Commission are hereby adopted by reference
and made a part hereof as though fully set forth herein.
A. Pursuant to § 495-47, the subdivider shall provide stormwater drainage
facilities which include curb and gutter, manholes, lift stations, catch
basins and inlets, storm sewers, storm sewer laterals from the main to
the lot line, road ditches and open channels, as may be required. All
such facilities are to be of adequate size and grade to hydraulically
accommodate maximum potential volumes of flow, the type of facility
required, the design criteria and the sizes and grades to be determined
by the Village Engineer. Such required improvements shall be
dedicated to the Village upon such terms and conditions as the Village
Board may determine.
B. If greater than thirty-six-inch diameter storm sewers are required to
handle the contemplated flows, the cost of such larger sewers shall be
prorated in proportion to the ratio which the total area of the proposed
plat is to the total drainage area to be served by such larger sewer. The
subdivider shall assume his/her prorated costs, with the excess either
borne by the Village or assessed against the remaining tributary
drainage area.
A. Specifications. All other required utilities shall satisfy the design
specifications in § 289-7 and Chapter 475 of the Village of East Troy
Code.
B. Submittal of plans to utility companies. Plans indicating the proposed
location of all gas, electrical power, cable television and telephone
distribution and transmission lines required to service the plat shall be
provided by the appropriate private utilities.
C. Installation.
(1) The subdivider shall cause natural gas, electric power, cable
television, and telephone facilities to be installed in such a manner
as to make adequate service available to each lot in the subdivision,
certified survey, or land division. The subdivider shall provide an
affidavit that the maintenance of said public improvements will be
guaranteed by the subdivider due to use of the improvements by
purchasers and construction traffic.
§ 495-30 EAST TROY CODE § 495-32
1:648
§ 495-33. Streetlamps.
The subdivider shall install streetlamps along all streets proposed to be
dedicated of a design compatible with the neighborhood and type of
development proposed. Such lamps shall be placed at each street
intersection and at such interior block spacing as may be required by the
Village Engineer.
§ 495-34. Street signs.
§ 495-35. Erosion control.
The subdivider shall cause all grading, excavations, open cuts, side slopes,
and other land surface disturbances to be mulched, seeded, sodded, or
otherwise protected so that erosion, siltation, sedimentation, and washing
are prevented. The subdivider shall submit an erosion control plan that
(2) All new natural gas, electric power, cable television, and telephone
facilities shall be installed underground unless the Village Board,
upon the recommendation of pertinent Village utilities or the Plan
Commission, specifically allows overhead poles for the following
reasons:
(a) Topography, soil, water table, solid rock, boulders or other
physical conditions would make underground installation
unreasonable or impractical; or
(b) The lots to be served by said facilities can be served directly
from existing overhead facilities.
D. Required maintenance. Prior to any maintenance, repair, or
replacement being performed by the subdivider during the bond period,
the subdivider shall notify the Village Engineer at least one workday
prior to the doing of the work and obtain approval of the Village
Engineer as to the nature and manner of work to be done.
A. The subdivider shall pay the costs of providing the street signing
necessary to serve the development. Such signing shall include street
name signs and such temporary barricades and "road closed" signs as
may be required by the Village Engineer or Director of Public Works
until the street improvements have been accepted by Village Board
resolution.
B. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to impose any
restrictions on traffic on street improvements not yet accepted by the
Village as he/she may deem necessary to protect the improvements
from damage and to protect the safety of the public. Such restrictions
shall include, but not be limited by enumeration to, weight restrictions,
street closings, access restrictions, or the posting of temporary traffic
control measures.
§ 495-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-35
1:649
specifies measures that will be taken to assure the minimization of erosion
problems.
§ 495-36. Partition fences.
When the land included in a subdivision plat or certified map abuts upon
or is adjacent to land used for farming or grazing purposes, the subdivider
shall erect, keep, and maintain partition fences, satisfying the requirements
of the Wisconsin Statutes for a legal and sufficient fence, between such land
and the adjacent land. A covenant binding the developer, its grantees, heirs,
successors, and assigns to erect and maintain such fences, without cost
to the adjoining property owners, so long as the land is used for farming
or grazing purposes, shall be included upon the face of the final plat or
certified survey map.
§ 495-37. Easements.
A. Utility easements. The Village Board, on the recommendation of
appropriate departments, utilities, and agencies serving the Village,
shall require utility easements for poles, wires, conduits, storm and
sanitary sewers, gas, water and head mains or other utility lines. It is
the intent of this chapter to protect all established easements so as to
assure proper grade, assure maintenance of the established grade,
prohibit construction of permanent fences or retaining walls over
underground installation, and prevent the planting of trees in the
easement area. All such utilities shall be installed underground, as
required in § 495-32.
B. Drainage easements. Drainage easements shall comply with the
requirements of this section.
C. Easement locations.
(1) Utility easements shall be at least 15 feet wide, unless the utilities,
in writing, approve a narrower width, and may run across lots or
alongside of rear lot lines. Such easements should preferably be
located along rear lot lines. Evidence shall be furnished the Plan
Commission that easements and any easement provisions to be
incorporated in the plat or in deeds have been reviewed by the
individual utility companies or the organization responsible for
furnishing the services involved.
(2) All easements dedicated on final plats or certified survey maps for
poles, cables, or conduits for electricity, telephone, or other private
utility lines shall be noted thereon as "Utility Easements." All
easements for storm and sanitary sewers, water and force mains,
pedestrian walks, and other public purposes shall be noted thereon
as "Public Easement for" followed by reference to the use or uses
for which they are intended.
§ 495-35 EAST TROY CODE § 495-37
1:650
§ 495-38. Extra-sized and off-site facilities.
When any public improvements of adequate capacity are not available at
the boundary of a proposed land division, the Village, or its duly authorized
representative, may require, as a prerequisite to approval of a final plat or
certified survey map, assurances that such improvement extensions shall be
provided as follows in accordance with the following standards:
D. Deed restrictions for easements. Deed restrictions shall accompany
each final plat or certified survey map and shall be filed in the Register
of Deeds office. In addition to whatever else may be contained therein,
such restrictions shall describe the location and width of utility and
public easements which are being established; a description by
reference to the final plat or certified survey map shall suffice. Such
restrictions shall further recite that the utility companies and the public
agencies using such easements are granted the right to place, and shall
state that the elevation of such easements as graded by the subdivider
may not be altered by the subdivider or any subsequent landowner by
more than six inches.
A. Design capacity. All improvements within or entering or leaving the
proposed development shall be installed to satisfy the service
requirements for the entire service or drainage area in which the
development is located, and the improvements shall be of sufficient
capacity to handle the expected development of the overall service area
involved.
B. Extra-sized and off-site improvements. Except as provided in
Subsections C and D below, where improvements of adequate size
needed to serve the development are not available at the boundary of
the development, the subdivider shall proceed under one of the options
as identified in § 495-23.
C. Extra-sized sewer improvements. The subdivider or developer shall
assume the cost of installing all sanitary sewerage system
improvements and facilities within the land division or development,
including the cost of any required boundary or cross land division sewer
main, except for added material cost of installing oversized sewers
greater than 12 inches in diameter, which are necessary to serve
tributary areas lying outside the proposed land division or
development. The Village shall credit or reimburse the subdivider or
developer, as appropriate, for the reasonable material costs of such
required oversizing. The Village Board may determine, on a case-bycase
basis, to credit or reimburse the subdivider or developer, as
appropriate, for the material costs of oversizing other sanitary
sewerage system improvements and facilities, such as lift stations,
relating to the land division or development.
D. Extra-sized water improvements. The subdivider or developer shall
assume the cost of installing all water system improvements and
facilities within the land division or development, including the cost of
§ 495-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-38
1:651
§ 495-39. Acceptance of improvements and dedications. [Amended
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13]
any required boundary water main, except for added material cost of
installing oversized water mains greater than 12 inches in diameter,
which are necessary to serve areas lying outside the proposed land
division or development. The Village shall credit or reimburse the
subdivider or developer, as appropriate, for the reasonable material
costs of such required oversizing. The Village Board may determine, on
a case-by-case basis, to credit or reimburse the subdivider or developer,
as appropriate, for the material costs of oversizing other required
water system improvements and facilities within the land division or
development.
E. Lift stations. Where sanitary or storm sewer lift stations and force
mains are required to lift sewage to the gravity system, the subdivider
shall have plans, profiles, specifications and estimated operation and
maintenance costs prepared for the installation of such facilities to the
Village Engineer's requirements. Equipment similar to existing Village
equipment shall be utilized whenever possible. The installation,
inspection, supervision and engineering fees for lift stations and/or
force mains shall be paid for by the subdivider unless otherwise
determined and agreed upon by the Village Board. Gravity sanitary
sewer service shall be employed whenever determined by the Village
Engineer to be feasibly accessible.
A. Acceptance of improvements. The dedication of any improvements,
utilities, streets, parks, easements, rights-of-way or other lands, or
rights to the Village or the public, shall not be considered accepted by
the Village for public ownership until such time as the required public
improvements within the intended dedication have been completed and
accepted by the Village Board by adoption of a resolution accepting
such dedication. Improvements shall be dedicated to the Village free
and clear of any encumbrances. The subdivider shall be responsible for
and liable for the maintenance, safety, and operation of all required
public improvements until such time as the improvements are accepted
by the Village Board by resolution. In the event the Village must take
measures to maintain, operate, or make safe a public improvement
existing or required as a result of the land division, but which has not
yet been accepted by the Village, the costs of such measures shall
hereby be determined to be the Village-incurred costs to be reimbursed
to the Village by the subdivider in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Inspection and certification of improvements.
(1) After any of the following increments of the required improvements
have been installed and completed, the subdivider shall notify the
Village Engineer, in writing, that the work is complete and ready
for final inspection, shall file reproducible record drawings of the
completed improvements, and shall file lien waivers or affidavits, in
§ 495-38 EAST TROY CODE § 495-39
1:652
a form acceptable to the Village Engineer and approved by the
Village Attorney, evidencing that there are no claims, actions, or
demands for damages based upon contract or tort arising out of or
in any way related to the project, and that no moneys are owed to
any surveyor, mechanic, contractor, subcontractor, material man,
or laborer after all required improvements have been installed.
Acceptance of the improvements may be requested in the following
increments:
(a) Sewer mains and services (either storm or sanitary).
(b) Water mains and services.
(c) Streets comprised of all grading, gravel, curb and gutter,
culverts, and paving.
(d) Other miscellaneous appurtenances to the above increments
such as sidewalks, bikeways, streetlighting, street signing, etc.
(2) The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall certify that there are no unpaid
taxes or unpaid special assessments on any of the lands included in
the area of acceptance and shall prepare a final billing for
engineering, inspection, and legal fees and submit it to the
subdivider for payment. The Village Engineer shall conduct any
necessary final inspections of the improvements and forward a
report to the Village Clerk-Treasurer recommending either
approval or disapproval. When the engineering, inspection, and
legal fees, taxes and special assessments have been paid, and when
the necessary lien waivers and affidavits have been filed, the report
of the Village Engineer, together with the recommendation of the
Village Clerk-Treasurer, shall be forwarded to the Village Board for
approval and acceptance of the improvements and dedications.
C. Maintenance guarantee after final acceptance. Prior to final acceptance
of the required public improvements, the subdivider shall provide the
Village with a cash deposit or a letter of credit, in a form acceptable to
the Village Attorney, that is equal to 15% of the amount of the cash
deposit or letter of credit the subdivider provided the Village prior to
the start of construction or the largest amount allowed by law,
whichever is greater. If within one year of final acceptance the Village
Engineer determines that the public improvements need repair due to
faulty materials or workmanship or the subdivider damages Village
property and/or improvements, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall give
the subdivider a fourteen-day written notice to perform such repairs. If
the repairs are not begun within the fourteen-day period and completed
within a reasonable time thereafter, as determined by the Village
Board, the Village may complete the repairs. The cost of the repairs
shall be billed to the subdivider and paid by the subdivider within a
reasonable time, as determined by the Village Board, or taken out of the
cash deposit or letter of credit. If the Village draws against the cash
deposit or letter of credit, the subdivider shall, within 10 working days
§ 495-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-39
1:653
§ 495-40. Site grading.
The subdivider shall be required to grade the full land division in
accordance with the requirements of § 495-49.
§ 495-41. Street trees.
The Village Board may require the subdivider to plant at least one tree
of a species acceptable to the Village Board and of at least six feet in
height for each 50 feet of frontage on all streets proposed to be dedicated.
The required trees shall be planted in the lawn area of the right-of-way in
accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the Village
Engineer.
§ 495-42. Survey monumentation. [Added 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-13]
Before final approval of any final plat or certified survey map within the
corporate limits of the Village, the subdivider shall install monuments
consistent with the requirements of Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., or as may be
required by the Village Engineer. All survey monumentation located
adjacent to street or public rights-of-way, but not located within street
pavement, shall be protected with steel fence posts erected near the survey
monumentation. The Village Engineer may waive the placing of monuments
for a reasonable time during public improvement construction on condition
that the subdivider executes a surety to ensure the placing of such
monuments within the time required. The Village Clerk-Treasurer is
authorized to accept a letter of credit for monumentation on behalf of the
Village in an amount approved by the Village Engineer. Building permits
shall not be issued until all survey monumentation for the block(s) of lots
in which the lot(s) for which building permits are being applied for within
the phase of the land division under development has been installed. When
the land division includes an established 1/2, 1/4, 1/4-1/4, or other such
section monument, the established monument shall be preserved and/or
fully restored by the subdivider at his/her cost.
of such draw, replenish said moneys up to the aggregate amount.
This financial guarantee shall not be a bar to any action the Village
might have for negligent workmanship or materials. Wisconsin law on
negligence shall govern such situations.
§ 495-39 EAST TROY CODE § 495-42
1:654
ARTICLE VII
Design Standards
§ 495-43. General street design standards.
A. Compliance with statutes. In laying out a certified survey or
subdivision, the owner shall conform to the provisions of Ch. 236, Wis.
Stats., and all applicable Village regulations. In all cases where the
requirements of this chapter are different from the requirements of
Chapter 236, the more restrictive provision shall apply. The provisions
of this article do not apply to land divisions within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
B. Dedication. The subdivider shall dedicate land and improve streets as
provided in this chapter and § 495-26. Streets shall be located with
regard for topographical conditions, natural features, existing and
proposed streets, utilities and land uses and public convenience and
safety. Streets shall conform to the Official Map adopted by the Village
Board. The subdivision, certified survey parcel or land division shall be
so designed as to provide each lot with satisfactory access to a public
street or road.
C. Compliance with Comprehensive Plan and ordinances.
(1) Compliance with statutes. In laying out a certified survey or
subdivision, the owner shall conform to the provisions of Ch. 236,
Wis. Stats., and all applicable Village regulations. In all cases
where the requirements of this chapter are different from the
requirements of Chapter 236, the more restrictive provision shall
apply. [Amended 8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07]
(2) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of
all streets shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map,
and to this chapter, and other Village planning documents, and
shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
reasonable circulation of traffic, topographical conditions, runoff of
stormwater, public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate
relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such
streets.
(3) The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make
provisions for the appropriate continuation at the same or greater
width of the existing streets in adjoining areas.
D. Areas not covered by official map or plan. In areas not covered by an
official map or a Village comprehensive plan, the layout of streets shall
conform to the plan for the most advantageous development of
adjoining areas of the neighborhood. Streets shall be designed and
located in relation to existing and officially planned streets, topography
and natural terrain, streams and lakes, and existing tree growth, public
§ 495-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-43
1:655
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed use of the land to be served by such streets.
E. Proposed streets. Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary lines of
the tract being subdivided unless prevented by topography or other
physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the Village Board, such
extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the
layout of the subdivision or land division, or for the advantageous
development of the adjacent tracts.
F. Street classifications. Streets shall be required and classified by the
Village Engineer in accordance with the Village's Comprehensive Plan
and, where not identified in said plan, in accordance with sound
engineering standards into the classifications indicated below with the
designated minimum widths:
(1) Arterial streets. Arterial streets shall be arranged to provide
through traffic for a heavy volume of vehicles. Arterial streets as
defined herein shall be arranged so as to provide ready access to
centers of employment, centers of governmental activity,
community shopping areas, community recreation and points
beyond the boundaries of the community. They shall also be
properly integrated with and related to the existing and proposed
system of major streets and highways and shall be, insofar as
practicable, continuous and in alignment with existing or planned
streets with which they are to connect.
(2) Collector streets. Collector streets shall be arranged so as to
provide ready collection of traffic from individual areas and
conveyance to the arterial street and highway system and shall be
properly related to special traffic generators such as schools,
churches, and shopping centers and other concentrations of
population and to the major streets into which they feed.
(3) Local/minor streets. Local streets shall be arranged to conform to
the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit the
design of efficient storm and sanitary sewerage systems, and to
require the minimum street area necessary to provide safe and
convenient access to abutting property.
(4) Alleys. Alleys shall be located at rear property lines, discourage
through traffic, serve fewer than 50 vehicles a day, be intended to
provide access to off-street loading and service areas, and shall not
serve as primary access to parcels.
G. Reserve strips. Reserve strips shall not be provided on any plat to
control access to streets or alleys, except where control of such strips is
placed with the Village under conditions approved by the Village Board.
H. Extraterritorial streets. Streets located in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Village shall provide for the dedication of the
minimum widths of right-of-way in accordance with the standards of
§ 495-43 EAST TROY CODE § 495-43
1:656
this chapter. Extraterritorial streets within the urban service area shall
be provided to the structural standards of this chapter and minimum
pavement widths of 24 feet and without curb and gutter. Other streets
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village shall meet or
exceed the town road standards of § 82.50, Wis. Stats.
I. Alleys.
(1) Commercial and industrial. Alleys may be provided in commercial
and industrial districts upon the Plan Commission's
recommendation. Where approved, the paved width of commercial
and industrial alleys shall be not less than 30 feet. Alley rights-ofway
shall be 50 feet. Alleys shall be constructed according to base
and surfacing requirements for streets.
(2) Residential. Alleys shall not be approved in residential areas except
within the SR-7 Traditional-Rear Residential Zoning District or if
necessary due to topography or other exceptional circumstances.
Where approved, the paved width of the right-of-way for residential
alleys shall be not less than 24 feet. Alleys shall be constructed
according to base and surfacing requirements for streets.
(3) Dead end. Dead-end alleys are prohibited except under very
unusual circumstances, and crooked and "T" alleys shall be
discouraged. Temporary dead-end streets shall not be over 1,000
feet in total length, shall provide for an eventual intersection
spacing meeting the requirements of this chapter, and shall provide
for a temporary cul-de-sac or turnaround as approved by the
Village Engineer.
J. Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets may only be used where
necessary to respond to the preservation of existing slopes or natural
features. Cul-de-sac streets designed to have one end permanently
closed shall not exceed 750 feet in length and shall terminate with a
circular turnaround having a right-of-way radius of 60 feet and a
minimum outside curb radius of 40 feet. The length of cul-de-sac streets
shall be measured from the line of intersection with the connecting
street to the farthest extent of the cul-de-sac bulb. In all culs-de-sac,
there shall be an unobstructed sight distance from the intersection of
the intersecting street to the far end of the cul-de-sac bulb.
K. Continuation. Streets shall be laid out to provide for possible
continuation wherever topographic and other physical conditions
permit. The use of culs-de-sac shall be held to a minimum, and
permanently dead-ended streets shall be prohibited. Provisions shall be
made so that all proposed streets shall have a direct connection with, or
be continuous and in line with, existing, planned, or platted streets with
which they are to connect.265
265. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-43
1:657
L. Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out so as to discourage
their use by through traffic.
M. Frontage roads. Where a land division abuts or contains an existing or
proposed arterial highway, or railroad right-of-way, the subdivider shall
provide a frontage road or reverse frontage road, platted access
restriction along the property contiguous to such highway, or such
other treatment as may be determined necessary by the Village
Engineer to ensure safe, efficient traffic flow and adequate protection of
residential properties.
N. Private streets. Private streets shall not be approved nor shall public
improvements be approved for any private street; all streets shall be
dedicated for public use.
O. Horizontal curves. When connecting street lines deflect from each other
at any one point by more than 5°, they shall be connected by a curve
with a radius of not less than 150 feet on local streets, 250 feet on
collector streets, and 450 feet on arterial streets.
P. Radii of curvature. When a continuous center line deflects at any one
point by more than 10°, a circular curve shall be introduced having a
radius of curvature on said center line of not less than the following:
(1) Arterial streets and highways: 500 feet.
(2) Collector streets: 300 feet.
(3) Minor streets: 100 feet.
Q. Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be required between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
R. Street grades.
(1) Maximum grade.
(a) Unless necessitated by exceptional topography, subject to the
approval of the Village Board, the maximum center-line grade
of any street or public way shall not exceed the following:
[1] Arterial streets: 6%.
[2] Collector streets: 8%.
[3] Minor streets, alleys and frontage streets: 10%.
[4] Pedestrianways: 12%, unless steps of acceptable design
are provided.
(b) The grade of any street shall in no case exceed 10% or be less
than 1/2%.
§ 495-43 EAST TROY CODE § 495-43
1:658
(2) Street grades shall be established wherever practicable so as to
avoid excessive grading, the promiscuous removal of ground cover
and tree growth, and general leveling of the topography.266
S. Vertical curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected by
vertical curves of a minimum length, in feet, equivalent to 20 times the
algebraic difference in the rate of grade for major thoroughfares and 1/
2 this minimum length for all other streets.
T. Half streets. Half streets shall not be platted unless necessary to
provide the full width of an existing street platted to half width. All
newly platted streets shall be platted to the required full width. Where a
half street exists adjacent to a proposed land division, the subdivider
shall endeavor to acquire and dedicate the remaining half street.
U. Intersections.
(1) Angle of intersect. Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly
right angles as topography and other limiting factors of good
design permit. A curved street shall intersect another street with
not less than 15 feet of tangent right-of-way between the end of
curvature and the right-of-way of the street being intersected.
(2) Number of streets converging. The number of streets converging at
one intersection shall be reduced to a minimum, preferably not
more than two. Cross-type intersections on local streets shall be
avoided whenever possible in favor of T-type intersections.
Intersections of local streets shall be at least 125 feet from each
other.
(3) Number of intersections on arterial streets. The number of
intersections along arterial streets shall be held to a minimum.
Wherever practicable, the distance between such intersections
shall be not less than 1,200 feet, unless otherwise determined by
the Village Engineer to provide better safety.
(4) Local street spacing. Local streets and frontage roads intersecting
with other local streets or collector streets shall, wherever
practicable, be spaced no closer than 150 feet between right-of-way
lines, nor closer than 250 feet to the right-of-way of an arterial
street.
(5) Property lines at street intersections. Property lines at street
intersections shall be rounded with a minimum radius of 25 feet or
of a greater radius when required by the Village Engineer.
(6) Local streets. Local streets shall not necessarily continue across
arterial or collector streets, but if the center lines of such local
streets approach the major streets from opposite sides within 300
266. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-43
1:659
feet of each other, measured along the center line of the arterial
or collector streets, then the location shall be so adjusted that the
adjoining across the major or collector street is continuous and a
jog is avoided.
(7) Additional sight easements. At any intersection determined by the
Village Engineer, restricted development easements or additional
street right-of-way shall be platted to provide for adequate sight
distances in every direction of travel. At a minimum, the subdivider
shall grade, clear, or otherwise provide for an unobstructed sight
triangle at all intersections incorporating the area within a triangle
formed by the intersection of the street right-of-way lines and a
point on each right-of-way line being not less than 30 feet from the
intersection point.
V. Street names.
(1) New street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets,
but streets that are continuations of others already in existence and
named shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street names
shall be subject to approval by the Village Board.
(2) All streets shall be named in conformity with the street naming
plan of the Village or with adjoining streets. In the case of diverging
streets, the name shall be repeated. New street names shall not
duplicate the names of existing streets. Long or continuous
thoroughfares running north and south shall be named avenues;
those running east and west shall be named streets; diagonal
thoroughfares shall be named roads; and curving thoroughfares
shall be named drives. Short or discontinuous thoroughfares
running north and south shall be named courts; those running east
and west shall be named places; diagonal thoroughfares shall be
named ways; and curving thoroughfares shall be named lanes.
W. Limited access highway and railroad right-of-way treatment. Whenever
the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a limited access
highway, arterial street, or railroad right-of-way, the design shall
provide the following treatment:
(1) Subdivision lots. When lots within the proposed subdivision back
upon the right-of-way of an existing or proposed limited access
highway or a railroad, a planting strip at least 30 feet in depth shall
be provided adjacent to the highway or railroad in addition to the
normal lot depth. This strip shall be part of the platted lots but shall
have the following restriction lettered on the face of the plat: "This
strip reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs. The building of
structures hereon prohibited."
(2) Commercial and industrial districts. Commercial and industrial
districts shall have provided on each side of the limited access
highway, arterial street, or railroad streets approximately parallel
to and at a suitable distance from such highway or railroad for the
§ 495-43 EAST TROY CODE § 495-43
1:660
§ 495-44. Construction and dedication of streets and roads.
appropriate use of the land between such streets and highway or
railroad, but not less than 150 feet.
(3) Streets parallel to a limited access highway. Streets parallel to a
limited access highway or railroad right-of-way, when intersecting
a major street and highway or collector street which crosses said
railroad or highway, shall be located at a minimum distance of 250
feet from said highway or railroad right-of-way. Such distance,
where desirable and practicable, shall be determined with due
consideration of the minimum distance required for the future
separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
(4) Minor streets. Minor streets immediately adjacent and parallel to
railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided, and location of minor
streets immediately adjacent to arterial streets and highways and
to railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided in residential areas.
X. Minimum right-of-way and roadway width. The minimum right-of-way
(ROW) and roadway width shall follow the Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map or, if no width is specified therein, the minimum widths
shall be as follows: [Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
Width To Be
Dedicated
(feet)
Face to Face
Curb Width
(feet)
Surface
Width
(feet)
Arterial streets 80 52 n/a
Collector streets 75 40 n/a
Minor streets (1,000
feet or more in length)
66 36 n/a
Minor streets (less
than 1,000 feet in
length); culs-de-sac;
frontage streets
66 30 n/a
Alleys 25 n/a 24
A. General requirements.
(1) Construction standards. All roadway construction and materials
used shall be performed in accordance with the construction
methods as listed in the appropriate sections of the State of
Wisconsin Department of Transportation Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction, and its supplements, and this
chapter, whichever is more restrictive. The design requirements of
this section and § 495-43 shall be applicable to all streets and roads
that are to be dedicated to the Village, regardless of whether such
streets or roads are part of a new subdivision or land division.
§ 495-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-44
1:661
Design requirements for the pavement shall be adequate for the
zoning classification of the area served by the subject street. A
street which divides areas with different zoning classifications shall
be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the area
requiring the higher quality pavement. Any variation of this must
have prior approval of the Village Engineer. Combination concrete
curb and gutter is required on all streets. (See § 495-27.) A copy
of all design assumptions and computations on which the proposed
design is based shall be submitted to the Village Engineer.
(2) Project costs. All roadway surveys, dedications, plans,
specifications, and construction will be at the expense of the
applicant. This includes any expense incurred by the Village in the
preparation of plans and review and inspection of plans and
construction.
(3) Preliminary consultation. Prior to the design, preparation, and
construction of any roadway to be dedicated to the Village of East
Troy, the applicant shall notify the Village Engineer. An on-site
meeting with the applicant and the Village Engineer will then be
arranged by the Village Engineer. Plans must be provided in order
for the Village Engineer to check the design and the drainage.
(4) Material slips. Copies of material slips for all materials furnished
for the road construction projects shall be delivered to the Village
before the Village approves the final construction.
(5) Required inspections. Prior to the commencement of any street
construction, the subdivider shall notify the Village Engineer at
least one workday in advance as to the nature of the work being
done. The Village Engineer shall be contacted for required
inspections after the following phases of construction: subbase
grading; crushed aggregate base course; concrete gutters, curbs
and sidewalks; bituminous surface course; and shouldering. Any
deficiencies found by the Village Engineer shall be corrected before
proceeding to the next phase of construction.267
(6) Tests of materials. The Village reserves the right to obtain a sample
of the roadway base material prior to placement on the roadway for
purposes of determining whether the material meets gradation and
soundness requirements.
(7) Pavement samples. Samples of bituminous concrete may be taken
by the Village during pavement construction operations for the
purpose of determining that the material meets specifications.
B. Construction standards. All streets and highways constructed in the
Village or to be dedicated to the Village shall fully comply with the
267. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-44 EAST TROY CODE § 495-44
1:662
following construction standards and shall be adequate for the zoning
classifications or projected use of the area served by the street.
(1) General. After completion of the underground utilities and approval
thereof, the streets shall be constructed. Unless phasing of
construction of improvements is approved by the Village Board or
its designee, building permits shall not be issued prior to the
installation of the street improvements and the approval of an
individual lot grading plan that conforms to the guidelines of the
master site grading plan, as determined by the Village Engineer or
his/her designee.
(2) Street rights-of-way. Streets shall have a right-of-way width as
established on the Official Map or as designated in § 495-43X;
provided, however, that a greater or lesser roadway width may be
required by the Village Engineer where necessary to assure
uniformity along the entire length of any street.
(3) Temporary streets. Construction of temporary streets shall require
authorization of the Plan Commission.
(4) Standard street improvements.
(a) Standard street improvements shall include streetlights,
concrete curb and gutter, bituminous base course, bituminous
surface course, and, when required, walkways.
(b) The construction of standard street improvements can begin
only when either the underground utilities were installed in the
previous construction season or the construction of
underground utilities included mechanical compaction and
compaction tests have been approved by the Village Engineer.
(c) Upon obtaining the written approval of the Village Engineer,
the subdivider can proceed with the construction of the
standard street improvements. Standard street improvements
shall be installed to the boundary line of the subdivision unless
the street culminates in a cul-de-sac, the topography or other
physical conditions make it impossible to do so, or unless this
requirement is waived, in writing, by the Plan Commission.
(d) Where he/she deems appropriate, the Village Engineer may
require that pavement construction take place over a two-year
period, with the lower coat being placed in the same year as
the underground utilities are constructed and with the upper
coat being placed in the following year, after thorough cleaning
and application of a tack coat to the first coat.
(5) Roadway base standards.
(a) The subdivider must bring all streets and alleys to a grade
established by the Village Board. All site work by Village
§ 495-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-44
1:663
employees in determining grade shall be billed at the Village
rate and paid by the owner.
(b) Residential streets shall have a roadway base of six inches
minimum compacted in place crushed aggregate base course
of Gradation No. 2 in the top layer and Gradation No. 1 and No.
2 in the lower level.
(c) On commercial, arterial or other heavy use streets, as
determined by the Village Engineer, a base course of eight
inches minimum compacted shall be constructed upon an
inspected and approved subgrade.
(d) In the case of commercial, arterial, or other heavy use roads,
the Village Board may, in the alternative to the above
standards, have the Village Engineer provide specifications for
such roads after researching the site and conducting a soil
analysis pursuant to Subsection B(8)(c) below.
(e) In any case, the Village Board shall have the sole discretion in
determining the use and construction classification to be
adhered to.
(f) In all cases, the base course shall be compacted to the extent
necessary to produce a condition so that there will be no
appreciable displacement of material laterally and
longitudinally under traffic and shall conform to line, grades,
and shape shown on the approved plans, profiles, and cross
sections.
(g) The subdivider shall furnish drawings which indicate the
proposed grades of streets shown on the plat and, after
approval of those grades by the Village Engineer and adoption
by the Village Board, the streets shall be graded to full width of
the right-of-way of the proposed street to the subgrade
elevations shown on the typical cross section. The grading is to
be completed prior to installation of utilities. All stumps and
trees which cannot be saved, boulders and other similar items
shall be removed by the subdivider.
(6) Roadway subgrade quality. If deemed necessary by the Village
Engineer, California Bearing Ratio (CBR) tests may be required
according to the following standards:
(a) All subgrade material shall have a minimum CBR of three.
Subgrade material having a CBR less than three shall be
removed and replaced with a suitable fill material or the
pavement must be designed to compensate for the soil
conditions. The soil support CBR values selected for use by the
designer should represent a minimum value for the soil to be
used.
§ 495-44 EAST TROY CODE § 495-44
1:664
(b) Stable and nonorganic subbase material is required. All topsoil
shall be first removed. In addition, all subsoils which have a
high shrink-swell potential, low bearing capacity when wet, or
are highly elastic shall be removed and used outside of the
right-of-way. Where both subsoil and substratum have a high
shrink-swell potential and low bearing capacity when wet, an
underdrain system shall be installed to keep the water level
five feet below the pavement surface. Unstable and organic
material must be subcut, removed and replaced with a suitable
granular or breaker-run material approved by the Village
Engineer.
(7) Roadway grading; ditches. Roads shall be graded to their full width
in accordance with approved plans, plus an additional distance
necessary to establish a four-to-one backslope where ditches are
allowed. The roadway shall be compacted and graded to a
subgrade using, where necessary, approved fill material in
accordance with Wisconsin Department of Transportation
standards. Roadside ditches, where allowed by the Village, shall be
a minimum of 26 inches below the finished roadway center-line
elevation or as approved by the Village Engineer. Debris may not be
buried in the designated road right-of-way. Roadway ditches shall
have a normal slope ratio of three-to-one ditch from the edge of the
shoulder to the bottom of the ditch and two-to-one on the back
slope.
(8) Pavement thickness.
(a) Residential and rural type roads shall have a minimum of 2 1/2
inches thick compacted hot mix bituminous concrete
pavement, placed in two layers, a binder course of 1 1/2 inches
thick and a surface of one inch.
(b) On commercial, arterial or other heavy use roads, there shall
be a minimum of 3 1/2 inches of bituminous concrete
pavement, placed in two layers, a binder course of two inches
thick and a surface course of 1 1/2 inches thick.
(c) In the case of commercial, arterial or other heavy use roads,
the Village Board may, in the alternative to the above
standards, have the Village Engineer provide specifications for
paving such roads with a greater thickness after researching
the site(s) and conducting a soil analysis. In any case, the
Village Board shall have the sole discretion in determining the
use and construction classification to be adhered to. In no
event shall paving occur later than 18 months from the
Village's approval of the final or official plat. All subsequent
shouldering where ditches are allowed shall be brought to
even grade with bituminous mat.
§ 495-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-44
1:665
(d) Contraction joints shall be tooled, saw cut, or formed by
insertion of a metal plate in the concrete and intervals not
exceeding 12 feet and on each side of any structures located in
the concrete (i.e., inlets).
(9) Shoulder width.
(a) A shoulder a minimum of four feet wide on each side of the
road is required where curb and gutter is not used, and wider
when required by § 82.50, Wis. Stats.
(b) Where ditches are allowed, road shoulders shall have a
minimum thickness of 2 1/2 inches of compacted in place
crushed state-approved aggregate base course, over a
minimum six inches of compacted in place crushed stateapproved
aggregate base course, except that shoulder
thickness shall match the thickness of the pavement, provided
that there is a minimum shoulder thickness of six inches.
(10) Roadway culverts and bridges. Roadway culverts and bridges shall
be constructed as directed by the Village Engineer and sized
utilizing the methods listed in Chapter 13, Drainage, of the
Facilities Development Manual of the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation. All roadway culverts shall be provided with
concrete or metal apron endwalls. The developer shall provide
adequate facilities to provide surface water drainage as well as free
flow outlets for subsurface drain tile where they are required.
Where drainage facilities will aid in road construction and the
stabilization of the road subgrade, drainage facilities shall be
installed before road construction is started. Existing condition
status shall be based on a maximum of a Curve 70.
(11) Driveways.
(a) Curbs shall not be interrupted by openings for driveways or
other accessways to private property unless the number and
location of such interruptions have been approved pursuant to
Chapter 244, Driveways and Culverts, of this Code.
(b) Driveway specifications shall be as prescribed in Chapter 244,
Driveways and Culverts, of this Code.
(c) Driveway culverts shall be sized by the Village Engineer (if
appropriate). The culverts shall be placed in the ditch line at
elevations that will assure proper drainage, and they shall be
provided with concrete, metal, or landscape timber endwalls.
Driveway culverts shall be installed as prescribed in Chapter
244, Driveways and Culverts, of this Code.
(12) Topsoil, grass, seed, fertilizer, and mulch. All disturbed areas (i.e.,
ditches, back slopes, etc.) within the road right-of-way not provided
with pavement and shouldering material shall be restored utilizing
§ 495-44 EAST TROY CODE § 495-44
1:666
four inches of topsoil and good quality grass seed, fertilizer, and
mulch. Ditches along the roadway shall be protected by erosion
control materials such as hay bales, sod, erosion control mats, etc.
(13) Drainage improvements. In the case of all new roads and streets,
the Village Engineer may require that stormwater retention areas
and storm sewers be constructed in order to provide for proper
drainage.
(14) Continuity and transitions.
(a) All street pavement widths on streets continued from
previously developed or platted streets shall, wherever
practical, provide for the greater of the existing or required
pavement type, existing or required cross section width, same
or reduced grade, or same cross slope.
(b) Where it is necessary to provide for a transition of pavement
width and/or type between new and existing streets, the
transition shall occur in a safe manner at an intersection. In the
event a transition in pavement width cannot safely occur at an
intersection, it shall not occur closer than 250 feet to the
intersection of right-of-way lines. In width transitions, the ratio
of the transition length to width shall not be less than 15 to one
unless the Village Engineer determines that special
circumstances prevent use of such ratio, in which case the
minimum transition ratio shall be 10 to one.
(15) Curb and gutter. Combination concrete curb and gutter is required
on all streets. Curb and gutter in residential areas shall have a sixinch
barrier curb with a twenty-four-inch flag, except at driveway
aprons where depressed curb shall be constructed. Depressed curb
ramps shall be constructed at all handicap ramps for sidewalks and
at all bikeways. Said curbs and gutters shall be constructed of
concrete, 3,500 psi strength at 28 days, and contain two continuous
one-half-inch diameter reinforcing rods in the gutter flag at
locations crossing underground utility excavations or where
otherwise directed by the Village Engineer. Expansion joints 1/2
inch thick shall be placed in the curb at each starting and ending of
a radius and at intervals not exceeding 300 feet and where
otherwise directed by the Village Engineer. Tie bars shall be
provided where curb and gutter is adjacent to rigid pavements.
(16) Post-construction traffic limited. No vehicular traffic shall be
permitted on the pavement for a minimum period of between 24
and 72 hours following paving, as determined necessary by the
Village Engineer to protect the new pavement.
C. Selection of alternative design. The Village Engineer shall select a
pavement structure to be used after reviewing equivalent alternative
pavement designs with the subdivider. The Village Engineer shall
§ 495-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-44
1:667
§ 495-45. Block design standards.
require one or more of the pavement designs of the subdivider based
on the following criteria:
(1) Life cycle cost.
(2) History of similar pavements in the area.
(3) Adjacent existing pavements.
(4) Staging of construction.
(5) Construction season.
(6) Friction requirements.
(7) Depressed, surface or elevated design.
(8) Higher governmental preference (e.g., if state highway).
(9) Stimulation of competition.
(10) Conservation of materials.
(11) Construction considerations.
(12) Recognition of local industry.
(13) Availability of materials and methods locally.
D. Final inspection. Upon completion of proposed streets and after
waivers of liens or receipted bills that all work that has been done has
been paid for have been presented to the Village Engineer, or
arrangements have been made for the payment through written
instrument by the subdivider, the Village Engineer will proceed to make
a final inspection to ensure all provisions of this chapter have been
complied with, accepting or rejecting the street as the case may be. If
the street is rejected, corrections shall be made as required by the
Village Board, upon the Village Engineer's recommendation, before
final inspection can then be made again. If final acceptance is then
made, the owner or owners shall dedicate to the Village all land
necessary for streets. The subdivider shall warranty the fitness of street
improvements for one year after construction.
A. Length. As a general rule, blocks in residential areas shall not be less
than 600 feet nor more than 1,500 feet in length, unless otherwise
dictated by exceptional topography or other limiting factors of good
design. A block shall be so designated as to provide two tiers of lots,
unless it adjoins a railroad, major thoroughfare, river or park where it
may have a single tier of lots. Width of lots or parcels reserved or laid
out for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for offstreet
service and parking required by the use contemplated and the
area zoning restrictions for such use.
§ 495-44 EAST TROY CODE § 495-45
1:668
§ 495-46. Lot design standards.
B. Pedestrian pathways. Pedestrian pathway easements of at least 10 feet
wide may be required by the Village Board, upon the recommendation
of the Plan Commission, through the center of a block more than 900
feet long, where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other
community facilities.
C. Street tree planting strip easements. Tree planting strip easements
shall be provided for on both sides of all streets when the street terrace
is insufficient. The minimum easement width shall be 10 feet and shall
be adjacent to the front property line. Street trees shall be maintained
by the adjacent property owner in accordance with Village ordinances.
D. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed according to the standards
in § 423-5 of this Code. In areas where sidewalks and bikeways are to
be laid to the established grade of the street, the street edge of the
sidewalk or bikeway pavement shall be at an elevation above the top of
the curb determined by a slope of 1/2 inch per foot times the distance
between the curb and the street, sidewalk or bikeway edge. The
sidewalk or bikeway pavement shall be sloped at a minimum of 1/4 inch
per foot and a maximum of 3/4 inch per foot toward the street, unless
public drainage is available behind the sidewalk or bikeway.
A. Lot dimension.
(1) The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated. The lots should be designed to provide an
aesthetically pleasing building site and a proper architectural
setting for the buildings contemplated.
(2) Area and dimensions of lots shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 510, Zoning, of this Code and in areas not served by public
sewer shall, in addition, conform to the requirements of the State
Department of Safety and Professional Services. Whenever a tract
is subdivided into large parcels, such parcels shall be arranged and
dimensioned so as to allow resubdivision of any such parcels into
normal lots in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.268
B. Commercial or industrial lots. Depth and width of properties reserved
or laid out for commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to
provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the
type of use and development contemplated, as required by Chapter
510, Zoning, of this Code.
C. Access. All lots shall have a minimum of 50 feet of platted frontage on a
public street to allow access by emergency and service motor vehicles
268. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-46
1:669
unless part of a planned development approved by the Village Board.
Alley frontage (public or private) shall not constitute meeting this
minimum frontage requirement.
D. Lots where abutting arterial highway. Residential lots adjacent to major
and minor arterial streets and highways and/or railroads shall be
platted with an extra 15 feet of minimum yard setback and shall
otherwise be designed to alleviate the adverse effects on residential
adjacent lots platted to the major street, highway, railroad, or other
such features.
E. Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to
permit full building setback from both streets, or as required by
applicable zoning regulations.
F. Depth. Lots shall have a minimum average depth of 125 feet. Excessive
depth in relation to width shall be avoided and a proportion of two to
one shall be considered a desirable ratio under normal conditions.269
G. Width. Width of lots shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 510,
Zoning, of this Code, and in no case shall a lot be less than 40 feet in
width at the building setback line.
H. Side lots. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to or radial
to abutting street center lines. Lot lines shall follow Village boundary
lines.
I. Double and reversed frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed
frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide
separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
J. Natural features. In the dividing of any land, regard shall be shown for
all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots,
or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and
stability to the proposed development.
K. Land remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after
dividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots or a plan shown
as to future use rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
L. Large lots. In case a tract is divided and results in parcels of more than
twice the minimum lot size provided for by Chapter 510, Zoning, of this
Code for the zoning district in which the land is located, such parcels
shall be so arranged to permit redividing into parcels in accordance
with this chapter and with Chapter 510, Zoning.
M. Trunk highway proximity. All lots adjacent to state trunk and federal
highways shall be platted with additional depth necessary to provide for
a building setback line not less than 50 feet from the nearer right-of-
269. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-46 EAST TROY CODE § 495-46
1:670
§ 495-47. Drainage and stormwater management system.
way line or 110 feet from the center line, whichever is more restrictive.
The subdivider may appeal this requirement to the Village Engineer.
Upon written request of the Village Engineer, the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation is hereby authorized to then determine
building setback requirements equal to or less than those required
above in all land divisions (including certified surveys) adjacent to state
and federal highways in accordance with the authority granted in the
Administrative Code. The required building setback line and additional
lot depth shall be platted so as to accommodate such required building
setbacks.
N. Easement allowance. Lots containing pedestrian or drainage easements
shall be platted to include additional width in allowance for the
easement.
O. Drainageway and watercourses.
(1) Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream
shall have such additional depth or width as required by the Village
Engineer to obtain building sites that are not subject to flooding
from a post-development one-hundred-year storm.
(2) Lands lying between the meander line and the water's edge and
any otherwise unplattable lands which lie between a proposed
subdivision and the water's edge shall be included as part of lots,
outlots or public dedications in any plat abutting a lake or stream.
A. Purpose. The following provisions in this section are established to
preserve and provide properly located public sites and facilities for
drainage and stormwater management as the community develops and
to ensure that the costs of providing and developing such public sites
are equitably apportioned on the basis of serving the need for the
management of increased stormwater quantities resulting from land
development.
B. Drainage system required.
(1) As required by § 495-31, a drainage system shall be designed and
constructed by the subdivider consistent with the requirements of
Chapter 483, Article II, Post-Construction Stormwater
Management, of this Code. A final plat shall not be approved until
the subdivider submits plans, profiles, and specifications as
specified in this section that have been prepared by a registered
professional engineer and approved or modified by the Village
Board, upon the recommendations of the Plan Commission and
Village Engineer.270
270. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-47
1:671
(2) Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from
all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with
the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be
designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from
each lot to adjacent lots.
(3) The Plan Commission shall not recommend for approval any
subdivision plat which does not provide adequate means for
stormwater or floodwater runoff. Any stormwater drainage system
will be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system.
Storm sewers, where necessary, shall be designed in accordance
with all governmental regulations, and a copy of design
computations for engineering capacities shall accompany plans
submitted by the planning engineer for the final plat. When
calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point,
no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and
basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point.
C. Drainage system plans.
(1) The subdivider shall submit to the Village at the time of filing a final
plat a drainage plan or engineering report on the ability of existing
watercourse channels, storm sewers, culverts, and other
improvements pertaining to drainage or flood control within the
subdivision to handle the additional runoff which would be
generated by the development of the land within the subdivision
consistent with the requirements of Chapter 483, Article II, Post-
Construction Stormwater Management, of this Code. Additional
information shall be submitted to adequately indicate that
provision has been made for disposal of surface water without any
damage to the developed or undeveloped land downstream or
below the proposed subdivision. The report shall also include:271
(a) Estimates of the quantity of stormwater entering the
subdivision naturally from areas outside the subdivision.
(b) Quantities of flow at each inlet or culvert.
(c) Location, sizes, and grades of required culverts, storm
drainage sewers and other required appurtenances.
(2) A grading plan for the streets, blocks, and lots shall be submitted
by the subdivider for the area within the subdivision.
(3) The design criteria for storm drainage systems shall be consistent
with the requirements of Chapter 483, Article II, Post-Construction
Stormwater Management, of this Code.272
271. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
272. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-47 EAST TROY CODE § 495-47
1:672
(4) Material and construction specifications for all drainage projects
(i.e., pipe, culverts, seed, sod, etc.) shall be in compliance with
specifications provided by the Village Engineer.
D. Drainage system requirements. The subdivider shall install all the
storm drainage facilities indicated on the plans required in Subsection
C of this section necessary to serve, and resulting from, the phase of the
land division under development.
(1) All streets shall be provided with an adequate storm drainage
system. The street storm system shall serve as the minor drainage
system and shall be designed to carry street, adjacent land, and
building stormwater drainage. Stormwater shall not be permitted
to be run into the sanitary sewer system within the proposed
subdivision.
(2) The design of the off-street major drainage system shall include the
entire watershed affecting the land division and shall be extended
to a watercourse or ditch adequate to receive the storm drainage.
When the drainage system is outside of the street right-of-way, the
subdivider shall make provisions for dedicating an easement
pursuant to Subsection F to the Village to provide for the future
maintenance of said system.
E. Protection of drainage systems. The subdivider shall adequately protect
all ditches to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer. Ditches and open
channels shall be seeded, sodded or paved depending upon grades and
soil types. Generally ditches or channels with grades up to 1% shall be
seeded, those with grades up to 4% shall be sodded, and those graded
over 4% shall be paved.
F. Drainage easements. Where a land division is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream:
(1) There shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage rightof-
way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse
and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate
for the purpose and as may be necessary to comply with this
section.
(2) The watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream may be
relocated in such a manner that the maintenance of adequate
drainage will be assured and the same provided with a stormwater
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming to the lines of the
relocated watercourse and such further width or construction, or
both, as will be adequate for the purpose and may be necessary to
comply with this section.
(3) Wherever possible, drainage shall be maintained in an easement by
an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for
maximum potential volume flow. In all cases, such easements shall
§ 495-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-47
1:673
be of a minimum width established at the high-water mark or, in
the absence of such specification, not less than 30 feet.
(4) Whenever a parcel is to be subdivided or consolidated and
embraces any part of a drainageway identified on a Village
stormwater management plan, comprehensive plan, and/or official
map, or any portion thereof, such part of said existing or proposed
public drainageway shall be platted and dedicated by the
subdivider as an easement or right-of-way in the location and at the
size indicated, along with all other streets and public ways in the
land division. Whenever any parcel is to be subdivided or
consolidated and is part of a drainage district established under the
authority of Ch. 88, Wis. Stats., the subdivider shall petition the
Circuit Court to transfer the jurisdiction of that portion of the
drainage district being subdivided or consolidated to the Village in
accordance with § 88.83, Wis. Stats.
G. Dedication/preservation of stormwater management facilities. The
subdivider shall dedicate sufficient land area for the storage of
stormwater to meet the needs to be created by the proposed land
development, and in accordance with the standards for on-site
detention, and as determined by the Village Engineer. Whenever a
proposed stormwater management facility (e.g., detention or retention
basin), in whole or in part, is depicted on Village plans, such as the
Official Map, as a regional facility within the proposed land division,
ground areas for providing the required storage capacity in such
proposed public facility shall be dedicated to the public to the
requirements of the plan and/or Official Map. Storage areas necessary
to serve areas outside the land division shall be held in reserve for a
period of five years from the date of final plat approval for future
dedication to the Village or other appropriate agency. Storage facilities
required and not shown on the Official Map as a regional facility shall
be owned and maintained by the subdivider/subsequent owners'
association. A maintenance agreement shall be prepared in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter 483, Article II, Post-Construction
Stormwater Management, of this Code.273
H. Storm drainage facilities. The subdivider, at his/her cost, shall install all
drainage facilities identified in the required erosion control plan or
determined by the Village Engineer as being necessary for the
management of all lands and roadways within the development. In
addition, drainage capacity through the development from other areas
shall be provided in accordance with a comprehensive surface water
management study, if applicable. All required storm drainage facilities
shall be constructed and operational prior to acceptance of any
dedications and/or public improvements served by the storm drainage
facilities.
273. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-47 EAST TROY CODE § 495-47
1:674
I. Minor drainage system. The subdivider shall install all minor drainage
system components necessary to reduce inconvenience and damages
from frequent storms. Minor drainage components shall include all
inlets, piping, gutters, channels, ditching, pumping, and other facilities
designed to accommodate the post-development runoff resulting from a
ten-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall event as determined in the most
current edition of the Natural Resources Conservation Service
Technical Release 55 (TR 55). Temporary accumulations of storm runoff
from ponding or flowing water, in or near minor system components,
shall be permitted provided that such accumulations do not allow the
water to flow across the crown of the street from one side to the other.
For arterial streets and streets located in commercial districts, ponding
within normal traffic lanes (10 feet on each side of the center line of the
street) is prohibited. In drainageways and drainageway easements,
accumulations of water shall not inundate beyond the limits of the
drainageway or drainageway easement. Cross-street drainage channels
(valley gutters) shall not be permitted except on cul-de-sac or
permanent dead-end streets serving fewer than 10 dwelling units and
where the minimum grade in the valley gutter and street gutter
between the valley gutter and the next downstream drainage inlet is not
less than 1%.274
J. Major drainage system. The subdivider shall install all major drainage
system components necessary to reduce inconvenience and damages
from infrequent storms. Major system components shall include large
channels and drainageways, streets, easements and other paths and
shall be capable of accommodating post-development runoff in excess
of that accommodated by minor system components resulting from
twenty-four-hour rainfall events for storms with return frequencies
greater than two years up to and including the one-hundred-year return
event (as identified in TR 55). Runoff resulting from a one-hundred-year,
twenty-four-hour rainfall event shall be contained within the street
right-of-way or designated storm drainage easement or detention
facility consistent with the requirements of Chapter 483, Article II,
Post-Construction Stormwater Management, of this Code.275
K. Drainage piping systems.
(1) Unless otherwise approved by the Village Engineer, all drainage
piping of 12 inches diameter and greater in street right-of-way shall
be constructed of Class 3 reinforced concrete pipe. Piping
materials outside of rights-of-way shall be subject to approval of the
Village Engineer. All storm sewer outlets shall be equipped with
steel bar or iron pipe debris gates.
274. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
275. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-47
1:675
§ 495-48. Nonresidential subdivisions.
(2) Agricultural drain tiles which are disturbed during construction
shall be restored, reconnected or connected to public storm
drainage facilities.
L. Open channel systems.
(1) Where open channels are utilized in either the minor or major
drainage system, they shall be designed so as to minimize
maintenance requirements and maximize safety. Drainage
easements (in lieu of dedications) shall be utilized to accommodate
open channels and provide adequate access by the Village for
maintenance of drainage capacity. Side slopes shall not exceed a
four-to-one slope. Drainageways, where subject to high
groundwater, continuous flows, or other conditions, shall have a
paved concrete invert of not less than eight feet wide and side
slopes to a point one foot above the channel invert.
(2) In areas where invert paving is not required, the drainageway
bottom shall be grass. If the drainageway has a bare soil bottom or
the natural grasses in the drainageway are disturbed due to
development operations, the drainageway bottom shall be sodded
and securely staked to one foot above the elevation of inundation
resulting from a predevelopment five-year, twenty-four-hour storm
event. Other disturbed areas shall be seeded and prepared in
accordance with the Village's erosion control requirements (see
§ 495-35). Velocities for grass-lined channels shall not exceed those
presented in the Village's surface water management study, if one
is adopted.
M. Standards for on-site detention storage. When the subdivider employs
on-site detention to control erosion and sedimentation, reduce the postdevelopment
peak runoff rate, or temporarily store stormwater runoff
due to inadequate downstream drainage facilities, the detention
(storage) facilities shall comply with the requirements in Chapter 383,
Article II, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, of this Code.276
A. General.
(1) If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for
commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision
with respect to such land shall make such provisions as the Village
may require.
(2) A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to all the
requirements of site plan approval set forth in the Village Building
Code.277 A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the
276. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
277. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Building Construction.
§ 495-47 EAST TROY CODE § 495-48
1:676
§ 495-49. Grading.
The subdivider shall grade each land division in order to establish street,
block, and lot grades in proper relation to each other and to topography as
follows:
requirements of this chapter, as well as such additional standards
required by the Village, and shall conform to the proposed land use
standards established by the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map,
and Chapter 510, Zoning, of this Code.
B. Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in this chapter,
which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant
shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Village Board that the
street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the
uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The
following principles and standards shall be observed:
(1) Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and
dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated.
(2) Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to
accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be
generated thereupon.
(3) Special requirements may be imposed by the Village Board, upon
the recommendation of the Village Engineer, with respect to street,
curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction.
(4) Special requirements may be imposed by the Village Board, upon
the recommendation of the Village Engineer, with respect to the
installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and
stormwater drainage.
(5) Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas
from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial
subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels
backing up on existing or potential residential development and
provisions for permanently landscaped buffer strips when
necessary.
(6) Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall
not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or
potential residential areas.
A. Master site grading plan.
(1) A master site grading plan shall be prepared by the subdivider for
all new subdivisions. This plan shall be prepared in accordance
with the requirements and standards of the Village.
(2) The master site grading plan shall show existing and proposed
elevations of all lot corners, control points, and building locations.
§ 495-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-49
1:677
The plan shall also indicate all overland storm drainage in and
adjacent to the subdivision. The cost of the preparation of such a
plan shall be paid for by the subdivider.
(3) After approval or modification of these plans by the Village
Engineer, the full width of the right-of-way of the proposed streets
within the subdivision and the entire subdivision lot area shall be
graded in accordance with the master site grading plan. The
owners of the subdivision lots shall adhere to those plans.
(4) Upon completion of all street and subdivision grading, the grades
shall be checked and certified by the Village Engineer to determine
that the completed grading work is in accordance with the master
site grading plan.
(5) The cost of all required grading work, supervision, certification,
inspection and engineering fees shall be paid for by the subdivider.
B. Right-of-way grading. The subdivider shall grade the full width of the
right-of-way of all proposed streets in accordance with the approved
plans, including the grading of sight triangles at each intersection.
C. Block grading. Block grading shall be completed by one or more of the
following methods:
(1) Regrading along the side or rear lot lines which provides for
drainage to the public drainage facilities, provided that any ditches
or swales are in public drainage easements, and provided that a
deed restriction is adopted which prohibits alteration of the grades
within five feet of any property line from the grades shown on the
master site grading plan.
(2) Parts of all lots may be graded to provide for drainage to a ditch or
to a swale.
D. Miscellaneous grading requirements.
(1) Lot grading shall be completed so that water drains away from
each building site toward public drainage facilities at a grade
approved by the Village Engineer, and provisions shall be made to
prevent drainage onto properties adjacent to the land division
unless to a public drainage facility.
(2) Grading activities shall not result in slopes greater than four to one
on public lands or lands subject to public access.
(3) The topsoil stripped for grading shall not be removed from the site
unless identified in the required erosion control plan approved by
the Village Engineer as not being necessary for erosion control or
site landscaping purposes. Topsoil shall be uniformly returned to
the lots when rough grading is finished. Topsoil piles shall be
leveled and seeded for erosion control prior to the Village releasing
§ 495-49 EAST TROY CODE § 495-49
1:678
§ 495-50. Erosion control.
The Village finds that urbanized land uses have accelerated the process
of soil erosion, runoff, and sedimentation in the waters of the Village.
Therefore, it is declared to be the purpose of this section to control and
prevent soil erosion and minimize stormwater runoff increases and thereby
to preserve the natural resources, control floods, and prevent impairment of
dams and reservoirs, protect the quality of public waters, protect wildlife,
protect the tax base, and protect and promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the people of the Village. All land disturbing activities shall be
subject to the provisions of Chapter 483, Article I, Construction Site Erosion
Control, of this Code.
the one-year guarantee provision on public improvements in the
streets adjacent to the lots on which the topsoil is stockpiled.
(4) Such grading shall not result in detriment to any existing
developed lands, either within or outside of the corporate limits.
E. Drainage flows. The subdivider shall cause to be set upon the master
grading plan arrows indicating the directions of drainage flows for each
property line not fronting on a street on all parcels and along each
street as will result from the grading of the site, the construction of the
required public improvements, or which are existing drainage flows and
will remain. The arrows indicating the directions of flows shall be
appropriately weighted so as to differentiate between the minor and
major (one-hundred-year event) drainage components. The arrows shall
be accompanied on the master grading plan with the following note.
"Arrows indicate the direction of drainage flow in various components
resulting from site grading and the construction of required public
improvements. The drainage flow components located in easements
shall be maintained and preserved by the property owner unless
approved by the Village Engineer."
§ 495-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-50
1:679

ARTICLE VIII
Park and Public Land Dedications
§ 495-51. General requirements.
§ 495-52. Land dedication.
A. Dedication requirements. In order that adequate open spaces and sites
for public uses may be properly located and reserved, and in order that
the cost of providing public areas, such as but not limited to parks,
recreation areas, and public schools, may be equitably apportioned on
the basis of additional need created by a certified survey or subdivision
development, each subdivider shall be required to dedicate land or pay
fees in lieu of land for park or other public uses. The provisions of this
article do not apply to land divisions within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
B. General design. In the design of a subdivision, land division, planned
development, or certified survey, provision shall be made for suitable
sites of adequate area for schools, parks, playgrounds, open spaces,
drainageways, and other public purposes. Such sites are to be shown on
the preliminary plat and final plat and shall comply with the
Comprehensive Plan or Park and Open Space Plan. Consideration shall
be given to the preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands of trees,
marshes, lakes, ponds, streams, watercourses, watersheds, ravines and
woodlands, prairie and wetlands, and plant and animal communities.
A. Dedication of sites. Where feasible and compatible with the
Comprehensive Plan or Park and Open Space Plan, the subdivider shall
provide and dedicate to the public adequate land to provide for park,
recreation, school, and open space needs of the land development
within the Village of East Troy. The location of such land to be dedicated
shall be determined by the Village Board. Where the dedication is not
compatible with the Comprehensive Plan or for other reasons is not
feasible as determined by the Village Board, the subdivider shall, in lieu
thereof, pay to the Village a fee as established by this article, or a
combination thereof.278
B. Dedication of parks, playgrounds, recreation and open spaces. The
subdivider shall dedicate sufficient land area to provide adequate park,
playground, recreation, and open space to meet the needs to be created
by and to be provided for the land division. Within the corporate limits
of the Village, whenever a proposed playground, park, or other public
land, other than streets or drainageways, designated in the
Comprehensive Plan or Official Map is embraced, all or in part, in a
tract of land to be subdivided, these proposed public lands shall be
made a part of the plat and dedicated to the public by the subdivider at
the following rate:
278. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-52
1:681
(1) Within the corporate limits of the Village, whenever a subdivision
plat or condominium plat is presented to the Village Board, the
Village Board shall, at its sole option, require the subdivider to
dedicate to the public land at the rate of $1,651 per unit in the
proposed development or require the donation of funds or a
combination of land/equipment/funds at the same value. The land
donated by the subdivider shall be valued at $40,000 per acre
(based upon a 2005 public needs assessment which was used to
determine the $1,651). Any donated land must be capable of being
developed as a neighborhood park, as determined by the Village
Board.
(2) Public lands designated in a plan or map and required to be
dedicated which are in excess of the aforesaid rate shall be
reserved for a period not to exceed five years, unless extended by
mutual agreement, for acquisition by the Village at undeveloped
land costs.
(3) Outside the corporate limits of the Village, but within the
extraterritorial limits, the subdivider may be required to reserve
such proposed public lands as may be recommended by the Plan
Commission as necessary for parks and open spaces, for a period
not to exceed five years, for acquisition at undeveloped land costs
by the municipality with appropriate jurisdiction.
(4) Within the corporate limits of the Village, whenever the
Comprehensive Plan, Park and Open Space Plan, or Official Map
does not embrace proposed playground, park, or other public
lands, other than streets and drainageways, in order that adequate
open space and sites for public use may be properly located and
preserved as the community develops, and in order that the cost of
providing the public park and recreation sites and facilities
necessary to serve the additional families brought into the
community by the subdivision may be most equitably apportioned
on the basis of the additional need created by the individual
subdivision development, the subdivider shall, in the design of the
plat or certified survey map, dedicate a public site for future public
use in the development of parks and recreational needs servicing
the subdivision. The minimum amount of land to be provided by the
subdivider by dedication shall be the same as provided for in
Subsection B(1).
C. Minimum size of park and playground dedications.
(1) In general, land reserved for recreation purposes shall have an
area of at least one acre. Where the amount of land to be dedicated
is less than one acre, the Village Board may require that the
recreation area be located at a suitable place on the edge of the
proposed land division, subdivision or certified survey so that
additional land may be added at such time that the adjacent land is
subdivided. In no case shall an area of less than one acre be
§ 495-52 EAST TROY CODE § 495-52
1:682
reserved for recreational purposes if it will be impractical or
impossible to secure additional lands in order to increase its area.
(2) Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a character and
location suitable for use as a playground, play field, or for other
recreation purposes and shall be relatively level and dry. A
recreation site shall have a total frontage on one or more streets of
at least 100 feet in length, and no other dimensions of the site shall
be less than 100 feet.
D. Fees in lieu of land.
(1) In the event that dedication would result in sites too small to be
usable, or if the Comprehensive Plan or Park and Open Space Plan
calls for such public sites or open spaces to be located elsewhere,
or if the land to be dedicated would not be adaptable to meet
desirable on-site facilities, or if such sites would not otherwise be
suitable, a payment of a fee in lieu of land dedication shall be
required. Factors used in evaluation the adequacy of proposed park
and open space areas shall include size and shape, topography,
geology, tree and other plant cover, access, and location. The
amount of such fee shall be equivalent to the value of the required
dedication. Such fee shall be deposited in a nonlapsing fund to be
used exclusively for park and recreation development, including
site acquisition and related capital improvements.
(2) Where the division results in the creation of not more than one
additional lot or parcel, payment shall be required only for the
additional parcel; no payment shall be required for a parcel on
which a permanent residential structure has existed for at least one
year prior to the date of final plat approval.
(3) Where a lot or parcel for which payment has once been made is
further divided, payment shall be required only for the additional
lots or parcels created.
(4) Where payment is made in lieu of dedication, it shall be made in
cash, in one lump sum (100%), at the time of approval of the final
plat or certified survey map. Where stage development of a
subdivision is approved by the Village Board, it may limit payments
in lieu of dedication to the area of the subdivision being developed,
the entire fee for the first stage being due and payable at the time
of final approval of the plat, and the entire fee for each phase
subsequent to the first shall be due and payable prior to the start of
work on each phase.
(5) The Village Board may, in its sole discretion, permit the subdivider
to satisfy the requirements of this article by combining a land
dedication with a fee payment. If 25% of the required dedication is
made, the subdivider shall also contribute an amount equal to 75%
of the required per-unit fee in lieu of land. If 50% of the required
dedication is made, the subdivider shall also contribute an amount
§ 495-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-52
1:683
§ 495-53. Reservation of additional land.
When public parks and sites for other public areas are shown on the
Comprehensive Plan or Park and Open Space Plan within the proposed
area for development and are greater in area than required by § 495-52,
the owner shall reserve for acquisition by the Village, through agreement,
purchase or condemnation, the remaining greater public area for a period
of one year from final plat approval unless extended by mutual agreement.
§ 495-54. Development of park area.
equal to 50% of the required per-unit fee in lieu of land. If 75%
of the required dedication is made, the subdivider shall also
contribute an amount equal to 25% of the required per-unit fee in
lieu of land.
(6) The Village shall place any fee collected pursuant to the provisions
of this section in a separate account to be used at the discretion of
the Village Board in any community park, for developing adequate
parks, playgrounds, recreation, and open spaces.
E. Suitability of lands. The Village Board shall have sole authority to
determine the suitability and adequacy of parklands proposed for
dedication. Drainageways, wetlands, or areas reserved for streets shall
not be considered as satisfying land dedication requirements.
F. Access to dedicated land. All dedicated land shall have frontage on a
public street and shall have unrestricted public access.
G. Utility extensions. The subdivider shall install or provide for installation
of water and sanitary sewer lines to the property line of all dedicated
land, where such services are to be provided to the adjacent properties.
A. When parklands are dedicated to the Village, the subdivider is required
to:
(1) Properly grade and contour for proper drainage.
(2) Provide surface contour suitable for anticipated use of area as
approved by the Village Engineer.
(3) Cover areas to be seeded with a minimum of four inches of quality
topsoil, seed as specified by the Village Engineer and mulch, as
specified in the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, Sections 627 and 629. The topsoil furnished for the
park site shall consist of the natural loam, sandy loam, silt loam,
silty clay loam or clay loam humus-bearing soils adapted to the
sustenance of plant life, and such topsoil shall be neither
excessively acid nor excessively alkaline. Fine grading and seeding
must occur within one year following issuance of the first building
permit within that land division unless otherwise authorized by the
Village. The improved area shall not be deemed officially accepted
§ 495-52 EAST TROY CODE § 495-54
1:684
until a uniform grass cover to a two-inch height has been
established. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to
maintain the area until the Village accepts the dedication.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Village to maintain the dedicated
areas upon their dedication and acceptance to the Village.
C. A neighborhood park area shall be provided by the subdivider with a
standard residential water service, unless located directly adjacent to a
fire hydrant. A community park area shall be provided by the developer
with a minimum six-inch water service or at least one fire hydrant, and
at least one four-inch sanitary sewer lateral, all located at the street
property line.
D. The Village Board may require certification of compliance with this
article by the subdivider. The cost of such report shall be paid by the
subdivider.
E. If the subdivider fails to satisfy the requirements of this section, the
Village Board may contract said completion and bill such costs to the
subdivider, following a written notice to the subdivider of
noncompliance. Failure to pay such costs may result in the immediate
withholding of all building permits until such costs are paid.
F. The subdivider shall pay all costs of public improvements in the public
streets adjacent to or within all public and/or park lands.
§ 495-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-54
1:685

ARTICLE IX
Fees
§ 495-55. Administrative and other fees.
A. General. The subdivider shall pay the Village of East Troy all fees as
hereinafter required and at the times specified before being entitled to
recording of a plat or certified survey map. At the time of submission of
a plat or certified survey, the Plan Commission, at its sole discretion,
may require the subdivider to make a good faith deposit with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer to cover, in all or part, the expenses anticipated to be
incurred by the Village because of the land division. Unused portions of
such fund may be refunded to the subdivider. The requirements of this
section apply within both the Village and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
B. Engineering fee.
(1) The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the Village
for all engineering work incurred by the Village in connection with
the plat, including but not limited to:
(a) The preparation of those construction plans and specifications
required to be designed by the Village Engineer.
(b) The preparation of those construction plans and specifications
which the subdivider requests the Village Engineer prepare.
(c) The review of construction plans and specifications furnished
by the subdivider.
(d) Such inspection as the Village Engineer deems necessary to
assure that the construction of the required improvements is in
compliance with the plans, specifications and ordinances (or
other regulations) of the Village or any other governmental
authority.
(2) The Village Engineer shall render an itemized estimated bill for
services to be rendered, excluding inspection work, within 30 days
after approval, or conditional approval, of the preliminary plat.
Copies of this estimated bill shall be sent both to the Village and the
subdivider. The subdivider shall pay 1/2 of this bill prior to the
Village Engineer commencing any work on plans and specifications
and shall pay the remaining half at the time the final plat is
submitted for approval. Nonpayment constitutes grounds for
rejection of said final plat. Following completion and approval of all
construction work, an adjusted, final bill, including the costs of
inspection, shall be submitted by the Village Engineer, with copies
to both the Village and the subdivider. The net amount of the final
bill shall be paid by the subdivider within 30 days of its receipt.
Payments hereunder may be made directly to the Village Engineer
by the subdivider.
§ 495-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-55
1:687
C. Administrative fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee to the Village equal to
the cost of any legal, administrative, or fiscal work which may be
undertaken by the Village in connection with the plat or certified survey
map.
D. Concept plan. There shall be no fee for the Village's review of a concept
or sketch plan of a proposed land division. However, such reviews shall
be conducted only as staff time permits.
E. Preliminary plat/certified survey map review fee.279
(1) The subdivider shall pay a fee set by the Village Board to the Village
Clerk-Treasurer at the time of first application for approval of any
preliminary plats to assist in defraying the cost of review.
(2) A reapplication fee set by the Village Board shall be paid to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer at the time of reapplication for approval of
any preliminary plat which has previously been reviewed.
F. Final plat review fee.280
(1) The subdivider shall pay a fee set by the Village Board to the Village
Clerk-Treasurer at the time of first application for approval of said
plat to assist in defraying the cost of review.
(2) A reapplication fee set by the Village Board shall be paid to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer at the time of reapplication for approval of
any final plat which has previously been reviewed.
G. Objecting agency review fees. The subdivider shall transmit all fees
required for state agency review to the Village Clerk-Treasurer at the
time of application. Said review fees shall be retransmitted to the
proper state review agency by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. Said fees
shall be applicable, where appropriate, to review fees required by the
Wisconsin Department of Administration, Wisconsin Department of
Transportation, Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional
Services, and the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
H. Public site fee. If the subdivision does not contain lands to be dedicated
as required in this chapter, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall require a
fee pursuant to § 495-52D for the acquisition and development of public
sites to serve the future inhabitants of the proposed subdivision.
I. Assessments. All outstanding assessments due to the Village shall be
due prior to the signing of the final plat or certified survey by the
Village.
279. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
280. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-55 EAST TROY CODE § 495-55
1:688
§ 495-56. Impact fees.
Pursuant to the authority to impose impact fees found in § 66.0617, Wis.
Stats., and pursuant to the impact fee studies and plans required therein,
the Village of East Troy hereby establishes and imposes impact fees as
prescribed in this section.
J. Cost determination. The subdivider of land divisions within the Village
shall reimburse the Village for its actual cost of design, inspection,
testing, construction and associated legal and real estate fees incurred
in connection with the preliminary plat, final plat, replat or certified
survey. The Village's costs shall be determined as follows:
(1) The cost of Village employees' time engaged in any way with the
land division based on the hourly rate paid to the employee
multiplied by a factor determined by the Village Clerk-Treasurer to
represent the Village's cost for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick
leave, holidays, vacation, and similar benefits.
(2) The cost of Village equipment employed.
(3) The cost of mileage reimbursed to Village employees which is
attributed to the land division.
(4) The actual costs of Village materials incorporated into the work,
including transportation costs, plus a restocking and/or handling
fee not to exceed 10% of the cost of the materials.
(5) All consultant fees, including but not limited to legal fees, at the
invoiced amount plus administrative costs. Unless the amount
totals less than $50, the Village shall bill the subdivider monthly for
expenses incurred by the Village. Statements outstanding for more
than 30 days shall accrue interest at the rate of 1 1/2% per month.
Bills outstanding for more than 90 days shall be forwarded to the
subdivider's surety agency for payment. Amounts less than $50
shall be held for billing by the Village until amounts total more than
$50 or until the conclusion of project activities.
A. Establishment of service area. There is hereby established a
geographically defined area which shall be known as the "service area"
within which it will be necessary to enlarge and improve new and
existing public facilities attendant to the Village of East Troy water
system and library improvements as a result of land development and
growth within the Village of East Troy. The service for the water system
and library improvements is shown in Exhibit A which is attached
hereto and incorporated herein by this reference and is on file in the
Clerk-Treasurer's office and shall remain on file in the Clerk-Treasurer's
office. [Amended 12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-09]
B. Standard for impact fees. In accordance with § 66.0617, Wis. Stats., the
Village of East Troy adopts the following standards for impact fees
which will be imposed under this section:
§ 495-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-56
1:689
(1) Impact fees adopted by the Village of East Troy:
(a) Shall bear a rational relationship to the need for new, expanded
or improved public facilities that are required to serve land
development.
(b) May not exceed the proportionate share of the capital costs
that are required to serve land development, as compared to
existing uses of land within the Village of East Troy.
(c) Shall be based upon actual capital costs or reasonable
estimates of capital costs for new, expanded, or improved
public facilities.
(d) Shall be reduced to compensate for other capital costs imposed
by the Village of East Troy with respect to land development to
provide or pay for public facilities, including special
assessments, special charges, land dedications or fees in lieu
of land dedications under Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., or any other
items of value.
(e) Shall be reduced to compensate for moneys received from the
federal or state government specifically to provide or pay for
the public facilities for which the impact fees are imposed.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(f) May not include amounts necessary to address existing
deficiencies in public facilities.
(g) Shall be payable by the developer or the property owner to the
Village in full upon the issuance of a building permit by the
Village. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(2) References hereinabove to public facilities shall be deemed to refer
to the following, to the extent that their inclusion is permitted
under § 66.0617, Wis. Stats.: the Village of East Troy water system,
including wells, storage towers, and transmission mains; and the
public library, including structural improvements and equipment
owned and utilized by the system. [Amended 12-7-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-09]
C. Amount. The impact fees are adopted in the following amounts:
[Amended 12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-09]
(1) Village of East Troy water system impact fee: $1,469.
(2) Additional water fee for boosted zone: $723.
(3) Library impact fee: $482.
D. Residential impact fees. Each impact fee shall be imposed on a
residential equivalent unit (REU) basis with each single-family
residential unit, whether located within a one-family, condominium,
§ 495-56 EAST TROY CODE § 495-56
1:690
cooperative, rental, or owner-occupied unit, constituting one such REU.
Multifamily homes with two or fewer bedrooms shall pay 0.73 times the
impact fees charged to a single-family home. Other types of temporary
or limited term domestic use facilities shall be assigned residential unit
equivalents as provided herein:
(1) Congregate care facility (ACLF): one per four bedrooms.
(2) Community-based residential facility (CBRF): one per four
bedrooms.
(3) Retirement home: one per four bedrooms.
(4) Assisted living facility: one per two units.
(5) Motel/hotel: one per two rooms or suites.
E. Nonresidential impact fees. Nonresidential development will be
charged the impact fee for water and law enforcement only according
to water meter size. The fees will be charged on a cost per REU as
follows:
Water and Law Enforcement Impact Fees REU Multiplier
Meter Size
(inches) Meter Type
Flow
(gallons per
minute) REU Ratio
3/4 or less Displacement 15 1.0
1 Displacement 25 1.7
1 to 1 1/2 Displacement 50 3.3
2 Displacement 80 5.3
2 Compound 80 5.3
2 Turbine 100 6.7
3 Compound 160 10.7
3 Turbine 240 16.0
4 Compound 250 16.7
4 Turbine 420 28.0
6 Compound 500 33.3
6 Turbine 920 61.3
8 Compound 800 53.3
8 Turbine 1,600 106.7
10 Compound 1,150 76.7
10 Turbine 2,500 166.7
F. Payment of impact fees. Payment of impact fees for water system
additions and library additions shall become due and payable upon the
§ 495-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-56
1:691
issuance of a building permit for new development or before service
connection for existing developments. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02; 12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-09]
G. Low-cost housing. No exemption or reduction in the amount of said fee
shall be made on land development that provides for low-cost housing.
H. Separate fund established. There is hereby established an impact fee
fund for water system additions and library additions within the Village
of East Troy. Each such fund shall be placed in a segregated, interestbearing
account and shall be accounted for separately from all other
funds of the Village. Revenues from said fund, including impact fee
revenues and interest earned on impact fee revenues, may be expended
only for capital costs for which the impact fees were imposed.
[Amended 12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-09]
I. Refund of impact fees. Impact fees that are collected after April 10,
2006, within seven years of the effective date of the ordinance, but are
not used within 10 years after the effective date of the ordinance to pay
the capital costs for which they were imposed, shall be refunded to the
current owner of the property with respect to which the impact fees
were imposed, along with any interest that has accumulated. However,
the time for refunding impact fees may be extended an additional three
years by a majority vote of the Village Board of Trustees adopting a
resolution stating that, due to hardship or extenuating circumstances in
meeting the ten-year limit, the Village requires an additional three
years to use the impact fees. [Amended 2-6-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-05]
J. Exemptions.
(1) The following shall be exempted from payment of impact fees
herein provided:
(a) Alterations or expansion of existing buildings where no
additional or larger water meter connections are requested or
required and where the use of the property is not changed.
(b) The replacement of a building or structure with a new building
or structure of the same or less size where no additional or
larger water or service connections are requested and where
the use is not changed.
(2) Any claim of exemption shall be made at the time of application for
building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.
K. Penalty provision. Any person violating any provision of this section
shall be subject to the uniform penalty provisions of § 1-4 of this Code or
any other legal remedy available according to law.
§ 495-56 EAST TROY CODE § 495-56
1:692
L. Appeal. Any person upon whom an impact fee is imposed has the right
to appeal the amount, collection, or use of the impact fee to the Village
Board of the Village of East Troy. The procedure shall be as follows:
(1) Any person appealing the amount, collection, or use of the impact
fee shall submit a letter or petition to the Village of East Troy Clerk-
Treasurer, describing the nature of the appeal and providing any
supporting documentation therewith.
(2) The Clerk-Treasurer shall present the appeal letter or petition to
the Village Board. The Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the person
appealing of the time and place of the Village Board meeting at
which the appellant shall be given an opportunity to present
additional information in support of the appeal.281
(3) The appellant shall thereafter have a further right, within 60 days,
to request and cause the Village Board of the Village of East Troy to
conduct a formal hearing of the contest within a reasonable time
following said request.
281. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-56
1:693

ARTICLE X
Administration and Enforcement
§ 495-57. Variances and exceptions.
A. Where the subdivider alleges that extraordinary hardships or particular
difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations, he/
she may request variances or exceptions to the regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured,
provided that such variance or exception shall not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. Application for any
such variance shall be made in writing by the subdivider to the Village
Clerk-Treasurer at the time when the preliminary plat or certified
survey is filed for consideration, stating fully all facts relied upon by the
petitioner, and shall be supplemented with maps, plans, or other
additional data which may aid Village officials in the analysis of the
proposed project. The plans for such development shall include such
covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee
the full achievement of the plan. The Village Clerk-Treasurer may
request that the Village Engineer, Village Attorney, or other officials
review each situation to ensure that the request is consistent with the
requirements and standards of this chapter. The Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall refer the matter to the Plan Commission with a written
report and recommendations from the Village staff. The Plan
Commission shall make a recommendation to the Village Board. The
previous granting of variances or exceptions in the same or similar
circumstances shall not of itself constitute grounds for the granting of a
variance or exception, nor shall strictly financial rationale.282
B. The Plan Commission shall not recommend, nor shall the Village Board
grant, variances or exceptions to the regulations of this chapter unless
it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each
specific case that:283
(1) Failure to grant the variance may be detrimental to the public
safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property or
improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is
located.
(2) The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not
applicable generally to other property.
(3) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a
particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished
282. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
283. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-57
1:695
from a mere inconvenience, financial hardship or self-imposed
hardship, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out.
(4) There would be no costs, present or future, to the Village resulting
from the granting of the variance or exception.
C. A variance may be granted by the Village Board, upon receiving a
positive recommendation of the Plan Commission, to permit a parcel to
be created by a proposed land division in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction when it is shown that the application satisfies the following
standards:
(1) A finding of fact must be made that the purpose of the proposed
parcel is to be a lot for a dwelling unit which is to be occupied by a
person who, or a family at least one member of which, earns a
substantial part of his or her livelihood from farm operations on the
parcel, and/or contributes work which is substantially needed in
the farm operation, and is the parent or child of the farm operator
or the spouse of the farm operator; and
(2) A finding of public interest must be made that the proposed parcel
and development design are reasonable upon consideration of
these factors:
(a) The potential for conflict with agricultural use.
(b) The need of the proposed development for a location in an
agricultural area.
(c) The availability of alternative locations.
(d) Compatibility with existing or permitted development on
adjacent lands.
(e) The productivity of the lands involved.
(f) The location of the proposed development so as to reduce to a
minimum the amount of productive agricultural land
converted.
(g) The need for public services created by the proposed
development.
(h) The availability of adequate public services and the ability of
affected local units of government to provide them without a
reasonable burden.
(i) The effect of the proposed development on water or air
pollution, soil erosion, and rare or irreplaceable natural
resources.
D. Any recommendations for variances or exceptions by the Plan
Commission must be approved by a majority vote of the Plan
Commission and shall be so endorsed by the Secretary and transmitted
§ 495-57 EAST TROY CODE § 495-57
1:696
§ 495-58. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
to the Village Board. The Village Board, if it approves, shall do so by
resolution adopted by majority vote and shall instruct the Village Clerk-
Treasurer to notify the Plan Commission and the subdivider.
E. Variances from the strict application of this chapter may also be
granted in accordance with this chapter in the case of planned
developments, provided that the Village Board, upon review and
recommendations from the Plan Commission, shall find that the
proposed development is fully consistent with the purpose and intent of
this chapter, Chapter 510, Zoning, and the Comprehensive Plan.
A. Violations. It shall be unlawful to build upon, divide, convey, record, or
monument any land in violation of this chapter or the Wisconsin
Statutes, and no person shall be issued a building permit by the Village
authorizing the building on, or improvement of, any subdivision, land
division, certified survey, or replat within the jurisdiction of this chapter
not of record as of the effective date of this chapter until the provisions
and requirements of this chapter have been fully met. The Village may
institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin violations of this
chapter or the applicable Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Penalties.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation who or which fails to comply with
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a penalty as prescribed in § 1-4 of this Code. Each day a
violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.284
(2) Recording improperly has penalties provided in § 236.30, Wis.
Stats.
(3) Conveyance of lots in unrecorded plats has penalties provided for
in § 236.31, Wis. Stats.
(4) Monuments disturbed or not placed have penalties as provided for
in § 236.32, Wis. Stats.
(5) Assessor's plat made under § 70.27, Wis. Stats., may be ordered by
the Village at the expense of the subdivider when a subdivision is
created by successive divisions.
C. Revocation of permits and/or approvals.
(1) The Village Engineer, Director of Public Works, or Building
Inspector may revoke or suspend any permit or approval issued
under the regulations of this chapter and may stop construction or
use of approved materials, equipment, methods of construction,
devices or appliances for any of the following reasons:
284. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-58
1:697
(a) Whenever the Village Engineer shall find at any time that
applicable ordinances, laws, orders, plans, and specifications
are not being complied with and that the subdivider or his/her
contractor has refused to conform after written warning or
instruction has been issued to him/her.
(b) Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes
dangerous to life or property.
(c) Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provision of
the application for permit, or of the permit or of any approval.
(d) Whenever, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, Director of
Public Works or Building Inspector, the subdivider has
provided inadequate management of the project.
(e) Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been
made in the application for permit, plans, drawings, data
specifications or certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance
of the permit or approval was based.
(f) Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of an
approval or occupancy permit given by the Village Engineer,
Director of Public Works or Building Inspector for the use of all
materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices or
appliances.285
(2) The notice revoking a permit or approval shall be in writing and
may be served upon the applicant for the permit, owner of the
premises and his/her agent, if any, and/or on the person having
charge of construction.
(3) A revocation placard shall also be posted upon the premises in
question by the Village Engineer, Director of Public Works, or
Building Inspector.
(4) After the notice is served upon the person as aforesaid and posted,
it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any
construction operation whatsoever on the premises, and the permit
which has been so revoked shall be null and void, and before any
construction or operation is again resumed, a new permit, as
required by this chapter, shall be procured and fees paid therefor,
and thereafter the resumption of any construction or operation
shall be in compliance with the regulation of this chapter. However,
such work as the Village Engineer, Director of Public Works or
Building Inspector may order as a condition precedent to the
reissuance of the building permit may be performed, or such work
as he/she may require for the preservation of life and safety.286
285. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-58 EAST TROY CODE § 495-58
1:698
§ 495-59. Disclaimer on approvals.
§ 495-60. Restrictions for public benefit.
Pursuant to § 236.293, Wis. Stats., any restriction placed on platted lands by
covenant, grant of easement, land division, certified survey or consolidation
approval which was required by the Village and which names a public body
or public utility as grantee, promisee or beneficiary vests in the public
body or utility the right to enforce the restriction by law or in equity
against anyone who has interest in the land subject to the restriction. The
restriction may be released or waived by resolution of the Village Board.
(5) Any appeals of such revocations or suspensions must be made in
writing and within seven calendar days to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer for consideration by the Village Board at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, provided that the appeal is filed not
less than seven days prior to the meeting date.
(6) The Building Inspector is hereby directed to withhold the issuance
of building permits within the land division until compliance with
the provisions of this chapter is obtained.
(7) The Building Inspector is hereby directed to withhold the issuance
of occupancy permits within the land division if violations of this
chapter may result in health or safety problems for the occupants.
D. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or certified
survey, or a failure to approve a plat or certified survey, may appeal
therefrom, as provided in § 236.13(5), Wis. Stats., within 30 days of
notification of the rejection of the plat or certified survey. Where failure
to approve is based on an unsatisfied objection, the agency making the
objection shall be made a party to the action. The court may direct that
the plat or certified survey be approved if it finds that the action of the
approving or objecting agency is arbitrary, unreasonable or
discriminatory.
A. The purpose of requiring approvals under this chapter is to ensure the
health, safety, morale, comfort, prosperity and general welfare of the
Village of East Troy. This chapter shall not be interpreted as placing any
responsibility or liability on any Village official, Village employee, or the
Village as a municipal corporation for the granting of approval or the
denial of any approval. All approvals rendered as part of this chapter
shall be considered as being approved conditionally based upon the
information and circumstances apparent at that time.
B. Approvals issued by the Village shall not be construed as an assumption
or expression of any responsibility, warranty or guarantee for the
design or construction of any improvements within the land division.
286. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 495-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-60
1:699
Chapter 510
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning Board of Appeals and Plan
Commission — See Ch. 15.
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 170.
Airport — See Ch. 176.
Building construction — See Ch. 210.
Fair housing — See Ch. 263.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 340.
Erosion control and stormwater
management — See Ch. 483.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 486.
Official Map — See Ch. 490.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 495.
§ 495-60 EAST TROY CODE § 495-60
1:700
ARTICLE I
Introduction and Definitions
§ 510-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the "Village of East
Troy Zoning Ordinance," except where as referred to herein, where it shall
be known as "this chapter."
§ 510-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the State
of Wisconsin Statutes. Specific statutory references are provided within
the body of this chapter solely as a means of assisting the reader. Such
references are not to be considered as all inclusive and shall in no manner
be construed so as to limit the application or interpretation of this chapter.
State law references: §§ 62.23(7), 62.231, and 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 510-3. Purpose and intent.
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of protecting the health, safety,
morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the public. This
chapter is designed to control and lessen congestion in the streets; to
secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote adequate light
and air; to protect groundwater resources; to prevent the overcrowding
of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to preserve, protect,
and promote property values; to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public facilities;
and to preserve burial sites as defined in § 157.70(1)(b), Wis. Stats. It is also
the intent of this chapter to implement certain goals and objectives of the
Village of East Troy Comprehensive Plan which are best addressed through
zoning approaches, as enabled by Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 510-4. Severability and nonliability.
A. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Village of East Troy
Village Board that the provisions of this chapter are separable in
accordance with the following:
(1) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provisions of this chapter not specifically included in said
judgment.
(2) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any portion of this chapter to a particular property,
water, building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect the
application of said provision to any other property, water, building,
or structure not specifically included in said judgment.
§ 510-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-4
1:701
§ 510-5. Abrogation.
It is not intended that this chapter abrogate or interfere with any
constitutionally protected vested right. It is also not intended that this
chapter abrogate, repeal, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing
easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, or
permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
§ 510-6. Rules of interpretation.
(3) If any requirement or limitation attached to an authorization given
under this chapter is found invalid, it shall be presumed that the
authorization would not have been granted without the
requirement or limitation and, therefore, said authorization shall
also be invalid.
B. The Village does not guarantee, warrant, or represent that only those
areas designated as floodplain will be subject to periodic inundation
and hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the Village, its
officers, employees, agents, or representatives for any flood damages,
sanitation problems, or structural damages.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals, and welfare and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the Village and shall not be construed to be a
limitation or repeal of any other power now possessed by the Village of
East Troy.
B. Where property is affected by the regulations imposed by any provision
of this chapter and by other governmental regulations, the regulations
which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or
requirements shall prevail. Regardless of any other provision of this
chapter, no land shall be developed or used, and no structure erected or
maintained, in violation of any state or federal regulations. Where there
are conflicts between or among regulations within this chapter, the
regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher
standards or requirements shall prevail. In all instances where there
are conflicts between the text of this chapter and any tables or figures
of this chapter, the text shall prevail.
C. No structure, land, water, or air shall hereafter be used and no
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered
without a building permit, except structures not requiring a building
permit (e.g., swing set, clothesline, etc.), and without full compliance
with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable local, county,
and state regulations.
D. Nothing herein contained shall require any changes in plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any building or part thereof for
§ 510-4 EAST TROY CODE § 510-6
1:702
§ 510-7. Jurisdiction.
This chapter is applicable to all territory located within the corporate limits
of the Village of East Troy.
§ 510-8. Reenactment and repeal.
§ 510-9. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon passage and posting according
to law, following the date of repeal and reenactment of the Official Zoning
Map. All plans approved under previous zoning regulations shall be valid
and may be used to obtain permits for a period of not more than one year
which a building permit has been issued before the effective date of this
chapter and the construction of which shall have been started within
one year from the date of such permit.
E. Except as provided in this chapter, under provisions for nonconforming
uses, nonconforming developments, nonconforming lots, and
nonconforming structures and buildings (see Article IX), no building,
structure, development, or premises shall be hereinafter used or
occupied, and no applicable permit granted, that does not conform to
the requirements of this chapter. In cases of mixed occupancy or mixed
use, the regulations for each land use shall apply to the portion of the
structure or land so occupied or so used.287
F. Except for outlots authorized under Chapter 495, Subdivision of Land,
of the Village Code to contain permanently protected green space area,
no yard or other open space area shall be considered as providing a
yard or open space for a building or structure on any other lot.
A. This chapter, in part, carries forward by reenactment some of the
provisions of the regulations governing zoning and related matters
previously known collectively as the "Zoning Code," Title 13 of the Code
of Ordinances for the Village of East Troy, adopted prior to the effective
date of this chapter. It is not the intention of this chapter to repeal but
rather to reenact and continue in force such existing provisions so that
all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are preserved
and may be enforced, unless explicitly surrendered by specific
provisions of this chapter or altered by the Official Zoning Map.
B. All provisions of Title 13 of the Village of East Troy Code of Ordinances
which are not reenacted herein are hereby repealed.
C. The adoption of this chapter shall not adversely affect the Village's right
to prosecute any violation of the predecessor Zoning Code, provided
that the violation occurred while that chapter was in effect.
287. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-9
1:703
after the effective date of this chapter, except where subject to developer
agreement provisions.
§ 510-10. Word usage.
The interpretation of this chapter shall abide by the provisions and rules of
this section, except where the context clearly requires otherwise, or where
the result would clearly be inconsistent with the apparent intent of this
chapter.
§ 510-11. Abbreviations.288
The following abbreviations in this chapter are intended to have the
following meanings:
Abbreviation Meaning
CUP Conditional use permit
ft Foot
GSA Gross site area
GSR Green space ratio
A. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses
and derivative forms.
B. Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
words in the plural number shall include the single number.
C. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
D. The words "shall," "must," and "will" are mandatory.
E. The words "may," "can," and "might" are permissive.
F. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations,
partnerships, associations, trusts, and any other legal entity.
G. The word "Village" shall mean the Village of East Troy, Wisconsin.
H. The word "county" shall mean the County of Walworth, Wisconsin.
I. The word "state" shall mean the State of Wisconsin.
J. The words "Plan Commission" shall mean the Village of East Troy Plan
Commission.
K. The words "Village Board" shall refer to the Village of East Troy Board
of Trustees.
L. If there is any ambiguity between the text of this chapter and any
illustration or figure, the text shall control.
288. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-9 EAST TROY CODE § 510-11
1:704
Abbreviation Meaning
LSR Landscape surface ratio
MBS Maximum building size
MGD Maximum gross density
MLA Minimum lot area
MSA Minimum site area
N/A Not applicable
NDA Net developable area
RPA Resource protection area
sq. ft. Square feet
Wis. Stats. Wisconsin Statutes
§ 510-12. Definitions.289
The following words, terms and phrases, wherever they occur in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section.
Definitions provided by this section include:
ABUTTING — Having a common border with or being separated from such
common border by an alley or easement.
ACCESS — A means of providing vehicular or nonvehicular egress from or
ingress to a property, highway, or private roadway.
ACCESS, DIRECT — A condition of immediate physical connection resulting
from a highway, alley, or private road abutting a property.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling established in conjunction
with and clearly subordinate to the principal dwelling unit. Accessory
dwelling units are typically located at the rear of a lot and above an attached
or detached alley-loaded garage that serves the primary residence.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure subordinate to,
and serving, the principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily
incidental thereto.
ACRE — Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet.
ADDITION — Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter and/or
height of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing
wall. Any walled and roofed addition connected by a fire wall or
separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction.
ALLEY — A public or private right-of-way usually of reduced width as
compared to a street, primarily intended to provide a secondary means of
289. Editor's Note: The following definitions which appeared in this section were repealed at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II): "candlepower,"
"extraterritorial area," "fixed houseboat," "increase in regional flood height," "minor
structures" and "mixed occupancy."
§ 510-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-12
1:705
access to the side or rear of an abutting property fronting upon another
street right-of-way and not for the use of through traffic.
ANIMAL UNIT — A measure which represents a common denominator for
the purpose of defining a husbandry or intensive agricultural land use. The
animal unit measure relates to the maximum carrying capacity of one acre
of land and is related to the amount of feed various species consume and the
amount of waste they produce. The following figure indicates the number of
common farm species which comprise a single animal unit:
Figure 510-12: Animal Units
Type of Livestock Number of Animals/Animal Unit
Horse (> 2 years) 1
Colt (< 2 years) 2
Cattle (> 2 years) 1
Cattle (< 2 years) 2
Calves (< 1 year) 5
Brood sow or boar 2
Hogs (up to 220 pounds) 3
Sheep 10
Lambs 14
Chickens: egg layers 30
Chickens: fryers 60
Turkeys 50
Source: The Stockman's Handbook
ANTENNA — Communications equipment that transmits and receives
electromagnetic radio signals and is used in the provision of mobile
services. [Note: This definition is based on the corresponding definition in
§ 66.0404, Wis. Stats.][Added 5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
APPEAL — A means for obtaining review of a decision, determination,
order, or failure to act pursuant to the terms of this chapter as expressly
authorized by the provisions of § 510-152.
ARTERIAL STREET — See "street, arterial."
AVERAGE GROUND ELEVATION — The average level of the finished
surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or
structure.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground but
having 1/2 or less of its floor to ceiling height below the average grade of
the adjoining ground.
BEDROOM — A room in a residence marketed or designed primarily for
sleeping.
§ 510-12 EAST TROY CODE § 510-12
1:706
BLANKET VARIANCE — A variance which is automatically granted by
a provision of this chapter in order to reduce the creation of legal
nonconforming developments.
BOATHOUSE — As defined in § 30.01(1d), Wis. Stats., a structure used for
the storage of watercraft and associated materials which has one or more
walls or sides.[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
BUFFERYARD — Any permitted combination of distance, vegetation,
fencing, and berming which results in a reduction of visual and other
interaction with an adjoining property.
BUILDING — A roofed structure intended for the shelter, housing, or
enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building which:
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by principal and
accessory buildings, including all structures with a roof.
BUILDING FRONT — The exterior wall of a building that faces the front lot
line of the lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average elevation
of the adjoining ground level to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, the
deckline of a mansard roof, or the average height of a gable, gambrel,
hip, or pitch roof. As used in this chapter, "average roof height" is the
wall height plus 1/2 of the roof height. When one or more dormers with
side walls exceeds 50% of the linear wall width immediately below the
dormer(s), the wall height extends from the ground to the top of such
dormer wall.[Amended 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-19]
BUILDING LINE — A line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line or
public or private road right-of-way line, located a sufficient distance from
either to provide the minimum yards required by this chapter. The building
line determines the area in which buildings are permitted subject to all
applicable provisions of this chapter. This is also referred to as a "setback."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which the main or principal use of
the lot is conducted.
BUILDING SEPARATION — The narrowest distance between two buildings
(see "minimum building separation").
A. Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principal use;
Is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal structure or
use served;
B.
Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served
except as otherwise expressly authorized by provisions of this chapter;
and
C.
Is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use. Any portion
of a principal building devoted or intended to be devoted to an
accessory use is not an accessory building.
D.
§ 510-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-12
1:707
BUILDING SIZE — The total gross floor area of a building (see "maximum
building size").
BULK (OF A BUILDING) — The combination of building height, size, and
location on a lot.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree, measured at a point six inches above
the ground if the resulting measurement is not more than four inches. If
the resulting measurement is more than four inches, the measurement is
taken 12 inches above the ground.[Amended 10-17-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-13]
CARPORT — An open-sided, roofed vehicle shelter, usually formed by
extension of the roof from the side of a building that meets the building
code.
CELLAR — That portion of the building having more than 1/2 of the floor-toceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CLIMAX TREE — A tree that would occupy the uppermost canopy of a forest
in a natural ecological situation (e.g., hickory, oak, maple, etc.).
COLLECTOR STREET — See "street, collector."
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle used for business or
institutional purposes or having painted thereon or affixed thereto a sign
identifying a business or institution or a principal product or service of a
business or institution. Agricultural equipment used as part of a permitted
agricultural principal use shall not be considered as a commercial vehicle.
COMMUNITY CHARACTER — The impression which an area makes in
regard to the type, intensity, density, quality, appearance, and age of
development.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan of the Village of East
Troy, Wisconsin, and as subsequently amended.
CONDITIONAL USE — A land use which requires a conditional use permit
in order to develop.
CONSTRUCTION, START OF — See "start of construction."
DECK — A structure that has no roof or walls and is considered part of a
building or structure.
DEDICATION — The transfer of property interest from private to public
ownership for a public purpose. The transfer may be of fee simple interest
or of a less than fee simple interest, including an easement.
DENSITY — A term used to describe the number of dwelling units per acre.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot or parcel of any land
proposed for inclusion in a development.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of any
buildings or land; any extension of any use of land; or any clearing, grading,
§ 510-12 EAST TROY CODE § 510-12
1:708
or other movement of land, for which permission may be required pursuant
to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT OPTION(S) — The type of residential or nonresidential
development as categorized by the proportion of the site devoted to
permanently protected green space.
DEVELOPMENT PAD — The area of land where site disruption will occur,
including building areas, paved areas, yard and septic system areas, and
other areas of nonnative vegetation.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading, or other means. "Drainage" includes the control of runoff to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after development and the
means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation
of flooding.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — One or more artificial ditches, tile drains, or similar
devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point
of discharge.
DWELLING — A building or one or more portions thereof, containing one
or more dwelling units, but not including habitations provided in
nonresidential uses such as lodging uses and commercial campgrounds.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A dwelling joined to another dwelling at one or
more sides by a shared wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A dwelling entirely surrounded by open space
on the same lot.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms providing or intended to
provide permanent living quarters for not more than one family.
DWELLING UNIT SEPARATION — The narrowest distance between two
dwelling units (see "minimum dwelling unit separation").
EASEMENT — Written authorization, recorded in the Register of Deeds
office, from a landowner authorizing another party to use any designated
part of the landowner's property for a specified purpose.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, building, use, or development that
advances beyond proper limits.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL FACILITY — Any facility, temporary or
permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the
prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water
pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants,
including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing
property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable
pollution control standards, or which are to be supplemented or replaced by
other pollution control facilities.
EQUIPMENT COMPOUND — When used in the context of
telecommunication facilities, the area surrounding or adjacent to the base
of an existing support structure within which are located mobile service
§ 510-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-12
1:709
facilities. [Note: This definition is based on the corresponding definition in
§ 66.0404, Wis. Stats.[Added 5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice, and/or gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Facilities that are:
FACADE — The entire building front including the parapet.
FALL ZONE — When used in the context of telecommunication facilities, the
area over which a mobile support structure is designed to collapse. [Note:
This definition is based on the corresponding definition in § 66.0404, Wis.
Stats.][Added 5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
FAMILY — An individual or two or more persons, each related by blood,
marriage, or adoption or guardianship, living together as a single
housekeeping unit, or a group of not more than four persons not so related,
maintaining a common household in which bathrooms, kitchen facilities,
and living quarters are shared.
FARM BUILDING — Any building, other than a dwelling unit, used for
storing agricultural equipment or farm produce or products, having
livestock or poultry, or processing dairy products.
FLOOD-FRINGE — The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN — The land area susceptible to inundation by water as a
result of a flood.
FLOODPROOFING — Measures designed to prevent and reduce flood
damage for those uses which cannot be removed from or which of necessity
must be created in the floodplain, ranging from structural modifications
through installation of special equipment or materials to operation and
management safeguards, such as the following: reinforcing of basement
walls; underpinning of floors; permanent sealing of all exterior openings;
use of masonry construction; erection of permanent watertight bulkheads,
shutters, and doors; treatment of exposed timbers; elevation of floodvulnerable
utilities; use of waterproof cement; adequate fuse protection;
sealing of basement walls; installation of sump pumps; placement of
automatic swing check valves; installation of seal-tight windows and doors;
installation of wire-reinforced glass; location and elevation of valuable
items; waterproofing, disconnecting, elevation or removal of all electrical
equipment; avoidance of the use of flood-vulnerable areas; temporary
removal or waterproofing of merchandise; postponement of orders or
A. Owned or maintained by public utility companies or public agencies.
Located in public ways or in easements provided for the purpose or on
a customer's premises and not requiring a private right-of-way;
B.
Reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate water, sewer, gas,
electric, communication, or similar services to adjacent customers; and
C.
D. Not including any cross-country line on towers.
§ 510-12 EAST TROY CODE § 510-12
1:710
rescheduling of freight shipments; operation of emergency pump
equipment; closing of backwater seer valve; placement of plugs and flood
drain pipes; placement of movable watertight bulkheads; and the shoring
of weak walls or structures. Floodproofing of structures shall be extended
at least to a point two feet above the elevation of the regional flood. Any
structure that is located entirely or partially below the flood protection
elevation shall be anchored to protect it from larger floods.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a
building, including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements, and attached
accessory buildings, stairs, escalators, unenclosed porches, detached
accessory buildings utilized as dead storage, heating and utility rooms, and
inside off-street parking or loading space. Measurements shall be made
from the outside of the exterior walls and to the center of interior walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The ratio calculated by dividing the total floor
area of all buildings on a site by the gross site area (see "maximum floor
area ratio").
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of
which are one foot from a uniform point source of one candle.
GARAGE (RESIDENTIAL) — A detached accessory building or portion of the
principal building, including a carport, which is used primarily for storing
passenger vehicles, trailers, or one truck of a rated capacity not in excess
of 10,000 pounds. Garages do not include temporary enclosures.
GLARE — The brightness of a light source which causes eye discomfort.
GREEN SPACE RATIO (GSR) — The percentage of the gross site area which
is preserved as permanently protected green space. Green space ratio is
calculated by dividing the area of permanently protected green space by the
gross site area.290
GROSS DENSITY — The result of dividing the number of dwelling units
located on a site by the gross site area (see "maximum gross density").
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total floor area on all levels of a building.
GROSS SITE AREA (GSA) — The total area of a site available for inclusion in
calculations of the maximum permitted density or intensity of development.
HEARING NOTICE — Publication or posting meeting the requirements of
Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. A Class 1 notice, published once at least 10 days
prior to public hearing, is the minimum required for appeals. A Class 2
notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least 10
days before the public hearing, is the minimum required for all zoning
ordinances and amendments, including map amendments.
HEIGHT — See "building height."
290. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-12
1:711
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Areas designed and installed to prohibit
infiltration of stormwater. Homes, buildings, and other structures with
roofs, as well as concrete, brick, stone, asphalt, gravel, and similar paved
surfaces, are considered impervious.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — A measure of the intensity of land use,
determined by dividing the total of all impervious surfaces on a site by the
gross site area.
INTENSITY — A term used to describe the amount of gross floor area or
landscaped area on a lot or site compared to the gross area of the lot or site.
LAKESHORE — Those lands lying within the following distances from the
ordinary high-water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond,
or flowage or 300 feet from a river or stream or to a landward side of the
floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Lakeshores shall not include those
lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches where:
LANDSCAPED AREA — The area of a site which is planted and continually
maintained in vegetation, including grasses, flowers, herbs, garden plants,
native or introduced ground covers, shrubs, bushes, and trees. The
landscaped area includes the area located within planted and continually
maintained landscaped planters.
LANDSCAPE SURFACE RATIO (LSR) — The percentage of the gross site
area or lot area which is preserved as permanently protected landscaped
area.291
LAND USE — The type of development and/or activity occurring on a piece
of property.
LOT — A parcel of land that is undivided by any street or private road,
is occupied by or designated to be developed for one building or principal
use, and contains the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to
such building, use, or development, including such open spaces and yards
as designed and arranged or required by this chapter for such building, use,
or development.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property boundaries of a
recorded lot.
LOT, CORNER — A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or
more intersection streets or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135°.
A. Such lands are not adjacent to a navigable stream or river;
Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not
navigable streams before ditching or had no previous stream history;
and
B.
C. Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
291. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-12 EAST TROY CODE § 510-12
1:712
LOT DEPTH — The average distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line of a lot.
LOT FRONTAGE — Lot width measured at the street lot line. When a lot has
more than one street lot line, lot width shall be measured and the minimum
lot width required by this chapter shall be provided at each such line.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — The property line (including the vertical plane established by
the line and the ground) bounding a lot, except that where any portion of
a lot extends into the public right-of-way or a proposed public right-of-way,
the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this
chapter.
LOT LINE, FRONT — A lot line which abuts a public or private street rightof-
way. In the case of a lot which has two of more street frontages, the lot
line along the street from which the house is addressed shall be the front
lot line. (See also "lot line, street side.")
LOT LINE, REAR — In the case of rectangular or most trapezoidal-shaped
lots, that lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front lot line
of the lot. In the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line
20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum
possible distance from the front line shall be considered to be the rear lot
line. In the case of lots which have frontage on more than one road or street,
the rear lot line shall be selected by the property owner.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line, a
street side lot line, or a rear lot line.
LOT LINE, STREET SIDE — Any lot line which abuts a public or private
street right-of-way which is not the front lot line (see also "lot line, front").
LOT OF RECORD — A platted lot or lot described in a certified survey
map or in a metes and bounds description which has been approved by the
Village or by Walworth County and has been recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two
substantially parallel streets (one or more of which may be a portion of a
cul-de-sac). Except for through lots which abut an arterial or nonresidential
collector street, through lots shall be prohibited under the provisions of this
chapter.
LOT WIDTH — The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines
of a lot, measured parallel to the front lot lines and at the required front
yard setback (see "minimum lot width").[Amended 10-17-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-13]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A dwelling unit that is constructed in an off-site
facility in conformance with the federal construction and safety standards
established by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant
to the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, as amended. (Note: A manufactured home bears a red insignia which
§ 510-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-12
1:713
certifies that it meets all applicable federal construction and safety
standards.)[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
MAXIMUM BUILDING SIZE (MBS) — The largest permitted total gross
floor area a building may contain (see "building size").
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO — The largest amount of floor area
permitted on a lot (see "floor area ratio").
MAXIMUM GROSS DENSITY (MGD) — The maximum number of dwelling
units permitted per acre of gross site area (see "gross density").
MAXIMUM HEIGHT — The highest portion of any structure (see "building
height").
MINIMUM BUILDING SEPARATION — The narrowest permitted building
separation.
MINIMUM DWELLING UNIT SEPARATION — The narrowest permitted
dwelling unit separation.
MINIMUM LANDSCAPE SURFACE RATIO (LSR) — The lowest permitted
landscape surface ratio (see "landscape surface ratio").
MINIMUM LOT AREA (MLA) — The minimum size lot permitted within the
specified zoning district and development option.
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH — The smallest permissible lot width for the
applicable dwelling unit type or nonresidential development option.
MINIMUM SETBACK — The narrowest distance permitted from a street,
side, or rear property line to a structure.
MINIMUM SITE AREA (MSA) — The minimum gross site area in which the
specified development option may occur (see "gross site area").
MIXED USE — Some combination of residential, commercial, industrial,
office, institutional, and/or other land uses within a district or development.
MOBILE HOME — A dwelling unit that was originally constructed prior to
June 15, 1976, and that is constructed off site, equipped with the necessary
utility service connections, made to be readily movable as a unit or units
on its (their) own running gear, and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation. (Note: After June 15, 1976, no mobile homes have
been constructed.)[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
MOBILE SERVICE — A radio communication service carried on between
mobile stations or receivers and land stations, and by mobile stations
communicating among themselves, and includes:[Added 5-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-08]
A. Both one-way and two-way radio communication services;
A mobile service which provides a regularly interacting group of base,
mobile, portable, and associated control and relay stations (whether
licensed on an individual, cooperative, or multiple basis) for private
B.
§ 510-12 EAST TROY CODE § 510-12
1:714
MOBILE SERVICE FACILITY — The set of equipment and network
components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations,
power supplies, cabling, and associated equipment, that is necessary to
provide mobile service to a discrete geographic area, but does not include
the underlying support structure. [Note: This definition is based on the
corresponding definition in § 66.0404, Wis. Stats.][Added 5-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-08]
MOBILE SERVICE PROVIDER — A person who provides mobile service.
[Note: This definition is based on the corresponding definition in § 66.0404,
Wis. Stats.][Added 5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
MODULAR HOME — A dwelling unit that meets local building codes and
which was constructed off site in a factory as separate modules which are
joined together and set on a permanent foundation.[Added 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02]
MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY — The municipal water supply of the Village
of East Troy.
NAVIGABLE WATER — All natural inland lakes, rivers, streams, ponds,
sloughs, flowages, and other waters within the territorial limits of
Wisconsin, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are
navigable under the laws of Wisconsin. The Wisconsin Supreme Court
has declared navigable all bodies of water with a bed differentiated from
adjacent uplands and with levels of flow sufficient to support navigation by
a recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis.
For the purposes of this chapter, rivers and streams will be presumed to
be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent
waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps until
such time that the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources has made a
determination that the waterway is not, in fact, navigable.
NET DEVELOPABLE AREA (NDA) — The area of a site which may be
disturbed by development activity. "Net developable area" is the result of
subtracting required resource protection area (RPA) from the gross site
area.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any building or other
structure which was lawfully existing under ordinances or regulations
preceding this chapter but which would not conform to this chapter if
one-way or two-way land mobile radio communications by eligible users
over designated areas of operation; and
Any service for which a license is required in a personal
communications service established pursuant to the proceeding
entitled "Amendment to the Commission's Rules to Establish New
Personal Communications Services" (GEN Docket No. 90-314; ET
Docket No. 92-100), or any successor proceeding.
[Note: This definition is based on the corresponding definition in
§ 66.0404, Wis. Stats.]
C.
§ 510-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-12
1:715
the building or structure were to be erected under the provisions of this
chapter.
NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT — A lawful development approved
under ordinances or regulations preceding the effective date of this chapter
but which would not conform to this chapter if the development were to be
created under the current provisions of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of record which lawfully existed prior to
this chapter which would not conform to the applicable regulations if the lot
were to be created under the current provisions of this chapter.292
NONCONFORMING SITE — One in which a principal use has been
established prior to the effective date of this chapter and on which one
or more site development standards, such as minimum landscape surfaces,
bufferyards, plantings, or minimum parking, have not been met or cannot
be met owing to the configuration of the site or existing structures, whether
conforming or nonconforming.293
NONCONFORMING USE — An active and actual use of land, buildings,
or structures which was lawfully existing prior to the enactment of this
chapter, which has continued as the same use to the present, and which
does not comply with all the applicable regulations of this chapter.
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIALS — Material capable of causing injury
to living organisms by chemical reaction or capable of causing detrimental
effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals.
NURSERY — An operation in which trees are raised as a crop to be replaced
with more trees after harvesting.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map adopted and designated by the Village as being
the Official Map pursuant to § 62.23(6), Wis. Stats., which shows current
and proposed municipal improvement sites and rights-of-way.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The map adopted and designated by the Village
as being the Official Zoning Map. See § 510-15.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question, except in the context of on-site
detention, when the term means within the boundaries of the development
site as a whole.
OPACITY — The degree to which vision is blocked by bufferyard. "Opacity"
is the proportion of a bufferyard's vertical plane which obstructs views into
an adjoining property.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore of a
body of water up to which the presence and action of surface water are so
continuous as to leave a distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or
prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or
other easily recognized characteristics.
292. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
293. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 510-12 EAST TROY CODE § 510-12
1:716
OTHER PERMANENTLY PROTECTED GREEN SPACE — Permanently
protected green space areas which are not constrained by one of the
protected natural resources (i.e., wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes,
lakeshores, and woodlands). Examples include portions of private lots,
outlots, or parcels commonly held by a property owners' association which
are deed restricted from site disruption.
OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT — A zoning district which imposes uniform
restrictions on all properties within its area which are in addition to the
restrictions specific to the standard zoning districts.
OWNER — The person, persons, or entity having the right of legal title to a
lot or parcel of land.
PARAPET — The extension of a false front or wall above the roofline.
PARCEL — The area within the boundary lines of a lot.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — Criterion established to control and limit
the impacts generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings.
PERMANENTLY PROTECTED GREEN SPACE — An area in which site
disruption and/or development is strictly limited.
PLAN COMMISSION — The Plan Commission of the Village of East Troy.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A designed grouping of varied and
compatible land uses, such as housing, recreation, commercial, and
industrial parks, all within one contained development or subdivision.
PORCH — A covered platform, usually having a separate roof, at an
entrance to a dwelling, or an open or enclosed gallery or room, which is not
heated or cooled, that is attached to the outside of a building.
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER — A portable, weather-resistant storage
container designed and used for the temporary storage or shipment of
materials, household goods, wares, or merchandise.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — See "building, principal."
PRINCIPAL USE — Any and all of the primary uses of a property treated as
a use permitted by right or as a conditional use (rather than as an accessory
use or a temporary use).
PROTECTED NATURAL RESOURCES — Resources such as floodways,
flood-fringes, floodplain, conservancy areas, wetlands, woodlands, steep
slopes, and lakeshores which are protected by the provisions of this chapter.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any improvement, facility, or service, together
with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to
provide for public needs, such as streets, roads, alleys, or pedestrian walks
or paths; storm sewers; flood-control improvements; water supply and
distribution facilities; sanitary sewage disposal and treatment; and public
utility and energy services.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER — Includes the Village of East Troy sewer
system and other forms of sewer systems approved by the Wisconsin
§ 510-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-12
1:717
Department of Natural Resources and maintained by a public agency
authorized to operate such systems.[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary
facilities for track operation, but not including freight depots or stations,
loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car
yards.
RECORDED LOT — See "lot of record."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A motorized wheeled vehicle used for
camping or other recreational activities.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have generally occurred in the state. The flood frequency of the regional
flood is once every 100 years; this means that in any given year, there is a
one-percent chance that the regional flood may occur or be exceeded.
REQUIRED RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA (RPA) — The area of a site
which may not be disturbed by development activity and which must also
be reserved as permanently protected green space. The required resource
protection area is the result of subtracting the net developable area (NDA)
from the gross site area (GSA).
RESTRICTIVE, MORE (LESS) — A regulation imposed by this chapter is
more (less) restrictive than another if it prohibits or limits development to a
greater (lesser) extent or by means of more (less) detailed specifications.
SCALE (OF DEVELOPMENT) — A term used to describe the gross floor
area, height, or volume of a single structure or group of structures.
SEARCH RING — When used in the context of telecommunication facilities,
a shape drawn on a map to indicate the general area within which a
mobile service support structure should be located to meet radio frequency
engineering requirements, taking into account other factors including
topography and the demographics of the service area. [Note: This definition
is based on the corresponding definition in § 66.0404, Wis. Stats.][Added
5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other natural means as a
result of erosion.
SETBACK — The shortest distance between the exterior of a building or
structure and the nearest point on the referenced lot line (see "minimum
setback").
SHARED DRIVEWAY — A driveway that serves two adjoining parcels and
that is generally centered on the shared lot line.[Added 11-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-15]
§ 510-12 EAST TROY CODE § 510-12
1:718
SHORELANDS — Lands within the following distances from the ordinary
high-water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or
flowage and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the
floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
SHORELINE BUFFER ZONE — An area extending from the ordinary highwater
mark of navigable water bodies landward for a horizontal distance of
35 feet.[Added 7-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-07]
SHORELINE SETBACK — A building setback requirement extending from
the ordinary high-water mark of navigable water bodies landward for a
horizontal distance of 50 feet.[Added 7-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-07]
SITE AREA — See "gross site area."
SITE-BUILT HOME — A dwelling unit that meets the Wisconsin Uniform
Dwelling Code standards and which was largely constructed on site. Also
known as a "conventional home" or "stick-built home."[Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
SOLID FENCE — Any fence which cannot be seen through. Such fences
include basket-weave fences, stockade fences, plank fences, and similar
fences.
STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS — Zoning districts which primarily
regulate the use of land and intensity or density of such use. See Articles II,
III, IV and V.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit is issued,
provided that the actual start of activity was within 365 calendar days of the
permit date. The actual start of activity means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on the site, such as the pouring of
a slab or footings, the installation of piles, or the construction of columns.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers,
or foundations; nor does it include the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main
structure.
STEEP SLOPES — Areas which contain a gradient of 12% or greater.
§ 510-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-12
1:719
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above or, if there is no floor above, the
space between the floor and the ceiling next above. Neither a basement nor
a cellar shall be counted as a story.
STREET — Unless specifically designated otherwise by the Village, any
public or private way that is dedicated or permanently open to pedestrian
and vehicular use.
STREET, ARTERIAL — Street which provides primary access to and through
an area. It has a secondary function of providing access to abutting land and
to collector and local streets.
STREET, COLLECTOR — Street which disperses traffic throughout an area
and provides access to abutting properties.
STREET, LOCAL — Street which provides access to individual properties.
STREET, LOCAL RESIDENTIAL — A local street serving primarily to collect
traffic originating directly from residential driveways and private
residential courts and streets.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR — A collector street serving primarily
residential land uses which primarily serves to connect local residential
streets to collector or arterial streets.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
a more or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something
having a permanent location on the ground, excepting public utility fixtures
and appurtenances.
SUBSTANDARD LOT — See "nonconforming lot."[Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02]
SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION — [Added 5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-08]
When used in the context of telecommunication facilities, the
modification of a mobile service support structure, including the
mounting of an antenna on such a structure, that does any of the
following:
For structures with an overall height of 200 feet or less, increases
the overall height of the structure by more than 20 feet, except as
provided below.
(1)
For structures with an overall height of more than 200 feet,
increases the overall height of the structure by 10% or more,
except as provided below.
(2)
Measured at the level of the appurtenance added to the structure
as a result of the modification, increases the width of the support
structure by 20 feet or more, unless a larger area is necessary for
co-location, except as provided below.
(3)
A.
§ 510-12 EAST TROY CODE § 510-12
1:720
SUPPORT STRUCTURE — An existing or new structure that supports or
can support a mobile service facility, including a mobile service support
structure, utility pole, water tower, building, or other structure. [Note:
This definition is based on the corresponding definition in § 66.0404, Wis.
Stats.][Added 5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
SWALE — A linear depression in land running downhill or having a marked
change in contour direction in which sheet runoff would collect and form a
temporary watercourse.
TEMPORARY USE — A land use which is present on a property for a limited
and specified period of time.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — The circumstance where special conditions
affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made
strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage,
height, or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the
purposes of this chapter.
URBAN SERVICE AREAS — Those areas in and around existing
communities which are most suitable for urban development and capable of
being provided with a full range of urban services.
URBAN SERVICES — Those additional public services normally provided
or needed in urban areas, including public water supply and distribution
systems, sanitary sewerage systems, police and fire protection, solid waste
collection, urban storm drainage systems, streets with curbs and gutters,
streetlighting, neighborhood facilities such as parks and schools, and urban
transportation facilities such as sidewalks and trails, on-street bicycle lanes,
taxi service, and mass transit.
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon is
designed, arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — See "accessory use."
USE, CONDITIONAL — See "conditional use."
USE, PRINCIPAL — See "principal use."
UTILITY POLE — In the context of telecommunication facilities, a structure
owned or operated by an alternative telecommunications utility, as defined
in § 196.01(1d), Wis. Stats.; a public utility, as defined in § 196.01(5), Wis.
Increases the square footage of an existing equipment compound
to a total area of more than 2,500 square feet.
(4)
An activity is not a substantial modification under Subsection A(1)
and (2) above if a greater height is necessary to avoid interference
with an existing antenna. Furthermore, an activity is not a substantial
modification under Subsection A(3) above if a greater protrusion is
necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect
the antenna to the existing structure by cable.
[Note: This definition is based on the corresponding definition in
§ 66.0404, Wis. Stats.]
B.
§ 510-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-12
1:721
Stats.; a telecommunications utility, as defined in § 196.01(10), Wis. Stats.;
a city, village, town, or county; or a cooperative association organized
under Ch. 185, Wis. Stats.; and that is designed specifically for and used
to carry lines, cables, or wires for telecommunications service, as defined
in § 182.017(1g)(cq), Wis. Stats.; for video service, as defined in
§ 66.0420(2)(y), Wis. Stats.; for electricity; or to provide light. [Note: This
definition is based on the corresponding definition in § 66.0404, Wis.
Stats.][Added 5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this
chapter, granted pursuant to § 510-161.
WELL FIELD — A piece of land used primarily for the purpose of locating
wells to supply a municipal water system.
WETLAND — An area that is saturated by surface water or groundwater,
with vegetation adapted for life under those soil conditions. See also
§ 23.32(1), Wis. Stats.
WETLAND ALTERATION — Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging,
ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or
dike and dam construction in a wetland area.
WETLAND VEGETATION — Plants of all types typically growing in and
associated with a wetland.[Added 7-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-07]
WOODLAND — Areas of trees whose combined canopies cover a minimum
of 80% of an area of one acre or more, as shown on United States Geological
Survey (USGS) 7.5 minute topographic maps for the Village of East Troy
and its environs.
WOODY VEGETATION — Perennial plants having hard lignified tissues or
woody parts, especially stems.[Added 7-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-07]
YARD — A required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and
unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky, except
as expressly permitted in this chapter. A yard shall extend along a lot line
and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the
setback regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line
between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street right-ofway
line to the face of the building.[Amended 10-17-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-13]
YARD, REAR — A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line
between the side lot lines and extending from the rear lot line to the face of
the building.[Amended 10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along the side lot line between the front
and rear yards, from the side lot line to the face of the building.[Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The person authorized and charged by the
Village with the administration of this chapter.
§ 510-12 EAST TROY CODE § 510-12
1:722
ARTICLE II
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 510-13. Purpose.
The area located within the jurisdiction of this chapter is hereby divided
into zoning districts of such number as is necessary to achieve compatibility
of land uses within each district, to implement the Village of East Troy
Comprehensive Plan, and to achieve the other purposes of this chapter.
§ 510-14. Standard zoning districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, all areas within the jurisdiction of this
chapter are hereby divided into the following standard zoning districts:
Agricultural Zoning Districts
RH-35 Rural Holding
Residential Zoning Districts
SR-3 Estate Residential
SR-4 Suburban Residential
SR-5 Neighborhood Residential
SR-6 Traditional-Front Residential
SR-7 Traditional-Rear Residential
TR-8 Two-Family Residential
AR-9 Attached Residential
MR-10 Multifamily Residential
MHR-6294 Mobile Home Residential
Business Zoning Districts
NB Neighborhood Business
HB Highway Business
CB Central Business
BP Business Park
Industrial Districts
LI Light Industrial
GI General Industrial
294. Editor's Note: The designation for the Mobile Home Residential District was amended
throughout this chapter to be "MHR-6" at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 510-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-15
1:723
§ 510-15. Map of standard zoning districts. [Amended 12-16-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-18]
Zoning districts established by this chapter are shown on the Official Zoning
Map of the Village of East Troy, which, together with all explanatory
materials thereon, is hereby made part of this chapter.295
§ 510-16. Interpretation of zoning district boundaries.
The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any
zoning district boundary shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Village of
East Troy:
§ 510-17. Description and purpose of zoning districts.
Articles III, IV and V specify the description and purpose of the standard
zoning districts established by this chapter, establish principal and
A. Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following the limits of any village, city, town, or county boundary shall
be construed as following such limits.
B. Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following streets or railroad lines shall be construed as following the
center line of such streets or railroad lines.
C. Zoning district boundary lines shown as following or approximately
following platted lot lines or other property lines as shown on the
Village of East Troy or County of Walworth Tax Maps shall be construed
as following such lines.
D. Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following the center lines of streams, rivers, or other continuously
flowing watercourses shall be construed as following the channel
center lines of such watercourses, and in the event of a natural change
in the location of such streams, rivers, or other watercourses, the
zoning district boundary shall be construed as moving with the channel
center line.
E. Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following ridgelines or watershed boundaries shall be construed as
following such lines.
F. Zoning district boundaries shown as separated from any of the features
listed in Subsections A through E above shall be construed to be at such
distances therefrom as are shown on the Official Zoning Map.
G. Where any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a zoning district
boundary line as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the location of the
line shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
295. Editor's Note: The Official Zoning Map is on file at the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 510-15 EAST TROY CODE § 510-17
1:724
accessory uses permitted by right or as conditional uses, establish bulk,
density, and intensity standards, and reference other applicable regulations.
Definitions and regulations for land uses are provided in Article VI. Section
510-38 includes a Table of Land Uses indicating which land uses are allowed
in each zoning district and whether they are permitted by right, by
conditional use, as accessory uses, or as temporary uses.
§ 510-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-17
1:725

ARTICLE III
Residential Zoning Districts
§ 510-18. RH-35 Rural Holding District.296
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit very low
density single-family detached residential development at a density of
one dwelling unit for every 35 gross acres. This district acts as a
"holding zone" to preserve productive agricultural lands in the long
term, protect existing farm operations from encroachment by
incompatible uses, promote further investments in farming, maintain
eligibility for farming incentive programs, and to ensure that
development does not land-lock the Village.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the RH-35 Zoning District
shall comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII,
except for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any
other agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. Single-family and agricultural land uses are
exempt from landscaping requirements. All other land uses in the
RH-35 Zoning District shall adhere to the applicable landscaping
requirements (see Article XIV).
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the RH-35 Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Density, intensity, and bulk regulations. Density, intensity, and bulk
regulations specific to the RH-35 Zoning District are detailed below.
See Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all
zoning districts.
296. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-18
1:727
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum lot area (square feet) 40,000 40,000
Maximum density 1 dwelling unit per
35 acres
N/A
Maximum building coverage of
lot
30% of net lot area 30% of net lot
area
Maximum impervious
coverage of lot
50% of net lot area 50% of net lot
area
Minimum lot width (feet) 150 150
Minimum street setback (feet) 30 30
Minimum side setback (feet) 15 15
Minimum rear setback (feet) 30 30
Maximum principal building
height (feet)
35 40
Minimum principal building
separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
(feet)
30 30
Minimum pavement setback
(lot line to pavement; excludes
driveway entrances) (feet)
5 5
Minimum parking required Per Article VI Per Article VI
Minimum garage door setback
to alley (if applicable) (feet)
15 15
Accessory structures Refer to § 510-47A(7)(b) for additional
requirements
Accessory building setback to
principal building (feet)
10 10
Accessory building side
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
Accessory building rear
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
§ 510-18 EAST TROY CODE § 510-18
1:728
§ 510-19. SR-3 Estate Residential District.297
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Maximum accessory building
height (feet)
20 40
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit very low
density development. Unlike the RH-35 Rural Holding District, the land
use standards for this district permit primarily single-family detached
residential development and a variety of related institutional land uses
and are not oriented to agricultural activities. All new development in
this district shall be provided with public sanitary sewer and water
services.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the SR-3 Zoning District
shall comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII,
except for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any
other agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. Single-family land uses are exempt from
landscaping requirements. All other land uses in the SR-3 Zoning
District shall adhere to the applicable landscaping requirements (see
Article XIV).
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the SR-3 Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Density, intensity, and bulk regulations. Density, intensity, and bulk
regulations specific to the SR-3 Zoning District are detailed below. See
Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all zoning
districts.
297. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-19
1:729
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum lot area (square feet) 15,000 40,000; 15,000
with CUP
Maximum density 3 dwelling units
per net acre
N/A
Maximum building coverage of
lot
30% of net lot
area
30% of net lot area
Maximum impervious
coverage of lot
50% of net lot
area
50% of net lot area
Minimum lot width (feet) 100 100
Minimum street setback (feet) 30 30
Minimum side setback (feet) 15 15
Minimum rear setback (feet) 30 30
Maximum principal building
height (feet)
40 40
Minimum principal building
separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
(feet)
30 30
Minimum pavement setback
(lot line to pavement; excludes
driveway entrances) (feet)
5 5
Minimum parking required Per Article VI Per Article VI
Minimum garage door setback
to alley (if applicable) (feet)
15 15
Accessory structures Refer to § 510-47A(7)(b) for additional
requirements
Accessory building setback to
principal building (feet)
10 10
Accessory building side
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Accessory building rear
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
§ 510-19 EAST TROY CODE § 510-19
1:730
§ 510-20. SR-4 Suburban Residential District.298
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Maximum accessory building
height (feet)
20 20
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to provide for singlefamily
detached residential development at densities of four dwelling
units per acre and uses accessory to and compatible with single-family
homes in a manner that protects the residential character of the
district. All uses in this district shall be provided with public sanitary
sewer and water services.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the SR-4 Zoning District
shall comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII,
except for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any
other agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. All single-family land uses are exempt from
landscaping requirements. All other land uses in the SR-4 Zoning
District shall adhere to the applicable landscaping requirements (see
Article XIV).
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the SR-4 Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Density, intensity, and bulk regulations. Density, intensity, and bulk
regulations specific to the SR-4 Zoning District are detailed below. See
Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all zoning
districts.
298. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-20
1:731
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
10,000 40,000; 10,000
with CUP
Maximum density 4 dwelling units
per net acre
N/A
Maximum building coverage
of lot
30% of net lot area 30% of net lot area
Maximum impervious
coverage of lot
50% of net lot area 50% of net lot area
Minimum lot width (feet) 75 75
Minimum street setback
(feet)
25 25
Minimum side setback (feet) 8 8
Minimum rear setback (feet) 25 25
Maximum principal building
height (feet)
35 35
Minimum principal building
separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
(feet)
16 16
Minimum pavement setback
(lot line to pavement;
excludes driveway entrances)
(feet)
5 5
Minimum parking required Per Article VI Per Article VI
Minimum garage door
setback to alley (if
applicable) (feet)
15 15
Accessory structures Refer to § 510-47A(7)(b) for additional
requirements
Accessory building setback to
principal building (feet)
10 10
Accessory building side
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
§ 510-20 EAST TROY CODE § 510-20
1:732
§ 510-21. SR-5 Neighborhood Residential District.299
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Accessory building rear
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Maximum accessory building
height (feet)
18 18
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to provide for singlefamily
detached residential development at densities of five dwelling
units per acre and uses accessory to and compatible with single-family
homes in a manner that protects the residential character of the
district. All uses in this district shall be provided with public sanitary
sewer and water services.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the SR-5 Zoning District
shall comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII,
except for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any
other agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. Single-family land uses are exempt from
landscaping requirements. All other land uses in the SR-5 Zoning
District shall adhere to the applicable landscaping requirements (see
Article XIV).
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the SR-5 Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
299. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-21
1:733
H. Density, intensity, and bulk regulations. Density, intensity, and bulk
regulations specific to the SR-5 Zoning District are detailed below. See
Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all zoning
districts.
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
7,200 40,000; 7,200 with
CUP
Maximum density 5 dwelling units
per net acre
N/A
Maximum building coverage
of lot
30% of net lot
area
30% of net lot area
Maximum impervious
coverage of lot
50% of net lot
area
50% of net lot area
Minimum lot width (feet) 60 75; 60 with CUP
Minimum street setback (feet) 25 25
Minimum side setback (feet) 6 (14 for sum of
sides)
8; 6 (14 for sum of
sides) with CUP
Minimum rear setback (feet) 25 25
Maximum principal building
height (feet)
35 35
Minimum principal building
separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
(feet)
12 12
Minimum pavement setback
(lot line to pavement;
excludes driveway entrances)
(feet)
5 5
Minimum parking required Per Article VI Per Article VI
Minimum garage door
setback to alley (if applicable)
(feet)
15 15
Accessory structures Refer to § 510-47A(7)(b) for additional
requirements
Accessory building setback to
principal building (feet)
10 10
§ 510-21 EAST TROY CODE § 510-21
1:734
§ 510-22. SR-6 Traditional-Front Residential District.300
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Accessory building side
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Accessory building rear
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Maximum accessory building
height (feet)
18 18
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to provide for singlefamily
detached residential development at densities of six dwelling
units per acre and uses accessory to and compatible with single-family
homes in a manner that protects the residential character of the
district. Development in the SR-6 Traditional-Front Residential Zoning
District shall exhibit two or more of the following characteristics:
streets laid out in a grid system, buildings oriented to the street, front
porches, pedestrian orientation, village squares and greens. All uses in
this district shall be provided with public sanitary sewer and water
services.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the SR-6 Zoning District
shall comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII,
300. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-22
1:735
except for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any
other agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. Single-family land uses are exempt from
landscaping requirements. All other land uses in the SR-6 Zoning
District shall adhere to the applicable landscaping requirements (see
Article XIV).
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the SR-6 Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Density, intensity, and bulk regulations. Density, intensity, and bulk
regulations specific to the SR-6 Zoning District are detailed below. See
Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all zoning
districts.
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
6,000 40,000; 6,000 with
CUP
Maximum density 6 dwelling units
per net acre
N/A
Maximum building coverage
of lot
35% of net lot
area
35% of net lot area
Maximum impervious
coverage of lot
50% of net lot
area
50% of net lot area
Minimum lot width (feet) 50 75; 50 with CUP
Minimum street setback (feet) 20 (12 from front
porch)
25; 20 with CUP
Minimum side setback (feet) 6 (14 for sum of
sides)
8; 6 (14 feet for
sum of sides) with
CUP
Minimum rear setback (feet) 25 25
Maximum principal building
height (feet)
35 35
Minimum principal building
separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
(feet)
12 12
Minimum pavement setback
(lot line to pavement;
excludes driveway entrances)
(feet)
5 5
Minimum parking required Per Article VI Per Article VI
§ 510-22 EAST TROY CODE § 510-22
1:736
§ 510-23. SR-7 Traditional-Rear Residential District.301
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum garage door
setback to alley (if applicable)
(feet)
15 15
Accessory structures Refer to § 510-47A(7)(b) for additional
requirements
Accessory building setback to
principal building (feet)
10 10
Accessory building side
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Accessory building rear
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Maximum accessory building
height (feet)
18 18
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to provide for singlefamily
detached residential development at densities of seven dwelling
units per acre and uses accessory to and compatible with single-family
homes in a manner that protects the residential character of the
district. Development in the SR-7 Traditional-Rear Residential Zoning
District shall exhibit one or more of the following characteristics:
streets laid out in a grid system, buildings oriented to the street, front
porches, pedestrian orientation, village squares and greens.
Development in the SR-7 Traditional-Rear Residential Zoning District
shall also be served by alleys. All uses in this district shall be provided
with public sanitary sewer and water services.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
301. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-23
1:737
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district
in addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations
and the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the SR-7 Zoning District
shall comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII,
except for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any
other agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. Single-family land uses are exempt from
landscaping requirements. All other land uses in the SR-7 Zoning
District shall adhere to the applicable landscaping requirements (see
Article XIV).
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the SR-7 Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Density, intensity, and bulk regulations. Density, intensity, and bulk
regulations specific to the SR-7 Zoning District are detailed below. See
Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all zoning
districts.
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
5,000 40,000; 5,000 with
CUP
Maximum density 5 dwelling units
per net acre
N/A
Maximum building coverage
of lot
40% of net lot
area
40% of net lot area
Maximum impervious
coverage of lot
50% of net lot
area
50% of net lot area
Minimum lot width (feet) 40 75; 40 with CUP
Minimum street setback (feet) 20 (12 from front
porch)
25; 20 with CUP
Minimum side setback (feet) 6 (14 for sum of
sides)
8; 6 (14 for sum of
sides) with CUP
Minimum rear setback (feet) 25 25
Maximum principal building
height (feet)
35 35
§ 510-23 EAST TROY CODE § 510-23
1:738
§ 510-24. TR-8 Two-Family Residential District.302
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum principal building
separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
(feet)
12 12
Minimum pavement setback
(lot line to pavement;
excludes driveway entrances)
(feet)
5 5
Minimum parking required Per Article VI Per Article VI
Minimum garage door
setback to alley (if applicable)
(feet)
15 15
Accessory structures Refer to § 510-47A(7)(b) for additional
requirements
Accessory building setback to
principal building (feet)
10 10
Accessory building side
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Accessory building rear
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Maximum accessory building
height (feet)
18 18
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to provide for
attached two-family residential development (duplexes, two-flats, and
twin houses), single-family homes, and uses accessory to and
compatible with residential uses in a manner that protects the
residential character of the district. All uses in this district shall be
provided with public sanitary sewer and water services.
302. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-24
1:739
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the TR-8 Zoning District
shall comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII,
except for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any
other agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. Single-family land uses are exempt from
landscaping requirements. All other land uses in the TR-8 Zoning
District shall adhere to the applicable landscaping requirements (see
Article XIV).
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the TR-8 Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Density, intensity, and bulk requirements. Density, intensity, and bulk
regulations specific to the TR-8 Zoning District are detailed below. See
Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all zoning
districts.
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum lot area (square feet) 5,000 per
dwelling unit
40,000; 10,000
with CUP
Maximum density 8 dwelling units
per net acre
N/A
Maximum building coverage of
lot
40% of net lot
area
40% of net lot area
Maximum impervious
coverage of lot
50% of net lot
area
50% of net lot area
Minimum lot width (feet) Total of 75 75
Minimum street setback (feet) 25 25
Minimum side setback (feet) 8 or 0 for twin
homes and
duplexes (20 for
sum of sides)
8
§ 510-24 EAST TROY CODE § 510-24
1:740
§ 510-25. AR-9 Attached Residential District.303
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum rear setback (feet) 25 25
Maximum principal building
height (feet)
35 35
Minimum principal building
separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
(feet)
16 16
Minimum pavement setback
(lot line to pavement; excludes
driveway entrances) (feet)
5 5
Minimum parking required Per Article VI Per Article VI
Minimum garage door setback
to alley (if applicable) (feet)
15 15
Accessory structures Refer to § 510-47A(7)(b) for additional
requirements
Accessory building setback to
principal building (feet)
10 10
Accessory building side
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Accessory building rear
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Maximum accessory building
height (feet)
18 18
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to provide for a range
of housing types at densities of nine dwelling units per acre and uses
accessory to and compatible with residential uses in a manner that
protects the residential character of the district. Multifamily residential
structures (townhouses, apartments, or multiplexes) containing no
303. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-25
1:741
more than four attached dwelling units, two-family homes (duplexes or
twin houses), and single-family detached homes are permitted principal
uses. All uses in this district shall be provided with public sanitary
sewer and water services.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the AR-9 Zoning District
shall comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII,
except for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any
other agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. Single-family land uses are exempt from
landscaping requirements. All other land uses in the AR-9 Zoning
District shall adhere to the applicable landscaping requirements (see
Article XIV).
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the AR-9 Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Density, intensity, and bulk regulations. Density, intensity, and bulk
regulations specific to the AR-9 Zoning District are detailed below. See
Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all zoning
districts.
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
4,840 per
dwelling unit
40,000; 10,000
with CUP
Maximum density 9 dwelling units
per net acre
N/A
Maximum building coverage
of lot
40% of net lot
area
40% of net lot area
Maximum impervious
coverage of lot
50% of net lot
area
50% of net lot area
Minimum lot width (feet) 75 or varies 75
Minimum street setback (feet) 25 25
§ 510-25 EAST TROY CODE § 510-25
1:742
§ 510-26. MR-10 Multifamily Residential District.304
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum side setback (feet) 8 or 0 for
attached
dwellings (20 for
sum of sides)
8
Minimum rear setback (feet) 25 25
Maximum principal building
height (feet)
35 35
Minimum principal building
separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
(feet)
16 16
Minimum pavement setback
(lot line to pavement;
excludes driveway entrances)
(feet)
5 5
Minimum parking required Per Article VI Per Article VI
Minimum garage door
setback to alley (if applicable)
(feet)
15 15
Accessory structures Refer to § 510-47A(7)(b) for additional
requirements
Accessory building setback to
principal building (feet)
10 10
Accessory building side
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Accessory building rear
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Maximum accessory building
height (feet)
18 18
304. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-26
1:743
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to provide for a range
of housing types at densities of 10 dwelling units per acre and uses
accessory to and compatible with residential uses in a manner that
protects the residential character of the district. Multifamily residential
structures (townhouses, apartments, or multiplexes) containing no
more than eight attached dwelling units, two-family homes (duplexes,
two-flats, and twin houses), and single-family detached homes are
allowable principal uses. All uses in this district shall be provided with
public sanitary sewer and water services.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the MR-10 Zoning District
shall comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII,
except for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any
other agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. Single-family land uses are exempt from
landscaping requirements. All other land uses in the MR-10 Zoning
District shall adhere to the applicable landscaping requirements (see
Article XIV).
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the MR-10 Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Density, intensity, and bulk regulations. Density, intensity, and bulk
regulations specific to the MR-10 Zoning District are detailed below.
See Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all
zoning districts.
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
4,356 per
dwelling unit
40,000; 10,000
with CUP
Maximum density 10 dwelling units
per net acre
N/A
Maximum building coverage
of lot
40% of net lot
area
40% of net lot area
§ 510-26 EAST TROY CODE § 510-26
1:744
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Maximum impervious
coverage of lot
50% of net lot
area
50% of net lot area
Minimum lot width (feet) 90 90; 75 with CUP
Minimum street setback (feet) 25 25
Minimum side setback (feet) 8 or 0 for
attached
dwellings (20 for
sum of sides)
8
Minimum rear setback (feet) 25 25
Maximum principal building
height (feet)
35 35
Minimum principal building
separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
(feet)
16 16
Minimum pavement setback
(lot line to pavement;
excludes driveway entrances)
(feet)
5 5
Minimum parking required Per Article VI Per Article VI
Minimum garage door
setback to alley (if applicable)
(feet)
15 15
Accessory structures Refer to § 510-47A(7)(b) for additional
requirements
Accessory building setback to
principal building (feet)
10 10
Accessory building side
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Accessory building rear
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot
structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
§ 510-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-26
1:745
§ 510-27. MHR-6 Mobile Home Residential District.305
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Maximum accessory building
height (feet)
18 18
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to provide for the
location of mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions in a singlefamily
residential setting at densities of six dwelling units per acre. All
uses in this district shall be provided with public sanitary sewer and
water services.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the MHR-6 Zoning District
shall comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII,
except for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any
other agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. Single-family land uses are exempt from
landscaping requirements. All other land uses in the MHR-6 Zoning
District shall adhere to the applicable landscaping requirements (see
Article XIV).
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the MHR-6 Zoning District shall
comply with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Density, intensity, and bulk regulations. Density, intensity, and bulk
regulations specific to the MHR-6 Zoning District are detailed below.
See Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all
zoning districts.
305. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-26 EAST TROY CODE § 510-27
1:746
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
6,000 per dwelling
unit
40,000; 10,000
with CUP
Maximum density 6 dwelling units
per net acre
N/A
Maximum building coverage
of lot
35% of net lot area 35% of net lot area
Maximum impervious
coverage of lot
50% of net lot area 50% of net lot area
Minimum lot width (feet) 50 75; 50 with CUP
Minimum street setback (feet) 20 25, 20 with CUP
Minimum side setback (feet) 6 (12 for sum of
sides)
8; 6 (12 for sum of
sides) with CUP
Minimum rear setback (feet) 25 25
Maximum principal building
height (feet)
35 35
Minimum principal building
separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
(feet)
12 12
Minimum pavement setback
(lot line to pavement;
excludes driveway entrances)
(feet)
5 5
Minimum parking required Per Article VI Per Article VI
Minimum garage door
setback to alley (if applicable)
(feet)
15 15
Accessory structures Refer to § 510-47A(7)(b) for additional
requirements
Accessory building setback to
principal building (feet)
10 10
Accessory building side
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
§ 510-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-27
1:747
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Accessory building rear
setback (feet)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
5 (less than
200-square-foot
structure)
10 (more than
200-foot structure)
Maximum accessory building
height (feet)
18 18
§ 510-27 EAST TROY CODE § 510-27
1:748
ARTICLE IV
Business Zoning Districts
§ 510-28. NB Neighborhood Business District.306
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit both
residential development and small-scale commercial uses which are
compatible with adjacent residential uses and neighborhood character.
District regulations are intended to protect neighborhood character
through the restriction of building size, architectural requirements,
landscaping requirements, and limitations on the range of allowable
uses. In order to minimize disruption to residences, uses within this
district shall be adjacent to and, where practical, take access from
collector or arterial streets. All uses in this district shall be provided
with public sanitary sewer and water services.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the NB Zoning District shall
comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII, except
for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any other
agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. Single-family land uses are exempt from
landscaping requirements. All other land uses in the NB Zoning District
shall adhere to the applicable landscaping requirements (see Article
XIV).
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the NB Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Density, intensity, and bulk regulations. Density, intensity, and bulk
regulations specific to the NB Zoning District are detailed below. See
Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all zoning
districts.
306. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-28
1:749
Residential Uses
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
7,200 7,200
Maximum density 5 dwelling units
per net acre
N/A
Maximum building coverage
of lot
30% of net lot area 30% of net lot area
Maximum impervious
coverage of lot
50% of net lot area 50% of net lot area
Minimum lot width (feet) 60 60
Minimum street setback
(feet)
25 25
Minimum side setback (feet) 6 (14 sum of sides) 6 (14 sum of sides)
Minimum rear setback (feet) 25 25
Maximum principal building
height (feet)
35 35
Minimum principal building
separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
(feet)
12 12
Minimum pavement setback
(lot line to pavement;
excludes driveway entrances)
(feet)
5 5
Minimum parking required Per Article VI Per Article VI
Accessory building side
setback (feet)
5 5
Accessory building rear
setback (feet)
5 5
Maximum accessory building
height (feet)
18 18
I. Design standards. All structures and uses shall comply with applicable
design standards of Article XIII, except for any exemptions specifically
stated in this chapter or by any other agency or jurisdiction. In addition,
structures and uses within the NB Zoning District shall adhere to the
following additional design requirements:
(1) Areas zoned NB shall be no larger than four acres in size.
(2) The minimum zoning district separation for areas zoned NB shall
be 500 feet.
(3) Residential architectural and landscaping requirements include:
§ 510-28 EAST TROY CODE § 510-28
1:750
§ 510-29. HB Highway Business District. [Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02]
(a) Foundation planting.
(b) Residential roof shapes, pitches, and materials, such as
shingles or shakes.
(c) A minimum of 15% window coverage.
(d) Residential exterior materials, such as wood, cement board,
brick, decorative block, stone, and other materials approved by
the Plan Commission.
(4) Areas zoned NB shall provide a neighborhood-oriented amenity per
Plan Commission direction (i.e., outdoor neighborhood gathering
area, public art, etc.).
(5) Parking shall be placed to the side or the rear of the principal
building; no parking shall be permitted in the front. Parking is
prohibited within required setbacks for principal buildings.
(6) Business operating hours within the NB District shall be from 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. unless otherwise extended by conditional use
permit.
(7) In order to ensure a minimum disruption to residential
development, development within this district shall take access
from a collector or arterial street, if available, rather than a
neighborhood street.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit a wide
range of large- and small-scale office, retail, service, and lodging uses
that are compatible with the desired community character. In addition,
small-scale warehousing/storage facilities and other specified uses may
be permitted. Generally, land included in the Highway Business District
should abut arterial or major collector streets. Access requirements are
intended to minimize any negative traffic impacts on adjacent
residential land uses and arterial roadways while ensuring safe and
efficient access. All uses in this district shall be provided with public
sanitary sewer and water services. [Amended 11-16-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-08; 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
§ 510-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-29
1:751
§ 510-30. CB Central Business District.307
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the HB Zoning District shall
comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII, except
for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any other
agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. All landscaping in the HB Zoning District
shall comply with applicable provisions of Article XIV.
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the HB Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Intensity and bulk regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
Intensity and bulk regulations specific to the HB Zoning District are
detailed below. See Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements
applicable to all zoning districts.
(1) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum building coverage of lot: 50% of net lot area.
(3) Maximum impervious coverage of lot: 80% of net lot area.
(4) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(5) Minimum street setback: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum side setback: zero or 10 feet.
(7) Minimum rear setback: 25 feet.
(8) Maximum principal building height: 35 feet.
(9) Minimum principal building separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots): 20 feet.
(10) Minimum pavement setback (lot line to pavement; excludes
driveway entrances): five feet.
(11) Minimum parking required: per Article VI.
(12) Accessory building side setback: five feet.
(13) Accessory building rear setback: five feet.
(14) Maximum accessory building height: 18 feet.
§ 510-29 EAST TROY CODE § 510-30
1:752
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit a range of
commercial, institutional, residential, and mixed-use development in a
manner that preserves and promotes the architectural character and
the compact, pedestrian-friendly environment of the Village's historic
downtown. The CB District requirements are specifically intended to
promote comparable renovation, infill, and redevelopment of property
through a combination of urban development intensities and downtown
design standards. All uses in this district shall be provided with public
sanitary sewer and water services.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the CB Zoning District shall
comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII, except
for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any other
agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. All landscaping in the CB Zoning District shall
comply with applicable provisions of Article XIV.
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the CB Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Intensity and bulk regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
Intensity and bulk regulations specific to the CB Zoning District are
detailed below. See Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements
applicable to all zoning districts.
(1) Minimum lot area: sufficient.
(2) Maximum building coverage of lot: 75% of net lot area.
(3) Maximum impervious coverage of lot: 100% of net lot area.
(4) Minimum lot width: sufficient.
(5) Minimum street setback: zero feet on square.
307. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-30
1:753
§ 510-31. BP Business Park District.308
(6) Minimum side setback: zero or 10 feet.
(7) Minimum rear setback: 25 feet.
(8) Maximum principal building height: 45 feet.
(9) Minimum principal building separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots): zero or 10 feet.
(10) Minimum pavement setback (lot line to pavement; excludes
driveway entrances): five feet.
(11) Minimum parking required: per Article VI.
(12) Accessory building side setback: five feet.
(13) Accessory building rear setback: five feet.
(14) Maximum accessory building height: 18 feet.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to provide for
administrative offices, research and development activities, support
uses typically found in an office park setting, and very limited industrial
uses. To maintain an attractive setting for uses within the district,
extensive landscaping and high-quality development design are
required. The BP District is intended to be located primarily on or near
collector and arterial roads. All uses in this district shall be provided
with public sanitary sewer and water services.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the BP Zoning District shall
comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII, except
for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any other
agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. All landscaping in the BP Zoning District shall
comply with applicable provisions of Article XIV.
308. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-30 EAST TROY CODE § 510-31
1:754
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the BP Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Intensity and bulk regulations for nonresidential uses. Intensity and
bulk regulations specific to the BP Zoning District are detailed below.
See Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all
zoning districts.
(1) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum building coverage of lot: 50% of net lot area.
(3) Maximum impervious coverage of lot: 80% of net lot area.
(4) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(5) Minimum street setback: 30 feet.
(6) Minimum side setback: 15 feet.
(7) Minimum rear setback: 40 feet.
(8) Maximum principal building height: 45 feet.
(9) Minimum principal building separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots): 30 feet.
(10) Minimum pavement setback (lot line to pavement; excludes
driveway entrances): five feet.
(11) Minimum parking required: per Article VI.
(12) Accessory building side setback: five feet.
(13) Accessory building rear setback: five feet.
(14) Maximum accessory building height: 45 feet.
§ 510-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-31
1:755

ARTICLE V
Industrial Zoning Districts
§ 510-32. LI Light Industrial District.309
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to allow primarily
indoor industrial, storage, office, and other associated business and
support uses. Allowable uses are geared toward activities which are not
associated with high levels of noise, odor, particulate emissions, and
other potential nuisances. Outdoor uses are limited to those that are
accessory to indoor principal uses. Architectural, site design,
landscaping, and other requirements are intended to ensure
compatibility with nearby residential, institutional, and conservancy
uses. All uses in this district shall be provided with public sanitary
sewer and water services.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the LI Zoning District shall
comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII, except
for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any other
agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. All landscaping in the LI Zoning District shall
comply with applicable provisions of Article XIV.
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the LI Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Intensity and bulk regulations for nonresidential uses. Intensity and
bulk regulations specific to the LI Zoning District are detailed below.
See Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all
zoning districts.
(1) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum building coverage of lot: 75% of net lot area.
309. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-32
1:757
§ 510-33. GI General Industrial District.310
(3) Maximum impervious coverage of lot: 85% of net lot area.
(4) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(5) Minimum street setback: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum side setback: 25 feet.
(7) Minimum rear setback: 25 feet.
(8) Maximum principal building height: 45 feet.
(9) Minimum principal building separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots): 50 feet.
(10) Minimum pavement setback (lot line to pavement; excludes
driveway entrances): five feet.
(11) Minimum parking required: per Article VI.
(12) Accessory building side setback: five feet.
(13) Accessory building rear setback: five feet.
(14) Maximum accessory building height: 45 feet.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to allow industrial,
office, storage, and other supporting uses, including those land uses
that may require more extensive outdoor storage, freight handling,
repair, and maintenance activities than allowed in the LI District.
Allowable uses are geared toward activities which are not associated
with high levels of noise, odor, particulate emissions, and other
potential nuisances that cannot be adequately fully mitigated on site.
Architectural, site design, landscaping, and other requirements are
intended to minimize impacts and potential nuisances to other land
uses. All uses in this district shall be provided with public sanitary
sewer and water services.
B. Uses. For principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use and allowable temporary uses, refer to the Table of
Land Uses included as an attachment to this chapter. See § 510-38.
C. Overlay district requirements. All lots, uses, structures, and site
features within one or more overlay zoning districts (see Article X) shall
be subject to the regulations of the applicable overlay zoning district in
addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Where
there are conflicts between the standard zoning district regulations and
the overlay zoning district regulations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
310. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-32 EAST TROY CODE § 510-33
1:758
D. Performance standards. All allowed uses in the GI Zoning District shall
comply with applicable performance standards of Article XIII, except
for any exemptions specifically stated in this chapter or by any other
agency with jurisdiction.
E. Landscaping regulations. All landscaping in the GI Zoning District shall
comply with applicable provisions of Article XIV.
F. Signage regulations. All signs in the GI Zoning District shall comply
with applicable provisions of Article XV.
G. Nonconforming situations. Any nonconforming lot, use, structure and/
or site shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
H. Intensity and bulk regulations for nonresidential uses. Intensity and
bulk regulations specific to the GI Zoning District are detailed below.
See Articles VII and VIII for additional requirements applicable to all
zoning districts.
(1) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum building coverage of lot: 75% of net lot area.
(3) Maximum impervious coverage of lot: 85% of net lot area.
(4) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(5) Minimum street setback: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum side setback: 25 feet.
(7) Minimum rear setback: 25 feet.
(8) Maximum principal building height: 45 feet.
(9) Minimum principal building separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots): 50 feet.
(10) Minimum pavement setback (lot line to pavement; excludes
driveway entrances): five feet.
(11) Minimum parking required: per Article VI.
(12) Accessory building side setback: five feet.
(13) Accessory building rear setback: five feet.
(14) Maximum accessory building height: 45 feet.
§ 510-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-33
1:759

ARTICLE VI
Land Use Regulations
§ 510-34. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to indicate which land uses may locate in each
zoning district and under what requirements and which land uses may not
locate therein. Certain land uses may locate in a given district as a matter
of right upon compliance with special regulations for such a land use. A
further distinction is made for land uses which may locate in a given district
only upon obtaining a conditional use or temporary use permit.
§ 510-35. Regulation of allowable uses.
The allowable land uses for each zoning district are established in Articles
III, IV and V of this chapter. Detailed descriptions and regulations for uses
are found in §§ 510-37 through 510-48. Even if a land use may be indicated
as permitted by right or requiring a conditional use in a particular district,
such a land use may not necessarily be permitted or permissible on any or
every property in such district. No land use is permitted or permissible on
a property unless it can be located on it or implemented in full compliance
with all of the applicable standards and regulations of this chapter or unless
an appropriate variance has been granted pursuant to § 510-161.
A. Principal land uses permitted by right. Principal land uses listed as
permitted by right (designated by the letter "P" in the Table of Land
Uses; see § 510-38) are permitted per the general land use
requirements of this article; per the density, intensity, and bulk
regulations of the specific zoning district in which they are located; per
any additional requirements imposed by applicable overlay districts;
per all other applicable requirements of this chapter; and per any and
all other applicable Village, county, state, and federal regulations.
B. Principal land uses permitted as conditional uses. Principal land uses
allowed only with a conditional use permit (designated by the letter "C"
in the Table of Land Uses; see § 510-38) may be permitted subject to all
the requirements applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in
Subsection A above, plus any additional requirements applicable to that
particular land use imposed as part of the conditional use permit
process established in § 510-157. Each application for, and instance of,
a conditional use shall be considered a unique situation and shall not be
construed as precedence for similar requests. Except for uses approved
under a general development plan and final development plan in a
planned development (see § 510-75 and Article XII), all uses requiring a
conditional use permit shall comply with the procedural requirements
of Article XVII.
C. Accessory land uses. Accessory land uses are allowed subject to all the
requirements and exemptions applicable to principal land uses
permitted by right as listed in Subsection A above. Accessory land uses
allowed only with a conditional use permit are subject to all the
§ 510-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-35
1:761
§ 510-36. Regulations applicable to all land uses.
All uses of land initiated within the jurisdiction of this chapter on, or
following, the effective date of this chapter shall comply with all of the
provisions of this chapter.
requirements and exemptions applicable to principal land uses
requiring a conditional use permit as listed in Subsection B above. See
§ 510-47 for additional regulations applicable to accessory land uses.
D. Temporary land uses. Temporary land uses (designated by the letter "T"
in the Table of Land Uses; see § 510-38) are allowed on a temporary
basis subject to permitting requirements in § 510-48 of this chapter.
A. Land use regulations and requirements. All uses of land shall comply
with all the regulations and requirements of this chapter pertaining to
the types of uses allowed within particular zoning districts. Such
regulations and requirements address both general and specific
regulations which land uses shall adhere to and which are directly
related to the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the Village of East Troy.
B. Density, intensity, and bulk regulations and requirements. All
development and use of land shall comply with all the applicable
requirements of Articles VII and VIII of this chapter pertaining to the
maximum permitted density, intensity, and bulk regulations.
C. Overlay zoning district requirements. All land use and/or development
of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of this
chapter pertaining to the protection of sensitive natural resources and
open space areas, protection of community character, and the
protection from airport operations as established under any applicable
overlay zoning districts in Article X of this chapter.
D. Exterior site and building design standards. All new, remodeled, and
expanded residential and nonresidential development shall comply with
all applicable building and site design guidelines as required in
§ 510-90 of this chapter.
E. Performance standards. All development of land shall comply with all
applicable requirements established in Article XIII of this chapter
pertaining to the provision of appropriate access, parking, loading,
storage, and lighting facilities. Such requirements address issues such
as maximum permitted access points, minimum required parking
spaces, the screening of storage areas, maximum permitted intensity of
lighting, and design requirements for exterior equipment such as
communication systems, as well as defining acceptable levels of
potential nuisances such as noise, vibration, odors, heat, glare, and
smoke.
F. Landscape and preservation regulations. All development of land shall
comply with all the regulations and requirements of Article XIV of this
§ 510-35 EAST TROY CODE § 510-36
1:762
chapter pertaining to the preservation of woodlands and mature trees
and provision of landscaping and bufferyards. Such requirements
address issues such as minimum required landscaping of developed
land and minimum required provision of bufferyards between adjoining
zoning districts, which are directly related to the effective bulk of a
structure.
G. Signage regulations. All land use and/or development of land shall
comply with all requirements of Article XV pertaining to the type and
amount of signage permitted on property. Such requirements address
issues such as the maximum area of permitted signage and the number
and types of permitted signage.
H. Number of buildings per lot. In the RH-35, SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-6, SR-7,
and MHR-6 Districts, only one principal building shall be permitted on
any one lot. In the TR-8, AR-9, MR-10, NB, HB, CB, BP, LI and GI
Districts, more than one principal building may be permitted on any one
lot upon granting of a conditional use permit for group development
(Subsection J) or large development regulations in compliance
(Subsection K).
I. Number of land uses per building. No more than one nonresidential
land use shall be permitted in any building unless a conditional use
permit for a group development (Subsection J) or large development
(Subsection K) is obtained. With the exception of accessory dwelling
units, home occupation, expanded home occupation, and in-family suite
land uses, no building containing a nonresidential land use shall contain
a residential land use.
J. Group development requirements. All uses and/or development of land
within a group development shall comply with all requirements of
§ 510-108.
K. Large development requirements. All uses and/or development of land
within a large development shall comply with all requirements of
§ 510-109.
L. Planned development requirements. All uses and/or development of
land within a planned development shall comply with all requirements
of Article XII. (See also § 510-75.)
M. Nonconforming lots, uses, structures, and site requirements. Land uses
not in conformance with the requirements of the applicable zoning
district shall be subject to the special limitations and exceptions as
established in Article IX. Land uses located on nonconforming lots or in
nonconforming structures shall comply with all the regulations and
requirements of Article IX. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
N. Site plan review required. All uses are subject to site plan review and
approval in accordance with § 510-160 of this chapter, except for the
following:
§ 510-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-36
1:763
§ 510-37. Detailed land use descriptions and regulations.
The land use categories employed by this chapter are defined in §§ 510-38
through 510-48. Land use categories which are not listed in this chapter
are not necessarily excluded from locating within any given zoning district.
Section 510-145 empowers the Zoning Administrator to make
interpretations on matters regarding specific land use proposals which are
not addressed by this chapter.
§ 510-38. Table of Land Uses. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
(1) Single-family and two-family residential uses on individual lots in
any zoning district.
(2) Agricultural land uses which are permitted by right in any
agriculture zoning district.
(3) Uses within a final development plan in a planned development in
accordance with the procedures of Article XII, provided that the
final development plan provides a similar level of detail and range
of plans as a typical site plan submittal required under this chapter.
O. Procedural regulations and requirements. All land use and/or
development of land shall comply with all requirements of Article XVII,
pertaining to the procedures necessary to secure review and approval
of land use and/or development. Such regulations and restrictions
address both procedural and technical requirements.
P. Compliance with building code requirements. When a permitted land
use is located in a building, such building shall comply with all
applicable building codes. [Added 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
Q. Dilapidated buildings. If the building inspector determines that a
building is dilapidated as set forth in § 210-8 of the Municipal Code,
such building cannot be used for a permitted land use until such time as
the property owner remedies the situation or the Plan Commission, in
consultation with the Building Inspector, approves a written
remediation plan with an acceptable timeline for compliance. [Added
3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
A. Generally. The Table of Land Uses is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
B. Group and large developments. Land use categories marked with an
asterisk in the table may be included in a group or large development.
Refer to §§ 510-108 and 510-109 regarding group and large
developments which are regulated as conditional uses.
C. Nonconforming uses. In the event a property has a nonconforming use,
any principal use that is permitted by right in the Table of Land Uses
shall be regulated as a conditional use.
§ 510-36 EAST TROY CODE § 510-39
1:764
§ 510-39. Residential land uses.
A. Single-family. A dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than
one family and having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any other
dwelling unit. This dwelling unit type consists of a fully detached singlefamily
residence which is located on an individual lot. Single-family land
uses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) The dwelling unit must be a site-built home, a modular home, or a
manufactured home.311
(2) The dwelling must be attached to a finished, permanent foundation,
such as a poured concrete slab or basement meeting Uniform
Dwelling Code (UDC) requirements.
(3) The minimum gross floor area shall be 1,000 square feet, exclusive
of an attached garage, carport, or open deck.312
(4) The dwelling unit roof shall have a pitch of at least three feet in rise
for every 12 feet in run, except by conditional use permit.
(5) This dwelling unit type may not be split into two or more dwelling
units, except for permitted accessory dwellings meeting the
requirements of this article.
(6) Minimum required parking: two spaces.
(7) This following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for single-family land
uses. Specific requirements for single-family uses can be found in
Article III under the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for
each residential zoning district.
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal
building or attached garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to
accessory building)
311. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
312. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-39
1:765
G Minimum pavement setbacks (lot line to pavement
excluding driveway entrances, etc.)
H Minimum principal building separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
B. Two-flat. This dwelling unit type consists of a single structure with two
separate residences each having a private individual access and no
shared internal access. Two-flats are attached units within a two-story
structure with one unit above the other. Two-flats shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:313
(1) Individual sanitary sewer and public water laterals and utility
meters are required for each dwelling unit.
(2) This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences.
(3) Minimum required parking: two spaces per dwelling unit.
(4) This following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for two-flat land uses.
Specific requirements for two-flats can be found in Article III under
the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for each residential
zoning district.
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal
building or attached garage)
313. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-39 EAST TROY CODE § 510-39
1:766
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to
accessory building)
G Minimum pavement setbacks (lot line to pavement
excluding driveway entrances, etc.)
H Minimum principal building separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
C. Twin house. This dwelling unit type consists of two separate residences,
each having a private individual access and no shared internal access.
Similar to duplexes, twin houses are attached side-by-side units, each
with a ground floor and roof. Unlike duplexes, twin houses are located
on shared, single lots. Twin houses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) A Uniform Dwelling Code required fire-rated wall must separate
the two dwelling units from the lowest level to flush against the
underside of the roof.
(2) Individual sanitary sewer and public water laterals and utility
meters are required for each dwelling unit.
(3) Covenants specifying respective obligations with regard to any
common structures, such as the shared wall, roof, and other
inseparable improvements, are required.314
(4) This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences.
314. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-39
1:767
(5) Minimum required parking: two spaces per dwelling unit.
(6) This following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for twin house land
uses. Specific requirements for twin houses can be found in Article
III under the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for each
residential zoning district.
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal
building or attached garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to
accessory building)
G Minimum pavement setbacks (lot line to pavement
excluding driveway entrances, etc.)
H Minimum principal building separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
D. Duplex. This dwelling unit type consists of two separate residences,
each having a private individual access and no shared internal access.
Duplexes are attached side-by-side units, each with a ground floor and
roof. Duplex dwelling units are located on a shared lot. Duplexes shall
adhere to the following listed regulations:315
315. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-39 EAST TROY CODE § 510-39
1:768
(1) A Uniform Dwelling Code required fire-rated wall must separate
the two dwelling units from the lowest level to flush against the
underside of the roof.
(2) Individual sanitary sewer and public water laterals and utility
meters are required for each dwelling unit.
(3) This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences.
(4) Minimum required parking: two spaces per dwelling unit.
(5) This following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for duplex land uses.
Specific requirements for duplexes can be found in Article III under
the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for each residential
zoning district.
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal
building or attached garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to
accessory building)
G Minimum pavement setbacks (lot line to pavement
excluding driveway entrances, etc.)
H Minimum principal building separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
§ 510-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-39
1:769
E. Townhouse. A townhouse consists of attached, two-story residences,
each having a private, individual access. This dwelling unit type may be
located on its own lot or within a group development. Each dwelling
unit shares at least one common wall with an adjacent dwelling unit.
Townhouses shall adhere to the following listed regulations: [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
(1) A Uniform Dwelling Code required fire-rated wall must separate
the two dwelling units from the lowest level to flush against the
underside of the roof.
(2) All townhouse units within a development shall be located a
minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the development.
(3) Covenants specifying respective obligations with regard to any
common structures, such as the shared wall, roof, and other
inseparable improvements, are required.
(4) This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences.
(5) Minimum required parking: two spaces per dwelling unit.
(6) This following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for townhouse land
uses. Specific requirements for townhouses can be found in Article
III under the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for each
residential zoning district.
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal
building or attached garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to
accessory building)
G Minimum pavement setbacks (lot line to pavement
excluding driveway entrances, etc.)
H Minimum principal building separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
§ 510-39 EAST TROY CODE § 510-39
1:770
F. Multiplex. This dwelling unit type consists of three or more individual
attached dwelling units which have private, individual exterior
entrances. Multiplexes shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:316
(1) A building code required fire-rated wall separating living areas
from the lowest level through the roof is required between each
dwelling unit.
(2) All multiplex units within a development shall be located a
minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the development.
(3) This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences.
(4) Minimum required parking: one space per dwelling unit.
(5) This following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for multiplex land uses.
Specific requirements for multiplexes can be found in Article III
under the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for each
residential zoning district.
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal
building or attached garage)
316. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-39
1:771
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to
accessory building)
G Minimum pavement setbacks (lot line to pavement
excluding driveway entrances, etc.)
H Minimum principal building separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
G. Apartment. This dwelling unit type consists of a single structure with
three or more individual attached dwelling units which take access
from a shared entrance or hallway. Apartments shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:317
(1) A building code required fire-rated wall separating living areas
from the lowest level to the underside of the roof is required
between each dwelling unit.
(2) As part of the conditional use requirement for group developments,
any development comprised of one or more buildings which contain
six or more dwelling units shall provide additional site design
features such as underground parking, architectural elements,
landscaping, and/or on-site recreational facilities.
317. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-39 EAST TROY CODE § 510-39
1:772
(3) This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences.
(4) Minimum required parking: one space per dwelling unit.
(5) This following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for apartment land uses.
Specific requirements for apartments can be found in Article III
under the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for each
residential zoning district.
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal
building or attached garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to
accessory building)
G Minimum pavement setbacks (lot line to pavement
excluding driveway entrances, etc.)
H Minimum principal building separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
H. Mobile home. A mobile home is a dwelling unit type consisting of a fully
detached single-family residence which has not received a federal
§ 510-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-39
1:773
manufactured housing certificate. Mobile homes shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) No mobile home may be split into two or more residences.
(2) Within 30 days of occupancy, the owner shall remove the axle and
install skirting.
(3) Minimum required parking: two spaces per mobile home.
(4) This following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for mobile home land
uses. Specific requirements for mobile homes can be found in
Article III under the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for
each residential zoning district.
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal building
or attached garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to
accessory building)
G Minimum pavement setbacks (lot line to pavement
excluding driveway entrances, etc.)
H Minimum principal building separation (multi-structure
developments on shared lots)
§ 510-39 EAST TROY CODE § 510-39
1:774
§ 510-40. Agricultural land uses.
I. Mobile home subdivision. This land use is a form of residential
development which is exclusively reserved for individually sold lots
containing mobile home units. Each lot and mobile home unit must
meet the requirements for mobile homes listed in Subsection H above.
Under this development option, approximately 10% of a development's
gross site area can contain natural resource areas which must be
protected (or other permanently protected green space areas), without
a reduction in maximum gross density. Mobile home subdivisions shall
adhere to the following listed regulations:318
(1) Development shall be located so as to blend with adjacent
residentially zoned areas to the greatest extent possible.
J. Mobile home park. This land use is a form of residential development
which is exclusively reserved for individually sold or rented air right
pads containing mobile home units. Each mobile home unit must meet
the requirements for mobile homes listed in Subsection H above. Under
this development option, approximately 10% of a development's gross
site area can contain natural resource areas which must be protected
(or other permanently protected green space areas), without a
reduction in maximum gross density. Mobile home parks shall adhere to
the following listed regulations:
(1) Development shall be located so as to blend with adjacent
residentially zoned areas to the greatest extent possible.
(2) No access shall be permitted to local residential streets.
K. Mixed-use dwelling unit. A mixed-use dwelling unit is a residential
dwelling within a mixed-use structure, which is defined as a single
building containing more than one type of land use. Mixed-use dwelling
units shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Covenants specifying respective obligations with regard to any
common structures, such as the shared wall, roof, and other
inseparable improvements, are required.319
(2) Minimum required parking: one space.
A. Cultivation. Cultivation includes all operations primarily oriented to the
on-site, outdoor raising of plants for commercial purposes. This land
use includes the raising of trees as a crop to be replaced with more
trees after harvesting, such as in nursery or Christmas tree operations.
The raising of plants for consumption by farm animals is considered
cultivation if said plants are consumed by animals which are located off
318. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
319. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-40
1:775
site. Cultivation land uses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) On buildable lots, cultivation areas shall not exceed 20% of the lot's
area.
(2) Cultivation areas shall not be located within the required front yard
or street yard of any buildable or developed lot.
(3) Reestablishment or new establishment of cultivation shall be
subject to the following additional requirements:
(a) Cultivation uses may only be reestablished within the Rural
Holding (RH-35) District.
(b) Cultivation uses, once discontinued for a period of 12 months,
shall not be reestablished or newly established except with the
granting of a conditional use permit and shall be limited to hay
crops.
(c) The applicant shall provide a site plan that clearly depicts the
area proposed for cultivation and all structures and land uses
on all adjoining properties. A current air photo may be used as
a base map for this site plan. All distances from the area to be
cultivated to all property lines and structures on adjoining
properties shall be measured and labeled on said site plan.
(d) The applicant shall provide a written plan of operation
describing the proposed general timing and frequency of any
and all farming activities involving mechanized equipment. The
plan of operation shall list the times of operation of
mechanized equipment, including earliest and latest times
during the day and likely months of mechanized activity. Said
plan of operation shall also list any and all chemicals to be
used.
(4) Minimum required parking: one space per employee on the largest
work shift. (Notes: Customer parking shall be provided based on
land use; agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the
surfacing requirements of § 510-93.)
B. Husbandry. Husbandry land uses include all operations primarily
oriented to the on-site raising and/or use of animals at an intensity of
less than one animal unit (defined in § 510-12) per acre. This includes
horses, cattle, sheep, goats, llamas (and related species), deer,
antelope, swine, fowl (including chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese,
peacocks, guinea hens, and game birds), aquatic species (including fish,
shellfish, crustaceans, echinoderms, plants, and algae), and any
animals typically hunted or trapped. This excludes animals typically
kept as pets and commonly available at commercial pet stores (e.g.,
domestic dogs and cats, fish, small rodents, reptiles, amphibians, and
tropical/exotic birds). Apiaries are also considered husbandry land
§ 510-40 EAST TROY CODE § 510-40
1:776
uses. Husbandry land uses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) Any building housing animals shall be located a minimum of 300
feet from any residentially zoned property and 100 feet from all
other lot lines.
(2) All outdoor animal containments (pastures, pens, and similar areas)
shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any residentially zoned
property.
(3) Husbandry uses, once discontinued for a period of 12 months, shall
not be reestablished or newly established except with the granting
of a conditional use permit and shall only be permitted in the Rural
Holding (RH-35) District.
(4) Minimum required parking: one space per employee on the largest
work shift. (Note: Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt
from the surfacing requirements of § 510-93.)
C. On-site agricultural retail. On-site agricultural retail includes land uses
solely associated with the sale of agricultural products grown
exclusively on the site. The sale of products grown or otherwise
produced off site shall not be permitted within on-site agricultural retail
operations; such activity constitutes indoor sales (see § 510-42D).
Packaging and equipment used to store, display, package, or carry
products for the convenience of the operation or its customers (such as
egg cartons, baskets, containers, and bags) shall be produced off site.
On-site agricultural retail land uses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) No structure or group of structures shall exceed 500 square feet in
gross floor area.
(2) No structure shall exceed 12 feet in height.
(3) All structures shall meet all required setbacks for nonresidential
land uses.
(4) Said structure and fencing shall be located a minimum of 300 feet
from any residentially zoned property.
(5) Signage for on-site agricultural retail shall comply with all
applicable requirements set forth in Article XV. [Amended
7-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
(6) Such land use shall be served by no more than one driveway. Said
driveway shall require a valid driveway permit (per Chapter 244,
Driveways and Culverts, of the Village Code).
(7) The sale of products which are grown or otherwise produced on
nonadjacent property under the same ownership, or on property
under different ownership, shall be prohibited.
§ 510-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-40
1:777
(8) On-site agricultural retail uses, once discontinued for a period of 12
months, shall not be reestablished or newly established except with
the granting of a conditional use permit and shall only be permitted
in the Rural Holding (RH-35) District.
(9) Minimum required parking: one parking space shall be required for
every 200 square feet of product display area. (Note: Agricultural
land uses are hereby made exempt from the surfacing
requirements of § 510-93.)
D. Selective cutting. Selective cutting includes any operation associated
with the one-time, continuing, or cumulative clearing, cutting,
harvesting, or other destruction of trees (including by fire) where the
extent of such activity is limited to an area (or combined areas) of less
than or equal to 30% of the woodlands on the property (or up to 100%
for developments approved prior to the effective date of this chapter).
Selective cutting shall be limited to areas located within development
pads which are designated on an approved site plan or on a recorded
plat or certified survey map. The destruction of trees in an area in
excess of this amount of the woodlands on the property shall be
considered clear-cutting (see Subsection E below). [Amended
10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
E. Clear-cutting. Clear-cutting includes the one-time, continuing, or
cumulative clearing, cutting, harvesting, or other destruction (including
by fire) of trees in an area (or combined areas) of more than 30% of the
woodlands on a property (or up to 100% for developments approved
prior to the effective date of this chapter). Clear-cutting shall adhere to
the following listed regulations:
(1) Clear-cutting is permitted only as a conditional use. Any owner of
property who intentionally clear-cuts any area of his or her
property or who intentionally solicits or causes another to
intentionally clear-cut any area of his or her property without first
having secured a conditional use permit for such activity shall be
subject to a forfeiture for such wrongful conduct and shall be
required to implement the mitigation standards required for the
destruction of woodlands solely at his/her expense, including costs
associated with site inspection to confirm the satisfaction of
mitigation requirements. Areas having been clear-cut
unintentionally as a result of fire shall not subject the owner of the
property to forfeiture for such nonapproved clear-cutting activity
but shall require the satisfaction of mitigation requirements at the
owner's expense, including costs associated with site inspection to
confirm the satisfaction of mitigation requirements.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that clear-cutting will improve the
level of environmental protection on the subject property.
(3) Areas of the subject property which are clear-cut beyond the
limitations established above shall be replanted per the
§ 510-40 EAST TROY CODE § 510-40
1:778
requirements of § 510-118. (Referenced section requires the
replanting of trees in other portions of the subject property,
thereby freeing the currently wooded area for development while
ensuring that the amount of required wooded area on the subject
property remains constant.)
(4) Clear-cutting shall not be permitted within a required bufferyard or
landscaped area or within an area designated as permanently
protected green space (see Article XIV).
F. Intensive agriculture. Intensive agricultural land uses include all
operations primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/or use of
animals at an intensity equal to or exceeding one animal unit (as
defined in § 510-12) per acre and/or agricultural activities requiring
large investments in structures. Examples of such land uses include
feed lots, hog farms, poultry operations, aquaculture, and certain other
operations meeting this criterion. Intensive agricultural land uses shall
adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Intensive agricultural uses shall not be located in or adjacent to an
existing or platted residential subdivision.
(2) Intensive agricultural uses shall be completely surrounded by a
bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 (see Article XIV).
(3) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and outdoor
animal containments (pastures, pens, and similar areas) shall be
located a minimum of 300 feet from all residentially zoned property
and 100 feet from all other lot lines.
(4) Intensive agricultural uses shall be located in an area which is
planned to remain commercially viable for agricultural land uses.
(5) Once discontinued for a period of 12 months, intensive agricultural
uses shall not be reestablished or newly established except with the
granting of a conditional use permit and shall only be permitted in
the Rural Holding (RH-35) District.
(6) Minimum required parking: one space per employee on the largest
work shift. (Notes: Customer parking shall be provided based on
land use; agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the
surfacing requirements of § 510-93.)
G. Agricultural service. Agricultural service land uses include all
operations pertaining to the sale, handling, transport, packaging,
storage, or disposal of agricultural equipment, products, by-products,
or materials primarily used or produced by agricultural operations.
Examples of such land uses include agricultural implement sales,
storage, or repair operations; feed and seed stores; agricultural
chemical dealers and/or storage facilities; animal feed storage facilities;
commercial dairies; food processing facilities; canning and other
packaging facilities; and agricultural waste disposal facilities (except
§ 510-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-40
1:779
commercial composting uses, see § 510-46B). Agricultural service land
uses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Agricultural service uses shall not be located in, or adjacent to, an
existing or platted residential subdivision.
(2) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and outdoor
animal containments (pastures, pens and similar areas) shall be
located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
(3) If within the Rural Holding (RH-35) District, agricultural service
uses shall be located in an area which is planned to remain
commercially viable for agricultural land uses.
(4) Once discontinued for a period of 12 months, agricultural service
uses shall not be reestablished or newly established except with the
granting of a conditional use permit and shall only be permitted in
the Rural Holding (RH-35) or General Industrial (GI) District.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(5) Minimum required parking: one space per employee on the largest
work shift. (Notes: Customer parking shall be provided based on
land use; agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the
surfacing requirements of § 510-93.)
H. Community garden. Community garden areas for cultivation and
related activities divided into one or more plots to be cultivated by more
than one operator or member. These areas may be on public or private
lands. Community gardens shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) All activity areas and structures shall comply with the required
setbacks and height regulations for principal structures within the
zoning district.
(2) A site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for
approval. Said site plan shall list the property owner, established
sponsoring organization and garden manager and demonstrate
consideration for and indicate locations of structures, materials
storage, equipment storage, access for deliveries and pickups,
water availability, shaded rest area, and availability of public
parking.
(3) The following structures are permitted in community gardens:
toolsheds, shade pavilions, barns, rest room facilities with
composting toilets, and planting preparation houses, benches, bike
racks, raised/accessible planting beds, compost bins, picnic tables,
seasonal farm stands, fences, garden art, rain barrel systems,
beehives, and children's play areas.
§ 510-40 EAST TROY CODE § 510-40
1:780
§ 510-41. Institutional land uses.
(4) Signage for a community garden shall comply with all applicable
requirements set forth in Article XV. [Amended 7-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-08]
(5) Fences shall comply with the regulations in § 510-97.
I. Market garden. An area for cultivation and related activities divided
into one or more plots to be cultivated by more than one operator or
member. These areas may be on public or private lands, with on-site
sales of crops grown on site permitted. Market gardens shall adhere to
the following listed regulations:
(1) All activity areas and structures shall comply with the required
setbacks and height regulations for principal structures within the
zoning district.
(2) A site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for
approval. Said site plan shall list the property owner, established
sponsoring organization, and garden manager and demonstrate
consideration for and indicate locations of structures, materials
storage, equipment storage, access for deliveries and pickups,
water availability, shaded rest area, and availability of public
parking.
(3) The following structures are permitted within market gardens:
toolsheds, shade pavilions, barns, rest room facilities with
composting toilets, and planting preparation houses, benches, bike
racks, raised/accessible planting beds, compost bins, picnic tables,
seasonal farm stands, fences, garden art, rain barrel systems,
beehives, and children's play areas.
(4) Seasonal farm stands shall be removed from the premises or stored
inside a building on the premises during that time of the year when
the garden is not open for public use.
(5) Signage for a market garden shall comply with all applicable
requirements set forth in Article XV. [Amended 7-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-08]
(6) Fences shall comply with the regulations in § 510-97.
A. Indoor institutional. Indoor institutional land uses include all indoor
public and not-for-profit recreational facilities (such as gyms, swimming
pools, libraries, museums, and community centers), schools, churches,
funeral homes, nonprofit clubs, nonprofit fraternal organizations,
convention centers, jails, prisons, and similar land uses. Indoor
institutional land uses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
[Amended 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04; 10-17-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-13]
§ 510-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-41
1:781
(1) Shall provide an off-street passenger loading area if the majority of
the users will be children (as in the case of a school, church, library,
or similar land use).
(2) All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
(3) Minimum required parking: generally, one space per three
expected patrons at maximum capacity; however, the following
specific requirements may apply:
(a) Church: one space per five seats at the maximum capacity.
(b) Community or recreation center: one space per 300 square
feet of gross floor area or one space per four patrons to the
maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus one space per
employee on the largest work shift.
(c) Funeral home: one space per three patron seats at the
maximum capacity, plus one space per employee on the largest
work shift.
(d) Library or museum: one space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area or one space per four seats to the maximum capacity,
whichever is greater, plus one space per employee on the
largest work shift.
(e) Elementary and junior high: one space per two employees.
(f) Senior high: one space per two employees, plus 30% of
maximum capacity.
(g) College or trade school: one space per staff member on the
largest work shift, plus one space per two students of the
largest class attendance period.
B. Outdoor open space institutional. Outdoor open space institutional land
uses include cemeteries, privately held permanently protected green
space areas, open grassed areas not associated with any particular
active recreational land use, and similar land uses. Outdoor
institutional land uses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
(2) Shall comply with § 510-157, standards and procedures applicable
to all conditional uses.
(3) Minimum required parking. No parking is required for outdoor
open space institutional land uses; however, for uses accessory to
cemeteries (e.g., mausoleums), parking may be required per the
recommendation of the Plan Commission or Zoning Administrator.
§ 510-41 EAST TROY CODE § 510-41
1:782
C. Passive outdoor public recreation. Passive outdoor public recreation
land uses include all recreational land uses located on public property
which involve passive recreational activities. Such land uses include
arboretums, natural areas, wildlife areas, hiking trails, bike trails,
cross-country ski trails, horse trails, picnic areas, picnic shelters,
botanical gardens, fishing areas, and similar land uses. Passive outdoor
public recreation land uses shall meet the following minimum parking
requirement: one space per four expected patrons at maximum capacity
for any use requiring over five spaces.
D. Active outdoor public recreation. Active outdoor public recreation land
uses include all recreational land uses located on public property
(including school district property) which involve active recreational
activities. Such land uses include play courts (such as tennis courts and
basketball courts), play fields (such as ball diamonds, football fields,
and soccer fields), neighborhood parks, tot lots, outdoor swimming
pools, swimming beach areas, fitness courses, public golf courses, and
similar land uses. Active outdoor public recreation land uses shall
adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Facilities using recreational facility night lighting and adjoining a
residentially zoned property shall install and continually maintain a
bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see Article XIV). Said
bufferyard shall be located at the property line adjacent to said
residentially zoned property.
(2) All structures and active recreational areas shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property.
(3) Facilities which serve a regional or community-wide function shall
provide an off-street passenger loading area if the majority of the
users will be children.
(4) Minimum required parking: generally, one space per four expected
patrons at maximum capacity for any use requiring over five
spaces; however, the following specific requirements may apply:
(a) Golf course: 36 spaces per nine holes, plus one space per
employee on the largest work shift, plus 50% of spaces
otherwise required for any accessory uses (e.g., bar or
restaurant).
(b) Swimming pool: one space per 30% of capacity in persons.
(c) Tennis court: two spaces per court.
E. Intensive outdoor public recreation. Intensive outdoor public recreation
land uses include recreational land uses located on public property that
generate regional traffic and noise beyond property lines and require
intensive lighting. Such land uses include racetracks, stadiums, fair
grounds, ski hills, marinas, and similar land uses. Intensive outdoor
§ 510-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-41
1:783
public recreation land uses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) Facilities using night lighting and adjoining a residentially zoned
property shall install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a
minimum opacity of 1.00 (see Article XIV). Said bufferyard shall be
located at the property line adjacent to said residentially zoned
property.
(2) Facilities which serve a regional or community-wide function shall
provide an off-street passenger loading area if the majority of the
users will be children.
(3) A minimum setback of 100 feet shall be required to any activity
area other than parking.
(4) Minimum required parking: one space per four expected patrons at
maximum capacity.
F. Public service and utilities. Public service and utilities land uses include
all Village, county, state, and federally owned facilities (except those
otherwise treated in this section), emergency service facilities such as
fire departments and rescue operations, wastewater treatment plants,
public and/or private utility substations, water towers, utility and public
service related distribution facilities, and similar land uses. Public
service and utility land uses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) All structures shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
(2) Outdoor storage areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from
any residentially zoned property.
(3) The exterior of all buildings shall be compatible with the exteriors
of surrounding buildings.
(4) All outdoor storage areas adjoining a residentially zoned property
shall install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 (see Article XIV). Said bufferyard shall be located at
the property line adjacent to said residentially zoned property.
(5) Minimum required parking: one space per employee on the largest
work shift, plus one space per company vehicle normally stored or
parked on the premises.
G. Institutional residential (one to twelve residents). This land use is a
form of residential development designed to accommodate institutional
residential land uses with 12 or fewer residents (of all ages), such as
senior housing, retirement homes, assisted living facilities, nursing
homes, hospices, group homes, convents, monasteries, dormitories,
nursing homes, convalescent homes, limited care facilities,
rehabilitation centers, and similar land uses not considered to be
§ 510-41 EAST TROY CODE § 510-41
1:784
community living arrangements (see separate listings) under the
provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats. Institutional residential uses with 12
or fewer residents shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) No individual lots are required, although the development shall
contain a minimum of 800 square feet of gross site area for each
occupant of the development.
(2) Project shall provide an off-street passenger loading area at a
minimum of one location within the development.
(3) A minimum of 30% of the development's gross site area shall be
held as permanently protected green space.
(4) Minimum required parking. The following specific parking
requirements may apply:
(a) Senior housing or retirement housing: 1/2 space per dwelling
unit.
(b) Assisted living facility or limited care facility: one space per
two dwelling units.
(c) Monastery, convent, or dormitory: one space per six adult
residents, plus one space per employee on the largest work
shift, plus one space per five chapel seats if the public may
attend.
(d) Nursing home or hospice: one space per four patient beds, plus
one space per two employees on the largest work shift, plus
one space per doctor.
(e) Other uses not listed: Parking requirements established by
Plan Commission as part of the site plan review process.
H. Institutional residential (13 or more residents). This land use is a form
of residential development designed to accommodate institutional
residential land uses with 13 or more residents (of all ages), such as
senior housing, retirement homes, assisted living facilities, nursing
homes, hospices, group homes, convents, monasteries, dormitories,
nursing homes, convalescent homes, limited care facilities,
rehabilitation centers, and similar land uses not considered to be
community living arrangements (see separate listings) under the
provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats. Institutional residential land with 13
or more residents shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
[Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-09320]
(1) No individual lots are required, although the development shall
contain a minimum of 800 square feet of gross site area for each
occupant of the development.
320. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections H
through J as Subsections I through K, respectively.
§ 510-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-41
1:785
(2) Project shall provide an off-street passenger loading area at a
minimum of one location within the development.
(3) A minimum of 30% of the development's gross site area shall be
held as permanently protected green space.
(4) Minimum required parking. The following specific parking
requirements may apply:
(a) Senior housing or retirement housing: 1/2 space per dwelling
unit.
(b) Assisted living facility or limited care facility: one space per
two dwelling units.
(c) Monastery, convent, or dormitory: one space per six adult
residents, plus one space per employee on the largest work
shift, plus one space per five chapel seats if the public may
attend.
(d) Nursing home or hospice: one space per four patient beds, plus
one space per two employees on the largest work shift, plus
one space per doctor.
(e) Other uses not listed: Parking requirements established by
Plan Commission as part of the site plan review process.
I. Community living arrangement (one to eight residents). Community
living arrangement land uses include all facilities provided for in
§ 46.03(22), Wis. Stats., including child welfare agencies, group homes
for children, foster homes, treatment foster homes, adult family homes,
and community-based residential facilities. Community living
arrangements do not include group day-care centers (see § 510-42M),
nursing homes (an institutional residential land use), hospitals, prisons,
or jails (all indoor institutional land uses). Community living
arrangement facilities are regulated depending upon their capacity as
provided for in § 62.23(7)(i), Wis. Stats., provided that any such
regulations do not violate federal or state housing or antidiscrimination
laws. Community living arrangements housing up to eight residents
shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) No community living arrangement shall be established within
2,500 feet of any other such facility regardless of its capacity unless
the Plan Commission and Village Board agree to a reduction in
spacing.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the total capacity of all
community living arrangements (of all capacities) in the Village
shall not exceed 1% of the Village's population (unless specifically
authorized by the Village Board following a public hearing by the
Plan Commission).
§ 510-41 EAST TROY CODE § 510-41
1:786
§ 510-42. Commercial land uses.
(3) Foster homes housing four or fewer children and licensed under
§ 48.62, Wis. Stats., shall not be subject to Subsection I(1) above
and shall not be subject to, or count toward, the total arrived at in
Subsection I(2) above.
(4) Minimum required parking: three spaces.
J. Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents). See description
under Subsection I above. Community living arrangements housing
nine to 15 residents shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) No community living arrangement shall be established within
2,500 feet of any other such facility, regardless of capacity, unless
the Plan Commission and Village Board agree to a reduction in
spacing.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the total capacity of all
community living arrangements (of all capacities) in the Village
shall not exceed 1% of the Village's population (unless specifically
authorized by the Village Board following a public hearing by the
Plan Commission).
(3) Minimum required parking: four spaces.
K. Community living arrangement (16 plus residents). See description
under Subsection I above. Community living arrangements housing 16
or more residents shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) No community living arrangement shall be established within
2,500 feet of any other such facility, regardless of capacity, unless
the Plan Commission and Village Board agree to a reduction in
spacing.
(2) The total capacity of all community living arrangements (of all
capacities) in the Village shall not exceed 1% of the Village's
population (unless specifically authorized by the Village Board
following a public hearing by the Plan Commission).
(3) Minimum required parking: one space per every three residents.
A. Office. Office land uses include exclusively indoor land uses whose
primary functions are the handling of information or administrative
services. Office uses do not typically provide services directly to
customers on a walk-in or on-appointment basis. Office land uses shall
meet the following minimum parking requirement: one space per 300
square feet of gross floor area.
B. Personal or professional service. Personal service and professional
service land uses include all exclusively indoor land uses whose primary
function is the provision of services directly to an individual on a walk-in
or on-appointment basis. Examples of such uses include professional
§ 510-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-42
1:787
services, insurance or financial services, realty offices, hospitals,
medical offices and clinics, veterinary clinics, barbershops, beauty
shops, and fitness studios and instructional studios (e.g., dance, art,
and martial arts) where the occupancy load is 25 people or fewer.
Personal or professional service land uses shall meet the following
minimum parking requirements: [Amended 7-21-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-06]
(1) Hospitals: one space per two patient beds, plus one space per staff
doctor and one space per two employees on the largest work shift;
(2) Offices: one space per 300 square feet; and
(3) Other uses: one space for every three persons at maximum capacity
of the establishment.
C. Artisan studio. A building or portion thereof used for the preparation,
display and sale of individually crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture,
sculpture, pottery, leathercraft, hand-woven articles, and related items,
as either a principal use or accessory use. An artisan studio is used by
no more than three artists or artisans. An artisan production shop is an
artisan studio used by more than three artists or artisans. Artisan land
uses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60
along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property
(see Article XIV).
(2) Minimum required parking: one space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area plus adequate on-site parking is required for all customer
and employee vehicles.
D. Indoor sales or service. Indoor sales or service land uses include land
uses which conduct sales or display merchandise or equipment and
provide nonpersonal or nonprofessional services entirely within an
enclosed building. This includes self-services facilities such as coinoperated
laundromats. Indoor sales or service land uses shall meet the
following minimum parking requirement: one space per 300 square feet
of gross floor area.
E. Outdoor display. Outdoor display land uses include land uses which
conduct sales and display merchandise or equipment outside of an
enclosed building. Examples include outdoor garden centers, outdoor
recreation equipment sales, monument sales, and manufactured and
mobile housing sales. Outdoor display uses do not include the storage
or display of inoperable equipment or other materials typically
associated with a junkyard or salvage yard (see § 510-46D below). If a
land use displays for sale or rent only a limited amount of product
outside of an enclosed building, such use may instead be considered
incidental indoor sales under § 510-47Q. Outdoor display land uses
shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
§ 510-42 EAST TROY CODE § 510-42
1:788
(1) The outdoor sales area shall be calculated as the area which would
be enclosed by a required physical separation installed and
continually maintained in the most efficient manner which
completely encloses all materials displayed outdoors.
(2) The display of items shall not be permitted in required setback
areas, landscape areas, bufferyards, or permanently protected
green space areas.
(3) Inoperable vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored or
displayed in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be displayed for
this land use.
(4) In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by Subsection E(9). If the number of
provided parking stalls on the property is already less than the
requirement, such display area shall not further reduce the number
of parking stalls already present.
(5) Display areas shall be separated from any circulation area by a
minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly delimited by a
physical separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of
planters or by a clearly marked paved area.
(6) Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or
off-site traffic visibility, including potential vehicle/vehicle and
vehicle/pedestrian conflicts.
(7) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all borders of the display area abutting
residentially zoned property, except per Subsection E(5) above (see
Article XIV).
(8) Outdoor display shall be permitted during the entire calendar year;
however, if goods are removed from the display area all support
fixtures used to display the goods shall be removed within 10
calendar days of the goods' removal.
(9) Minimum required parking: one space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
F. Indoor commercial entertainment. Indoor commercial entertainment
land uses include all land uses which provide entertainment services
entirely within an enclosed building. Such activities often have
operating hours that extend significantly later than most other
commercial land uses. Examples of such land uses include restaurants,
taverns, theaters, bowling alleys, arcades, roller rinks, pool halls, and
fitness studios and instructional studios (e.g., dance, art, and martial
arts) where the occupancy load is more than 25 people. Indoor
§ 510-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-42
1:789
commercial entertainment land uses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations: [Amended 7-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-06]
(1) If located on the same side of the building as abutting residentially
zoned property, no customer entrance of any kind shall be
permitted within 150 feet, or as far as possible, of a residentially
zoned property.
(2) Facility shall provide bufferyard with minimum opacity of 0.60
along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned
property (see Article XIV).
(3) Minimum required parking: one space per every three patron seats
or lockers (whichever is greater) or one space per three persons at
the maximum capacity of the establishment (whichever is greater).
G. Outdoor commercial entertainment. Outdoor commercial
entertainment land uses include all land uses which provide
entertainment services partially or wholly outside of an enclosed
building. Such activities often have the potential to be associated with
nuisances related to noise, lighting, dust, trash, and late operating
hours. Examples of such land uses include outdoor commercial
swimming pools, driving ranges, miniature golf facilities, amusement
parks, drive-in theaters, ski hills, marinas, and water parks. Outdoor
commercial entertainment land uses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) Activity areas shall not be located closer than 300 feet to a
residentially zoned property.
(2) Facility shall provide bufferyard with minimum opacity of 0.80
along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned
property (see Article XIV).
(3) Activity areas (including drive-in movie screens) shall not be visible
from any residentially zoned property.
(4) Outdoor commercial entertainment activities proposed in a public
right-of-way or on Village-owned property must receive Village
Board approval for such use, in addition to any required conditional
use permit.
(5) Minimum required parking: one space for every three persons at
the maximum capacity of the establishment.
H. In-vehicle sales or service. In-vehicle sales and service land uses
include all land uses which perform sales and/or services to persons in
vehicles or to vehicles which may or may not be occupied at the time of
such activity (except vehicle repair and maintenance services). Such
land uses often have traffic volumes which exhibit their highest levels
concurrent with peak traffic flows on adjacent roads. Examples of such
land uses include drive-in, drive-up, and drive-through facilities,
§ 510-42 EAST TROY CODE § 510-42
1:790
vehicular fuel stations, and all forms of car washes. If performed in
conjunction with a principal land use (e.g., a convenience store,
restaurant, or bank), in-vehicle sales and service land uses shall be
considered an accessory use.
(1) Clearly marked pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided for each
walk-in customer access to the facility adjacent to the drivethrough
lane(s).
(2) The drive-through facility shall be designed so as not to impede or
impair vehicular and pedestrian traffic movement or exacerbate
the potential for pedestrian/vehicular conflicts.
(3) In no instance shall a drive-through facility be permitted to operate
which endangers the public safety, even if such land use has been
permitted under the provisions of this section.
(4) The setback of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall be a
minimum of 10 feet from all street right-of-way lines, a minimum of
20 feet from all residentially zoned property lines, and shall be a
minimum of five feet from all other property lines. The total height
of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall not exceed 20
feet per the measurement of roof height.
(5) All vehicular areas of the facility shall provide a surface paved with
concrete or bituminous material which is designed to meet the
requirements of a minimum four-ton axle load.
(6) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60
along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property
(see Article XIV).
(7) Interior curbs shall be used to separate driving areas from exterior
fixtures such as fuel pumps, vacuums, menu boards, canopy
supports, and landscaped islands. Said curbs shall be a minimum of
six inches high and shall be of a nonmountable design. No curb
protecting an exterior fixture shall be located closer than 25 feet to
all property lines.
(8) Any text or logo larger than one square foot per side on an
overhead canopy or other accessory structure shall be considered a
freestanding sign subject to regulation under Article XV of this
chapter.
(9) Each drive-up lane shall have a minimum stacking length of 100
feet behind the pass-through window and 40 feet beyond the passthrough
window. This requirement may be adjusted by the Plan
Commission through the conditional use process.
(10) Minimum required parking. Refer to the parking requirements of
the other land use activities on the site, such as indoor sales and
§ 510-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-42
1:791
service land uses for a gas station/convenience store or office land
uses for a bank.
I. Bed-and-breakfast establishment. Bed-and-breakfast establishments
are exclusively indoor lodging facilities which provide meals only to
paying lodgers. Such land uses may provide indoor recreational
facilities for the exclusive use of their customers. Bed-and-breakfast
establishments shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
[Amended 7-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08; 10-17-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-13]
(1) If alcohol beverages of any kind are to be served on the premises,
the owner of the establishment shall first obtain the appropriate
license in accordance with Village of East Troy and state
regulations.
(2) Each such establishment shall be inspected annually by the
Building Inspector to verify that the land use continues to meet all
applicable regulations. A fee for such annual inspection shall be
imposed by the Village.
(3) Signage for a bed-and-breakfast shall comply with all applicable
requirements set forth in Article XV.
(4) No premises shall be utilized for a bed-and-breakfast operation
unless there are at least two exits to the outdoors from such
premises. Rooms utilized for sleeping shall have a minimum size of
100 square feet for every two occupants with an additional 30
square feet for each additional occupant to a maximum of four
occupants per room. Each sleeping room used for the bed-andbreakfast
operation shall have a separate operational smoke
detector alarm. One lavatory and bathing facility shall be required
for every 10 occupants, in addition to the owner/occupant's
personal facilities.
(5) The dwelling unit in which the bed-and-breakfast takes place shall
be the principal residence of the operator/owner and said operator/
owner shall live on the premises when the bed-and-breakfast
operation is active.
(6) Breakfast shall be the only meal served to overnight guests.
(7) Each operator shall keep a list of names of all persons staying at
the bed-and-breakfast operation. This list shall be kept on file for a
period of one year. Such list shall be available for inspection by
Village officials at any time.
(8) The maximum stay for any occupants of bed-and-breakfast
operations shall be 14 consecutive days.
(9) Minimum required parking: one space per each bedroom in
addition to requirements for principal residents.
§ 510-42 EAST TROY CODE § 510-42
1:792
(10) Additional requirements.
(a) Application requirements. Applicants for a license to operate a
bed-and-breakfast shall submit a floor plan of the single-family
dwelling unit illustrating that the proposed operation will
comply with the requirements of this chapter and other
applicable Village codes and ordinances.
(b) Consideration of issuance. After the application has been filed
with the Village Clerk, the Plan Commission shall review and
provide a recommendation to the Village Board for a
conditional use permit. The Plan Commission shall hold a
public hearing and determine whether any further license shall
be issued based upon the public convenience and necessity of
the people in the Village. In the Village's determination of the
number of bed-and-breakfast operations required to provide
for such public convenience and necessity, the Village Board
shall consider the effect upon residential neighborhoods,
conditions of existing holders of licenses, and the necessity of
issuance of additional licenses for public service. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(c) Public nuisance violations. Bed-and-breakfast operations shall
not be permitted whenever the operation endangers, offends,
or interferes with the safety or rights of others so as to
constitute a nuisance.
(d) Suspension, revocation, and renewal. Any license issued under
the provisions of this subsection may be revoked by the Village
Board for good cause shown after investigation and
opportunity to the holder of such license to be heard in
opposition thereto; in such investigation the compliance or
noncompliance with the state law and local ordinances, the
conduct of the licensee in regard to the public, and other
consideration shall be weighed in determination of such issue.
J. Commercial indoor lodging. Commercial indoor lodging facilities
include land uses which provide overnight housing in individual rooms
or suites of rooms, each room or suite having a private bathroom. Such
land uses may provide in-room or in-suite kitchens and may also provide
indoor recreational facilities for the exclusive use of their customers.
Restaurants, lounges, fitness centers, and other on-site facilities
available to nonlodgers are considered accessory uses and therefore
require review as a separate land use. Commercial indoor lodging land
uses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) If located on the same side of a building as abutting residentially
zoned property, no customer entrance of any kind shall be
permitted within 100 feet of a residentially zoned property.
§ 510-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-42
1:793
(2) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XIV).
(3) Within the Business Park (BP) District, each and every room must
take primary access via an individual interior door and may not be
accessed via an external balcony, porch or deck, except for
emergency purposes.
(4) Minimum required parking: one space per bedroom, plus one space
for each employee on the largest work shift.
K. Boardinghouse. Boardinghouses include any residential use renting
rooms which do not contain private bathroom facilities. Boardinghouses
shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XIV).
(2) Boardinghouses may only be located in an area of transition from
residential land uses to nonresidential land uses, as determined by
the Zoning Administrator.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any persons to operate a boardinghouse as
defined and as permitted in this chapter without first having
obtained a conditional use permit.
(4) Minimum required parking: one space per each bedroom for rent,
in addition to requirements for principal residents.
L. Campground. Campgrounds include any facilities designed for
overnight accommodation of persons in tents, travel trailers, or other
mobile or portable shelters or recreational vehicles. Campgrounds shall
adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Campgrounds shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.70 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XIV).
(2) Minimum required parking: 1 1/2 spaces per campsite.
M. Group day-care center (nine plus children). Group day-care centers are
land uses in which qualified persons provide child care services for nine
or more children. Examples of such land uses include day-care centers
and nursery schools. Such land uses may be operated on a for-profit or
a not-for-profit basis. Such land uses may be operated in conjunction
with another principal land use on the same environs, such as a church,
school, business, or civic organization. In such instances, group daycare
centers are not considered as accessory uses and therefore
require review as a separate land use. Group day-care centers shall
adhere to the following listed regulations:
§ 510-42 EAST TROY CODE § 510-42
1:794
(1) Group day-care centers shall not be located within a residential
building.
(2) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.50 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XIV).
(3) The property owner's permission and signature is required as part
of the conditional use permit application.
(4) Minimum required parking: one space per five students, plus one
space for each employee on the largest work shift.
N. Commercial animal boarding. Commercial animal boarding facilities
include land uses which provide short-term and/or long-term boarding
for animals, commercial kennels and commercial stables. Exercise
yards, fields, training areas, and trails associated with such land uses
are considered accessory thereto and do not require separate
consideration. Commercial animal boarding facilities shall adhere to
the following listed regulations:
(1) Each animal shall be provided with an indoor containment area.
(2) The minimum permitted size of a horse or similar animal stall shall
be 100 square feet.
(3) Special events such as shows, exhibitions, and contests shall only
be permitted when a temporary use permit has been secured.
(4) Minimum required parking: one space per every 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area.
O. Indoor maintenance service. Indoor maintenance services include all
land uses which perform maintenance services, including repair, and
contain all operations (except loading) entirely within an enclosed
building. Because of outdoor vehicle storage requirements, vehicle
repair and maintenance is considered an outdoor maintenance service
land use (see Subsection P). Indoor maintenance services land uses
shall meet the following minimum parking requirement: one space per
300 square feet of gross floor area.
P. Outdoor maintenance service. Outdoor maintenance services include
all land uses which perform maintenance services, including repair, and
have all or any portion of their operations located outside of an
enclosed building. Outdoor maintenance services shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) All outdoor activity areas shall be completely enclosed by a
minimum six-foot-high fence. Such enclosure shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property and shall
be screened from such property by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 (see Article XIV).
§ 510-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-42
1:795
(2) Outdoor storage of abandoned or inoperable vehicles is prohibited.
(3) Minimum required parking: one space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area or one space per each employee on the largest shift,
whichever is less.
Q. Vehicle sales. Vehicle sales include the sale and display of vehicles for
sale or rent outside of an enclosed building. Such land uses also include
a repair shop associated with the vehicle display lot and sales building,
provided the repair portion is clearly incidental to the sales operation
as determined by the Plan Commission. Such land uses do not include
the storage or display of inoperative vehicles or equipment or other
materials typically associated with a salvage yard or junkyard (see
§ 510-46D). Vehicles sales land uses shall adhere to the following
regulations: [Amended 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04;
10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
(1) The outdoor display and sales area shall be calculated as the area
that would be enclosed by a required physical separation installed
and continually maintained in the most efficient manner which
completely encloses all vehicles displayed outdoors.
(2) The display of vehicles shall not be permitted within required
setback areas for the principal structure.
(3) The display of vehicles shall not be permitted in permanently
protected green space areas, required landscaped areas, or
required bufferyards.
(4) In no event shall the display of vehicles reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of Subsection Q(10). If
the number of provided parking stalls on the property is already
less than the requirement, such display area shall not further
reduce the number of parking stalls already present.
(5) Display areas shall be separated from any circulation area by a
minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly delimited by a
physical separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of
planters or by a clearly marked paved area.
(6) Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or
off-site traffic visibility, including potential vehicle/vehicle and
vehicle/pedestrian conflicts.
(7) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all borders of the display area abutting
residentially zoned property, except per Subsection Q(5) above (see
Article XIV).
§ 510-42 EAST TROY CODE § 510-42
1:796
(8) Vehicle sales shall be permitted during the entire calendar year;
however, if vehicles are removed from the display area, all support
fixtures used to display the vehicles shall be removed within 10
calendar days of the vehicles' removal.
(9) Inoperable vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored or
displayed in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be displayed for
this land use.
(10) Minimum required parking: one space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
R. Sexually oriented land uses. Sexually oriented land uses include any
facility oriented to the display of sexually oriented materials, such as
videos, movies, photos, books, or magazines, or actual persons
displaying and/or touching sexually specified areas, including the
provision of body piercing or tattooing services to sexually specified
areas. For the purpose of this chapter, "sexually specified areas"
includes any of the following: genitals, anal area, female areola or
nipple. "Sexually oriented material" includes any media which displays
sexually specified area(s). Establishments which sell or rent sexually
oriented materials shall not be considered sexually oriented if the area
devoted to sale of said materials is less than 5% of the sales area
devoted to nonsexually-oriented materials and if such materials are
placed in generic covers or otherwise obscured areas. Sexually oriented
land uses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Facilities shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any
commercially zoned property or residentially zoned property and
shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any school, church,
or outdoor recreational facility.
(2) Exterior building appearance and signage shall be designed to
ensure that the use does not detract from the ability of businesses
in the vicinity to attract customers nor affect the marketability of
properties in the vicinity for sale at their assessed values.
(3) Minimum required parking: one space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area or one space per person at the maximum capacity of the
establishment, whichever is greater.
S. Truck-trailer rental establishment. A place where trucks, utility trailers,
and related items are kept and rented out, generally to those moving
their personal and household belongings. Servicing of vehicles and
trailers stored on site is allowed provided such use is clearly incidental
as may be established by the Plan Commission. Truck-trailer rental
establishments shall adhere to the following listed regulations: [Added
3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
(1) One parking space shall be provided for each employee and one
space for each seven trucks and trailers stored on site.
§ 510-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-42
1:797
§ 510-43. Industrial land uses.
(2) When located in the Highway Business Zoning District, trucks and
trailers shall not be stored within the front yard setback, the side
yard setback, or the rear yard setback.
(3) When located in the Highway Business Zoning District, no more
than a total of 15 trucks and trailers may be stored on site.
(4) When located in the Highway Business Zoning District, trucks and
trailers are limited to those that (1) have no more than two axles
per unit, (2) have a maximum box length of 17 feet, (3) have a
maximum height of 12 feet in height, and (4) do not require a
commercial driver's license to operate.
(5) The location on the property where trucks and trailers may be
stored shall be clearly indicated on an approved site plan.
T. Vehicle towing establishment. A place where tow trucks may be kept
along with towed vehicles. Vehicle towing establishments shall provide
one parking space for each tow truck kept on the premises. [Added
3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
A. Light industrial. Light industrial land uses are industrial facilities at
which all operations (with the exception of loading operations) are
conducted entirely within an enclosed building; not potentially
associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and
radiation which are detectable at the property line; do not pose a
significant safety hazard (such as danger of explosion); and comply with
the performance standards listed in Article XIII. Light industrial land
uses may conduct indoor sales as an accessory use, provided that the
requirements of § 510-47Q are complied with. Light industrial land uses
shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) All activities, except loading and unloading, shall be conducted
entirely within the confines of a building.
(2) Minimum required parking: one space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
B. Heavy industrial. Heavy industrial land uses are land uses that may be
wholly or partially located outside of an enclosed building, may have the
potential to create certain nuisances which are detectable at the
property line, and may involve materials which pose a significant safety
hazard. Examples of heavy industrial land uses include meat product
producers; paper, pulp or paperboard producers; chemical and allied
product producers (except drug producers), including poison or
fertilizer producers; petroleum and coal product producers; asphalt,
concrete or cement producers; tanneries; stone, clay, or glass product
producers; primary metal producers; heavy machinery producers;
electrical distribution equipment producers; electrical industrial
apparatus producers; transportation vehicle producers; commercial
§ 510-42 EAST TROY CODE § 510-43
1:798
sanitary sewage treatment plants; railroad switching yards; recycling
facilities not involving the on-site storage of salvage materials; and
large-scale alcohol beverage producers exceeding the production limits
in Ch. 125, Wis. Stats. Heavy industrial land uses shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property other than
permanent open space abutting properties which are not zoned
General Industrial (see Article XIV).321
(2) All outdoor activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet
from residentially zoned property.
(3) No equipment or materials shall be stacked or otherwise stored so
as to be visible over bufferyard screening elements.
(4) In no instance shall a heavy industrial land use exceed the
performance standards listed in Article XIII.
(5) Minimum required parking: one space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
C. Production greenhouse. Any business whose principal activity is the
growing and wholesaling of plants or plant by-products (not including
fruits and vegetables) that are either grown or stored within an
enclosed building or structure constructed chiefly of glass or glass-like
material, cloth, or other transparent material. Such uses also often
involve the seasonal display of plants and related products outdoors.
Production greenhouses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) The outdoor display of items shall not be permitted in required
setbacks, bufferyards, or landscaped areas.
(2) In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of Subsection C(6). If the
number of provided parking stalls on the property is already less
than the requirement, such display area shall not further reduce
the number of parking stalls already present.
(3) Storage and/or outdoor display areas shall be separated from any
vehicular parking or circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This
separation shall be clearly distinguished by a physical feature or
barrier such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of planters or by a
clearly marked paved area.
(4) Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or
321. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-43
1:799
off-site traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and traffic/
pedestrian conflicts.
(5) The facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all borders of outdoor display areas abutting
residentially zoned property (see Article XIV).
(6) Minimum required parking: one space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
D. Indoor food production. Any business whose principal activity is the
production and wholesaling of plants or plant by-products (including
fruits and vegetables) that are grown on site within an enclosed
building or structure constructed chiefly of glass or glass-like material,
cloth, or other transparent material. Such uses also often involve the
seasonal display of plants and related products outdoors. Indoor food
production also includes the farming of aquatic organisms (plants and
animals) under controlled conditions and which is located entirely
within an enclosed building and utilizes recirculating (closed) system
technology. Such operations may also incorporate aquaponics, which is
the symbiotic cultivation of plants and aquatic organisms in a
recirculating system. Indoor food production land uses shall adhere to
the following listed regulations:
(1) All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any
permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls, and/or
fencing. Such walls and fencing shall be a minimum of eight feet in
height and shall be designed to completely screen all stored
materials or products from view of nonindustrialized areas at an
elevation of five feet above the grade of all adjacent properties and
rights-of-way. Said walls or fencing shall be screened from
residentially zoned property by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.80 (see Article XIV).
(2) Storage and/or outdoor display areas shall be separated from any
vehicular parking or circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This
separation shall be clearly distinguished by a physical feature or
barrier such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of planters or by a
clearly marked paved area.
(3) All outdoor storage areas shall be located no closer to a
residentially zoned property than the required minimum setback
for buildings on the subject property.
(4) The storage of items shall not be permitted in any landscaping
areas, bufferyard areas, or permanently protected green space
areas.
(5) In no event shall the storage of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of Subsection D(14). If
the number of provided parking stalls on the property is already
§ 510-43 EAST TROY CODE § 510-43
1:800
less than the requirement, such storage area shall not further
reduce the number of parking stalls already present.
(6) Materials being stored shall not interfere in any manner with either
on-site or off-site traffic visibility, including potential vehicle/vehicle
and vehicle/pedestrian conflicts.
(7) Indoor aquaculture operations shall be connected to the municipal
water and sanitary sewer system, and all wastewater shall be
discharged to the municipal sanitary sewer system.
(8) Prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit, applicants wishing
to establish indoor aquaculture operations shall prepare a report
outlining the estimated average daily water usage and quantity of
wastewater discharge. Such report shall be reviewed and approved
by the Public Works Director.
(9) On-site processing of seafood is permitted, provided that the
activity is conducted entirely within an enclosed building and no
odors are detectable from the property line.
(10) The on-site retail sale of seafood or vegetables shall be considered
indoor sales for light industrial subject to the provisions of
§ 510-47Q, provided that the area devoted to sales does not exceed
25% of the total area of the building(s) within which the operation
is located. Retail areas that exceed 25% of the total area of the
building(s) within which the operation is located shall be
considered an indoor sales and service principal land use.
(11) Site plans shall be provided which indicate the location of all
outdoor activity areas.
(12) On-site composting shall be permitted, subject to the following
regulations:
(a) Compost areas shall be fully screened on all four sides.
(b) Composting shall comply with all county, state, and federal
rules, regulations, and permitting requirements.
(13)No outdoor activity areas shall be located in bufferyard areas. No
materials shall be stacked or otherwise stored so as to be visible
over bufferyard screening elements.
(14) Minimum required parking. For indoor aquaculture, one space for
each 500 square feet of principal building area. For wholesale
greenhouses, one space for every 10,000 square feet of gross
storage area, plus one space per each employee on the largest
work shift.
E. (Reserved)322
§ 510-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-43
1:801
F. Contractor yard. Contractor yards are used by a general contractor,
excavation contractor, landscaping contractor, building contractor, oil
or well drilling contractor, or similar business for the storage of
vehicles, equipment, and materials used in the day-to-day operation of
the business. This use may include a building which may be used for
administrative offices, indoor storage, and the care and maintenance of
equipment and vehicles in the fleet. Contractor yards shall adhere to
the following listed regulations: [Added 12-19-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-15]
(1) Type of outdoor storage. Outside storage of construction
equipment and fleet vehicles is allowed. Construction materials
may be kept out of doors provided such materials are being staged
for a specific work project. The storage of construction debris, tree
branches, wood chips, and the like is strictly prohibited.
(2) Equipment repair and maintenance. The repair and maintenance of
construction equipment and vehicles must occur within an
enclosed building, unless specifically permitted in the conditional
use order authorizing the use.
(3) Sales. The on-premise sale, at retail or wholesale, of any materials
is strictly prohibited.
(4) Incidental uses. Fabrication and assembly of component parts for
use in a building project is permitted inside of a building on the
subject property, provided such activity is of an incidental nature.
(5) Location of use areas. Outdoor storage areas and other activity
areas related to this use may not be located (i) in the front-yard
building setback area; (ii) within 30 feet of a side or rear lot line
when the adjoining property is located in a residential zoning
district, an agricultural zoning district, or a planned development
district that allows residential uses; (iii) within 20 feet of a side or
rear lot line when the adjoining property is located in a commercial
zoning district; and (iv) 10 feet from a side or rear lot line when the
adjoining property is located in any other zoning district. Employee
parking areas may be located in those areas otherwise allowed in
the zoning code.
(6) Fencing. Depending on the scale and nature of the contractor yard,
the Plan Commission may on a case-by-case basis require a solid
fence, as approved by the Plan Commission, in those areas where
screening is needed in the judgment of the Plan Commission to
mitigate potential impacts to adjoining properties.
(7) Control of fugitive dust. As part of the site plan and operation plan
review process, the control of fugitive dust (e.g., dust from a gravel
322. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Communication tower, as amended, was repealed
5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08.
§ 510-43 EAST TROY CODE § 510-43
1:802
yard) generated by this use, if any, shall be addressed to the
satisfaction of the Plan Commission.
(8) Hazardous materials and bulk fuel. As part of the site plan and
operation plan review process, the storage of hazardous materials
and bulk fuel, if any, shall be addressed to the satisfaction of the
Plan Commission.
(9) Minimum required parking: one space per employee on the largest
work shift.
G. "Telecommunication co-location, Class 1" means the placement of a
new mobile service facility on an existing support structure which
constitutes a substantial modification. [Added 5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-08]
H. "Telecommunication co-location, Class 2" means the placement of a
new mobile service facility on an existing support structure which does
not constitute a substantial modification. [Added 5-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-08]
I. "Telecommunication tower" means a freestanding tower, with or
without an equipment compound, that is intended for the placement of
one or more mobile service facilities. Telecommunication towers shall
adhere to the following listed regulations: [Added 5-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-08]
(1) Federal requirements. A telecommunication tower shall comply
with all applicable requirements of the Federal Communications
Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, and any other
federal agency with authority to regulate telecommunication
facilities. In the event of a conflict between federal law and this
section, federal law shall prevail.
(2) Single parcel. The fall zone and all structures related to the
telecommunication facility shall be located on a single parcel,
including the tower, equipment compound, and anchor points for a
guyed tower.
(3) Tower height. There is no limitation on the height of a tower, except
if the tower is located in the Airport Height Restriction Overlay
District (§ 510-69 of this Code).
(4) Fall zone and other setbacks. To ensure the fall zone for the tower
is located entirely on the subject property, the center of the tower
shall not be located closer to a property boundary line than height
of the tower. If an applicant submits an engineering certification
with the application that shows the fall zone is smaller than this
distance, the fall zone shall be the smaller calculated area, unless
the Village provides the applicant with substantial evidence that
the engineering certification is flawed. The fence around anchor
§ 510-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-43
1:803
points for a guyed tower shall be located at least 25 feet from a
property boundary line.
(5) Security fencing. A tower and related equipment compound,
consisting of equipment buildings, shelters, and cabinets, shall be
enclosed by a security fence (height and material to be established
through the site plan review process). If the tower is a guyed tower,
each of the anchor points shall be enclosed by a security fence.
(6) Lighting. A tower or any attachment shall not be artificially lighted,
except when specifically required by a state agency, the Federal
Aviation Administration, or another federal authority. Such
required lighting shall be the least obtrusive to the surrounding
views.
(7) Equipment buildings. The exterior of equipment buildings,
shelters, and cabinets exceeding 1,500 cubic feet shall be covered
with building materials typically used on buildings found in the
area.
(8) Emergency power system. A backup generator may be placed
within the equipment compound.
(9) Identification sign. An identification sign no larger than 18 inches
by 24 inches shall be placed in a visible location near the base of
the tower that lists:
(a) The name of the tower owner;
(b) The Federal Communications Commission identification
number; and
(c) A telephone number to contact in case of an emergency.
(10) Accommodation of other users on new towers (co-location). A tower
over 150 feet in height, along with the tower site and all support
facilities and appurtenances, shall accommodate at least two
additional users, unless the Zoning Administrator determines that
evidence presented by the tower operator demonstrates it is not
technically feasible to do so. Further, the tower operator and its
successors in interest shall allow other users to use the tower, the
tower site, support facilities, and appurtenances at fair market
rates as negotiated by those parties. If the Plan Commission
determines the tower operator has made access to the tower and
tower site unfeasible, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
tower operator via registered mail of such determination. If the
tower operator does not take corrective action within 45 days of
such determination, the permit for that tower shall become null and
void and the tower shall be removed and the site restored within 90
days of such determination.
§ 510-43 EAST TROY CODE § 510-43
1:804
(11) Requirement for co-location. A new tower shall only be permitted if
the applicant demonstrates with a sworn statement that co-location
on an existing or planned tower within the applicant's search ring
would not result in the same mobile service functionality, coverage,
and capacity; is technically infeasible; or is economically
burdensome to the mobile service provider. If the applicant does
not provide such analysis and sworn statement, the application for
a new tower shall be denied.
(12) Co-location review. The co-location of an antenna or antenna array
on an existing tower is permitted, subject to site plan, building
plan, and plan of operation review.
(13) Landscaping. Landscaping shall be placed around the equipment
enclosure and anchor points for guyed towers consistent with a
landscaping plan as approved by the Plan Commission. After
reviewing the location of the facility and the visibility of the facility
from public rights-of-way and adjoining properties, the Plan
Commission may waive this landscape requirement or defer the
requirement to a later date.
(14) Lease agreement. If the operator of the telecommunication tower
does not own the land where the facility is to be located, the
property owner and the operator shall execute a lease agreement
prior to any land-disturbing activity. Such agreement shall be
binding on future property owners and future operators and shall
address the rights and responsibilities of each party with respect to
the requirements in this Code, including Subsection I(16) and (17)
of this section. If the tower is located on Village property, the
agreement shall be in the form of a license agreement that is
subject to the approval of the Village Attorney.
(15) Ongoing maintenance. The subject property shall be maintained
and kept in a good condition, so as not to become a nuisance, as
determined by the Plan Commission. Proper maintenance includes
regular lawn and landscaping care, and painting and regular care
of building(s), fences, towers, and other improvements.
Additionally, the site shall be kept clear of junk and debris.
(16) Termination of approval. If the Zoning Administrator determines
that the tower is unsafe or otherwise defective or that the tower
has not hosted an operational antenna for a continuous period of 12
months, the Administrator shall initiate the process to terminate
the use, which must include a public hearing with written notice
given to the property owner, and operator if different. Within 90
days after the date of termination, the property owner shall remove
the tower, equipment cabinets, and all related equipment and
improvements that are part of its communication facilities and
restore the site to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator. In
the event such work is not done within the specified period, the
§ 510-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-43
1:805
Village shall have the right to use the financial guarantee as
required by this section to pay for such work.
(17) Financial guarantee. Prior to issuance of a building permit
authorizing construction of a tower, the applicant shall submit a
financial guarantee in the amount of $20,000 to the Village. The
financial guarantee shall be held until the tower and related
improvements are removed and the site restored to the satisfaction
of the Zoning Administrator.
(18) Third-party consultant. The Zoning Administrator may, at the
applicant's expense, hire a third-party consultant to conduct an
objective analysis of the submitted materials, including the
application, calculation of the fall zone, and certification that colocation
is not possible. The third-party consultant may not charge
the applicant for any travel expenses incurred in such review.
J. Indoor mushroom production. A place where mushrooms are grown or
otherwise propagated indoors. The term includes processing and
storage of mushrooms and materials needed in the production process.
Indoor mushroom production shall adhere to the following listed
regulations: [Added 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
(1) Storefront. A retail storefront for the sale of mushrooms and/or
mushroom growing items must be open for business at least 20
hours per week starting three months following occupancy of the
building. The floor area of the storefront must be at least 300
square feet and the exterior door accessing the storefront must be
clearly visible from the street.
(2) Indoor operations. All operations, except deliveries, and related
storage must occur inside of the building. Outdoor storage is
strictly prohibited.
(3) Qualifying buildings. Indoor mushroom production can only be
located in a building that existed on January 1, 2019, and that
meets all applicable building codes for the intended use. Additions
to such building are not allowed, except for retail sales.
(4) Minimum required parking. For indoor mushroom production, one
space for each 400 square feet devoted to retail sales, plus one
space per each employee on the largest work shift.
K. Contractor shop/showroom. A place a contractor can use for office
operations and for storing tools, equipment, and other related
materials. Contractor shop/showroom shall adhere to the following
listed regulations: [Added 8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-08]
(1) Storefront/show. A retail storefront/showroom for products
specifically related to the contractor's business must be open for
business at least 20 hours per week starting three months following
occupancy of the building. The floor area of the storefront/
§ 510-43 EAST TROY CODE § 510-43
1:806
§ 510-44. Storage land uses.
showroom must be at least 300 square feet and the exterior door
accessing the storefront/showroom must be clearly visible from the
street.
(2) Indoor operations. All operations, except deliveries, and related
storage must occur inside of the building. Outdoor storage of
materials is strictly prohibited. No more than three company
vehicles may be parked out of doors from 10:00 p.m. to 5:30 a.m.
(3) Qualifying buildings. A contractor shop/showroom can only be
located in a building that existed on January 1, 2019, and that
meets all applicable building codes for the intended use. Additions
to such building are not allowed, except for retail sales/showroom.
Overhead doors/loading bays may be added to such building, with
Plan Commission approval, but only when not readily visible from
the street.
(4) Minimum required parking. For contractor shop/showroom, one
space for each 400 square feet devoted to retail sales/showroom,
plus one space per each employee on the largest work shift.
A. Indoor storage and wholesaling. Indoor storage and wholesaling land
uses are primarily oriented to the receiving, holding, and shipping of
packaged materials for a single business or a single group of
businesses. With the exception of loading and parking facilities, such
land uses are contained entirely within an enclosed building. Examples
of this land use include conventional warehouse facilities, long-term
indoor storage facilities, and joint warehouse and storage facilities.
Retail outlets associated with this use shall be considered accessory
uses per § 510-47Q below. Indoor storage and wholesaling land uses
shall meet the following minimum parking requirement: one space per
2,000 square feet of gross floor area.
B. Multipurpose business storage. Multipurpose business storage uses are
primarily oriented to those businesses that require an office/reception/
display area and a larger storage area for stock goods, materials,
equipment, and supplies. With the exception of loading and parking
facilities, such land uses are contained entirely within an enclosed
building. Examples of potential businesses include plumbing or
electrical contractor, product sales representative, and small-scale
warehousing. This use shall provide one parking space per 500 square
feet of gross floor area and two parking spaces for each fleet vehicle
kept on the premises (i.e., one space for the fleet vehicle and one for the
employee's vehicle). [Added 11-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08323]
323. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B
and C as Subsections C and D, respectively.
§ 510-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-44
1:807
(1) When located in the Highway Business (HB) Zoning District, the
following additional standards apply:
(a) The front portion of the building is specifically reserved for
office, administrative, and/or display purposes and the back
portion is used for storage of stock goods, materials, supplies,
and equipment specifically related to the business occupying
the space. These two areas are to be separated by a wall which
may include one or more doorways for access. The overall
design is intended to look like a traditional retail business
space from the street on which it fronts.
Front view of multitenant building
(b) Overhead doors may be located on the back of the building to
provide access to the storage space. All overhead doors shall
be located so they are not readily visible from a public street.
Screening shall be provided to obscure the view of any
overhead doors visible from an adjoining parcel zoned for a
residential use.
Rear view of multitenant building
(c) This use may be located in a single building or in a multitenant
building. When this use is located in a single building, the
maximum floor area is 2,500 square feet. When this use is
located in a multitenant building with two or three tenant
§ 510-44 EAST TROY CODE § 510-44
1:808
spaces, the maximum floor area of this use is 2,500 square
feet. When this use is located in a multitenant building with
four or more tenant spaces, the maximum floor area of this use
is 5,000 square feet. When located in a multitenant building,
the requirements in § 510-108 (Group development standards)
apply.
(d) Fleet vehicles must be parked behind the rear of the building
in a separate parking area. Screening shall be provided to
obscure the view of such parking area from an adjoining parcel
zoned for a residential use. The maximum number of fleet
vehicles that may be parked out of doors is dictated by the floor
area of the building as set forth in the following table.
Floor Area
Maximum Number of Fleet
Vehicles
Less than 1,000 square feet 2
1,000 to 1,999 square feet 3
2,000 to 3,999 square feet 5
4,000 to 5,000 square feet 7
C. Outdoor storage and wholesaling. Outdoor storage and wholesaling
land uses are primarily oriented to the receiving, holding, and shipping
of packaged materials for a single business or a single group of
businesses. Such a land use, in which any activity beyond loading and
parking is located outdoors, is considered an outdoor storage and
wholesaling land use. Examples of this land use include contractors'
storage yards, equipment yards, lumberyards, coal yards, landscaping
materials yards, construction materials yards, and shipping materials
yards. Such land uses do not include the storage of inoperable vehicles
or equipment or other materials typically associated with a junkyard or
salvage yard (see § 510-46D). Outdoor storage and wholesaling land
uses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any
permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls, and fencing.
Such walls and fencing shall be a minimum of eight feet in height
and shall be designed to completely screen all stored materials
from view from nonindustrialized areas at an elevation of five feet
above the grade of all adjacent properties and rights-of-way. Said
walls or fencing shall be screened from residentially zoned
property by a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.80 (see
Article XIV).
(2) The storage of items shall not be permitted in required frontage
landscaping areas, bufferyard areas, or permanently protected
green space areas.
(3) In no event shall the storage of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
§ 510-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-44
1:809
requirement established by the provisions of Subsection B(7). If the
number of provided parking stalls on the property is already less
than the requirement, such storage area shall not further reduce
the number of parking stalls already present.
(4) Storage areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or
circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be
clearly delimited by a physical separation such as a greenway, curb,
fence, or line of planters or by a clearly marked paved area.
(5) Materials being stored shall not interfere in any manner with either
on-site or off-site traffic visibility, including potential vehicle/vehicle
and vehicle/pedestrian conflicts.
(6) Inoperable vehicles or equipment or other items typically stored in
a junkyard or salvage yard shall not be stored under the provisions
of this land use.
(7) Minimum required parking: one space for every 10,000 square feet
of gross storage area, plus one space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
D. Personal storage facility. Personal storage facilities, also known as "mini
warehouses," are land uses oriented to the indoor storage of items
entirely within partitioned buildings having an individual access to each
partitioned storage area. Such storage areas may be available on either
a condominium or a rental basis. Personal storage facilities shall adhere
to the following listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall be designed so as to minimize adverse visual impacts
on nearby developments. The color, exterior materials, and
orientation of proposed buildings and structures shall complement
surrounding development.
(2) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.80 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XIV).
(3) No electrical power shall be run to the storage facilities, except for
exterior lighting.
(4) Minimum required parking: one space for each employee on the
largest work shift.
E. Salt storage shed. Salt storage sheds are structures for storing salt
stockpiles typically associated with a municipal public works
department or a snow plowing business. Salt storage sheds shall adhere
to the following listed regulations: [Added 11-16-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-08]
(1) Prior to the establishment of this use, the property owner shall
obtain and maintain all necessary approvals from the Wisconsin
§ 510-44 EAST TROY CODE § 510-44
1:810
Department of Transportation under Ch. Trans 277, Wis. Admin.
Code, and any other state agency or the federal government.
(2) When located in the Highway Business Zoning District, the shed
shall be located so that it is not readily visible from a public street.
Additionally, screening shall be provided to obscure the view of the
shed from an adjoining parcel zoned for a residential use.
F. Vehicle storage and impound yard: A place for the temporary storage of
wrecked and/or inoperative and/or abandoned motor vehicles. The
dismantling, wrecking, or sale of said vehicles or parts thereof is strictly
prohibited. Vehicle storage and impound yards shall provide one
parking space for each employee on the largest work shift. [Added
3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
G. Bus yard. Bus yards are a place where buses are parked when not in use
and may include administrative offices and a building for the storage,
care, and maintenance of buses in the fleet. Bus yards shall adhere to
the following listed regulations: [Added 12-19-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-15]
(1) Location of use areas. Outdoor storage areas and other activity
areas related to this use may not be located (i) in the front-yard
building setback area; (ii) within 30 feet of a side or rear lot line
when the adjoining property is located in a residential zoning
district, an agricultural zoning district, or a planned development
district that allows residential uses; (iii) within 20 feet of a side or
rear lot line when the adjoining property is located in a commercial
zoning district, and (iv) 10 feet from a side or rear lot line when the
adjoining property is located in any other zoning district. Employee
parking areas may be located in those areas otherwise allowed in
the zoning code.
(2) Vehicle maintenance. The repair and maintenance of busses and
other vehicles in the fleet must occur within an enclosed building.
(3) Fencing. Depending on the scale and nature of the bus yard, the
Plan Commission may on a case-by-case basis require a solid fence,
as approved by the Plan Commission, in those areas where
screening is needed in the judgment of the Plan Commission to
mitigate potential impacts to adjoining properties.
(4) Control of fugitive dust. As part of the site plan and operation plan
review process, the control of fugitive dust (e.g., dust from a gravel
yard) generated by this use, if any, shall be addressed to the
satisfaction of the Plan Commission.
(5) Hazardous materials and bulk fuel. As part of the site plan and
operation plan review process, the storage of hazardous materials
and bulk fuel, if any, shall be addressed to the satisfaction of the
Plan Commission.
§ 510-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-44
1:811
§ 510-45. Transportation land uses.
(6) Minimum required parking: one space per employee on the largest
work shift.
A. Transit center. A building, structure, and/or area designed and used for
the purpose of loading, unloading, or transferring passengers or
accommodating the movement of passengers from one mode of
transportation to another. Examples include bus stations, train stations,
and park and ride stations. Transit centers shall adhere to the following
listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XIV).
(2) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas, except employee and passenger parking, shall be
located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines abutting
residentially zoned property.
(3) Minimum required parking. As sufficient to accommodate parking
needs.
B. Distribution center. Distribution centers are facilities oriented to the
short-term indoor storage and possible repackaging and reshipment of
materials involving the activities and products of a single user. Retail
outlets associated with this use shall be considered accessory uses per
§ 510-47Q below. Distribution centers shall adhere to the following
listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XIV).
(2) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot
lines abutting residentially zoned property.
(3) In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required
frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas.
(4) Minimum required parking: one space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
C. Freight terminal. Freight terminals are defined as land and buildings
representing either end of one or more truck carrier line(s) which may
have some or all of the following facilities: yards, docks, management
offices, storage sheds, buildings and/or outdoor storage areas, freight
stations, and truck maintenance and repair facilities, principally
serving several or many businesses requiring transshipment. Freight
terminals shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
§ 510-44 EAST TROY CODE § 510-45
1:812
§ 510-46. Extraction and disposal land uses.
(1) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XIV).
(2) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot
lines abutting residentially zoned property.
(3) In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required
frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas.
(4) Minimum required parking: one space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
D. Airport. Airports are transportation facilities providing takeoff, landing,
servicing, storage, and other services to any type of air transportation.
The operation of any type of air vehicle (including ultralight aircraft,
hang gliders, parasails, and related equipment, but excepting model
aircraft) within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall occur only in
conjunction with an approved airport. Airports shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) Airports shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property not otherwise
completely screened from activity areas by buildings or structures
(see Article XIV).
(2) The East Troy Municipal Airport is governed by the provisions of
Chapter 176, Airport, Article I, Aeronautical Services, of the Village
Code, the Declaration of Lease Restrictions and Protective
Covenants, and the Standard Conditions and Policies of the Lease
Restrictions and Protective Covenants for the East Troy Municipal
Airport.324
(3) Minimum required parking: one space per each employee on the
largest work shift, plus one space per every five passengers based
on average daily ridership.
E. Off-site parking. Off-site parking lots are any areas used for the
temporary parking of vehicles which are fully registered, licensed, and
operable. See also § 510-93 for additional parking regulations. Off-site
parking facilities shall adhere to the following regulation: access and
vehicular circulation shall be designed so as to discourage cut-through
traffic.
A. Extraction. Extraction uses include land uses involving the removal of
soil, clay, sand, gravel, rock, minerals, peat, or other material in excess
324. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-46
1:813
of that required for approved on-site development or agricultural
activities. Extraction land uses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) Shall receive approval from the county prior to action by the Village
of East Troy and shall comply with all county, state, and federal
regulations.
(2) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00
along all borders of the property other than permanent open space
(see Article XIV).
(3) All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a
minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines.
(4) Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration plans,
which shall include, at minimum, detailed grading and revegetation
plans, and a detailed written statement indicating the timetable for
such restoration. A surety bond, in an amount equivalent to 110%
of the costs determined to be associated with said restoration (as
determined by a third party selected by the Village), shall be filed
with the Village by the petitioner (subject to approval by the Zoning
Administrator) and shall be held by the Village for the purpose of
ensuring that the site is restored to its proposed condition. (The
requirement for said surety is waived for publicly owned waste
disposal facilities.)
(5) Minimum required parking: one space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
B. Composting. Composting operations are any land uses devoted to the
collection, storage, processing, and/or disposal of vegetation.
Composing land uses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Shall comply with all county, state, and federal regulations.
(2) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00
along all borders of the property occupied by nonagricultural land
uses (see Article XIV).
(3) All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a
minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
(4) No food scraps or other vermin-attracting materials shall be
processed, stored, or disposed of on site.
(5) Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage, or
disposal of hazardous wastes as defined by state statutes in any
manner.
(6) Minimum required parking: one space for each employee on the
largest work shift.
§ 510-46 EAST TROY CODE § 510-46
1:814
C. Recycling and waste disposal. Recycling land uses include recycling
facilities not involving the on-site storage of salvage materials. Waste
disposal facilities are any facilities and/or areas used for the disposal of
solid wastes, including those defined by § 289.01(33), Wis. Stats., but
not including composting operations (see Subsection B above).
Recycling and waste disposal facilities shall adhere to the following
listed regulations:
(1) Shall comply with all county, state, and federal regulations.
(2) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property (see Article XIV).
(3) All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a
minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines.
(4) Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage, or
disposal of hazardous materials as defined by state statutes in any
manner.
(5) Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration plans,
which shall include, at minimum, detailed grading and revegetation
plans, and a detailed written statement indicating the timetable for
such restoration. A surety bond, in an amount equivalent to 110%
of the costs determined to be associated with said restoration (as
determined by a third party selected by the Village), shall be filed
with the Village by the petitioner (subject to approval by the Zoning
Administrator) and shall be held by the Village for the purpose of
ensuring that the site is restored to its proposed condition. (The
requirement for said surety is waived for recycling and waste
disposal facilities owned by public agencies.) [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(6) Minimum required parking: one space for each employee on the
largest work shift.
D. Salvage yard or junkyard. Junkyard or salvage yard facilities are any
land or structure used for a salvaging operation, including but not
limited to the aboveground, outdoor storage and/or sale of wastepaper,
rags, scrap metal, and any other discarded materials intended for sale
or recycling, and/or the collection, dismantlement, storage, or salvage
of two or more unlicensed and/or inoperable vehicles. Recycling
facilities involving on-site outdoor storage of salvage materials are
included in this land use. Salvage yard or junkyard land uses shall
adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00
along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property
(see Article XIV).
§ 510-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-46
1:815
§ 510-47. Accessory land uses and structures.
(2) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from all roads
and 100 feet from all lot lines.
(3) In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required
frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas.
(4) Operations shall not involve the storage, handling, or collection of
hazardous materials as defined by state statutes. [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(5) Minimum required parking: one space for every 20,000 square feet
of gross storage area, plus one space for each employee on the
largest work shift.
A. Accessory uses are land uses which are incidental to the principal
activity conducted on the subject property. In addition to specific
requirements for each accessory use listed under Subsections B
through W (below), accessory land uses shall adhere to the following
requirements: [Amended 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
(1) Any accessory use or structure shall conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located, except as
specifically otherwise provided.
(2) No accessory use or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior
to establishment of an allowable principal use, unless otherwise
stated in this chapter.
(3) No accessory structure shall exceed the height of or have a larger
floor area than the principal structure.
(4) With the exception of an in-family suite (see Subsection F) or
accessory dwelling units (see Subsection G), in no instance shall an
accessory structure, cellar, basement, tent, or recreational trailer
be used as a residence.
(5) Accessory uses and structures shall not be located between a
principal building and a street frontage on the same lot, nor within
any required front yard or street side yard, except when there is a
shore yard. In instances where there is a shore yard, shore yards
shall be treated as front yards and street yards as rear yards,
whereby accessory structures may be located between a principal
building and a street frontage on the same lot.
(6) Accessory uses are permitted in the rear yard only of residential
zoning districts.
B. Home occupation. Home occupations are economic activities
performed within a single-family detached residence. Examples include
personal and professional services and handicrafts. Home occupations
§ 510-46 EAST TROY CODE § 510-47
1:816
are intended to provide a means to accommodate a small home-based
family or professional business without the necessity of a rezoning
from a residential to a business district. Home occupations are limited
to service-oriented businesses and businesses that do not generate
customer visits. Home occupations shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed
area of the dwelling unit or attached garage.
(2) There shall be no exterior alterations which change the character
of the structure as a single-family dwelling unit.
(3) There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation, other
than those signs permitted per Subsection B(6).
(4) No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment
related to the operation of the home occupation shall be visible
outside any structure located on the premises.
(5) No use shall create smoke, odor, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire
hazard, small electrical interference, or any other nuisance not
normally associated with the average residential use in the district.
(6) Signage for a home occupation shall comply with all applicable
requirements set forth in Article XV. [Amended 7-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-08]
(7) Home occupations shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles
for more than occasional delivery of materials to or from the
premises.
(8) The Village Board may determine the percentage of the property
that may be devoted to the occupation, but this shall not exceed
30%.
(9) No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be installed or
maintained other than such as customarily incidental to domestic
use.
(10) Under no circumstances shall a vehicle repair shop or body work
business qualify as a home occupation.
(11) A home occupation shall not endanger the public health and safety
and shall not interfere with other parcels in the neighborhood.
(12) Sale or transfer of the property shall cause the conditional use
permit to be null and void.
C. Expanded home occupation. Expanded home occupations are intended
to provide greater flexibility than home occupations in terms of number
of employees, number of customer visits, and allowable occupations.
For example, retail trade may be conducted in an expanded home
§ 510-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-47
1:817
occupation, whereas home occupations are limited to service-oriented
businesses and businesses that do not generate customer visits.
Expanded home occupations shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) The expanded home occupation shall be conducted only within the
enclosed area of the dwelling unit or attached garage.
(2) There shall be no exterior alterations which change the character
of the structure as a single-family dwelling unit and/or exterior
evidence of the expanded home occupation, other than those signs
permitted in accordance with Subsection C(5). [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(3) No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment
related to the operation of the home occupation shall be visible
outside any structure located on the premises.
(4) No use shall create smoke, odor, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire
hazard, small electrical interference, or any other nuisance not
normally associated with residential uses.
(5) Signage for an expanded home occupation shall comply with all
applicable requirements set forth in Article XV. [Amended
7-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
(6) Expanded home occupations shall not involve the use of
commercial vehicles for more than occasional delivery of materials
to or from the premises.
(7) The Village Board may determine the percentage of the property
that may be devoted to the expanded home occupation, but this
shall not exceed 30%.
(8) Manufacturing of items or products on the premises is prohibited.
(9) No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be installed or
maintained other than such as customarily incidental to domestic
use.
(10) Under no circumstances shall a vehicle repair shop or body work
business qualify as a home occupation.
(11) An expanded home occupation shall not endanger the public health
and safety and shall not interfere with other parcels in the
neighborhood.
D. Family day-care home (four children to eight children). Family day-care
homes are occupied residences in which a qualified person or persons
provide child care for four children to eight children. The care of fewer
than four children is not subject to the regulations of this chapter. State
law reference: § 66.1017(1)(a), Wis. Stats.
§ 510-47 EAST TROY CODE § 510-47
1:818
E. Intermediate day-care home (nine children to 15 children).
Intermediate day-care homes are occupied residences in which a
qualified person or persons provide child care for nine children to 15
children. State law reference: § 48.65, Wis. Stats.
F. In-family suite. The in-family suite is an area within a dwelling unit that
may contain separate kitchen, dining, bathroom, laundry, living,
sleeping, and recreation areas, including exterior porches, patios, and
decks. In addition to the required internal physical connection,
separate outdoor access or separate access to the garage may be
provided. However, external stairs serving as the primary access to the
in-family suite are prohibited. In-family suites shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) In-family suites may not be occupied by a nonfamily member.
(2) In-family suites should be considered and regulated as part of a
single-family dwelling unit.
(3) The principal dwelling unit and the in-family suite shall together
appear as a single-family dwelling.
(4) A separate walled garage area or driveway is not permitted.
(5) A separate address for the in-family suite is not permitted.
(6) A separate utility connection or meters are not permitted.
(7) A physical all-weather connection between the main living area and
the in-family suite must be present. This required connection may
not occur through an attic, basement, garage, porch, or other
nonliving area. A door may be used to separate the in-family suite
from the principal dwelling but may not be locking, except that a
locking door may be used for the bedroom and bathroom doors of
the in-family suite.
(8) When an application is submitted for a building permit to
accommodate what is explicitly listed as, or could possibly serve as,
an in-family suite, the building plan shall be marked as "not a
separate dwelling unit or apartment" and a signed letter from the
applicant stating agreement with this condition shall be filed.
G. Accessory dwelling unit. Accessory dwelling units are residential
dwellings located directly above the ground floor of a building used for
an office, commercial, or institutional land use or a residential dwelling
unit located on the same lot as a single-family dwelling unit, either in
the same building as the single-family dwelling unit or in a detached
building. Accessory dwelling units may also be permitted on the ground
floor of a building used for an office, commercial, or institutional land
use but may not be within the first 24 feet of the ground floor measured
from the front of the building. Accessory dwelling units shall adhere to
the following listed regulations:
§ 510-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-47
1:819
(1) The number of occupants of the accessory dwelling unit shall not
exceed one family plus one roomer or two unrelated individuals.
(2) Additional entrances shall not be added to the front elevation of an
existing building but may be added to side or rear or street side
elevations.
(3) Accessory dwelling units shall adhere to the setback requirements
and standards for the underlying zoning district.
(4) On corner lots, primary entrances to accessory dwelling units shall
be placed on the facade parallel to the side street.
(5) Accessory dwelling unit entryways within a rear or side yard shall
be connected to a street frontage by a paved walkway or driveway.
(6) For accessory dwelling units located on the same lot as a singlefamily
dwelling unit, the following additional regulations shall
apply:
(a) Principal building must be owner-occupied.
(b) The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately from
the principal dwelling.
(c) The maximum size of an accessory dwelling unit shall not
exceed 75% of the principal dwelling's floor area, up to a
maximum size of 700 square feet.
(d) The appearance or character of the principal building must not
be significantly altered so that its appearance is no longer that
of a single-family dwelling.
(e) The exterior finish material must match in type, size and
placement the exterior finish material of the principal dwelling
unit.
(f) The roof pitch must match the predominant roof pitch of the
principal dwelling unit or structure.
(g) Trim must match the trim used on the principal dwelling unit.
(h) Projecting eaves must match those of the principal dwelling
unit or structure.
(i) Windows must match those in the principal dwelling unit in
both proportion (relationship of width to height) and
orientation (horizontal or vertical).
H. Farm residence. A farm residence is a single-family detached dwelling
unit located on the same property as any of the principal agricultural
land uses listed in § 510-40.
§ 510-47 EAST TROY CODE § 510-47
1:820
I. Migrant employee housing. Migrant employee housing includes any
facility subject to the regulation of § 103.90(3)(a), Wis. Stats. Migrant
employee housing shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Migrant employee housing shall be surrounded by a bufferyard
with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see Article XIV) along all property
lines adjacent to all properties in residential or business zoning
districts. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(2) Migrant employee housing shall be an accessory use to an active
principal land use and under the same ownership.
J. Accessory buildings. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02;
3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02; 5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
(1) Residential accessory building: a detached building customarily
found with a residential use as an accessory use. The term includes
greenhouses, detached garages, sheds, gazebos, pool cabanas, and
the like. Residential accessory buildings shall adhere to the
following regulations and any others that may apply:
(a) Number. In addition to one accessory building less than 150
square feet, one additional accessory building shall be allowed
per lot.
(b) Maximum floor area. The maximum floor area of the additional
accessory building shall not exceed the following square
footage for each lot size:
[1] Lot area less than 30,000 square feet: 484 square feet.
[2] Lot area from 30,000 square feet to 39,999 square feet:
690 square feet.
[3] Lot area from 40,000 square feet to 49,999 square feet:
920 square feet.
[4] Lot area from 50,000 square feet to 59,999 square feet:
1,150 square feet.
[5] Lot area from 60,000 square feet to 69,999 square feet:
1,380 square feet.
[6] Lot area from 70,000 square feet to 79,999 square feet:
1,610 square feet.
[7] Lot area from 80,000 square feet to 89,999 square feet:
1,840 square feet.
(c) Placement. The accessory building that is less than 150 square
feet may only be located in the rear yard or the side yard. The
other accessory building must be located in the rear yard,
except as described in this subsection. If there is not enough
room in the rear yard to place the other accessory building, the
§ 510-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-47
1:821
building may be located in the rear and side yard, provided the
back of the building is within 110% of the rear yard setback
for the zoning district in which the parcel is located. If the
property owner would like to place the other accessory
building in a different location, the Plan Commission may allow
an alternative location as a special exception, provided the
front of the accessory building is at least five feet behind the
front face of the principal building that is most distant from the
front lot line.
(d) Materials. With the exception of farm buildings, accessory
buildings located within a residential district shall be
constructed or finished in a complementary architectural style
and with complementary materials to the principal residential
buildings in the neighborhood.
(2) Nonresidential accessory building: a detached building customarily
found with a nonresidential use as an accessory use. The term
includes greenhouses, detached garages, sheds, and the like.
Nonresidential accessory buildings shall adhere to the following
regulations and any others that may apply:
(a) Number. In addition to one accessory building less than 150
square feet, one additional accessory building shall be allowed
per lot.
(b) Maximum floor area. The maximum floor area of the additional
accessory building shall not exceed the following square
footage for each lot size:
[1] Lot area less than 30,000 square feet: 484 square feet.
[2] Lot area from 30,000 square feet to 39,999 square feet:
690 square feet.
[3] Lot area from 40,000 square feet to 49,999 square feet:
920 square feet.
[4] Lot area from 50,000 square feet to 59,999 square feet:
1,150 square feet.
[5] Lot area from 60,000 square feet to 69,999 square feet:
1,380 square feet.
[6] Lot area from 70,000 square feet to 79,999 square feet:
1,610 square feet.
[7] Lot area from 80,000 square feet to 89,999 square feet:
1,840 square feet.
(c) Placement. The accessory building that is less than 150 square
feet may only be located in the rear yard or the side yard. The
other accessory building must be located in the rear yard,
§ 510-47 EAST TROY CODE § 510-47
1:822
except the Plan Commission may allow an alternate location
as a special exception, provided the front of the accessory
building is at least five feet behind the front face of the
principal building that is most distant from the front lot line.
K. Residential recreational facility. This land use includes all active
outdoor recreational facilities located on a private residential lot which
are not otherwise listed in the Table of Land Uses in § 510-38. Common
examples include swing sets, tree houses, basketball courts, tennis
courts, and recreation-type equipment. Residential recreational
facilities shall adhere to the following listed regulations: [Amended
8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-09]
(1) All private residential recreation facilities and their attendant
structures shall comply with the bulk requirements for accessory
structures (see Article VIII).
(2) Materials and lighting at said property line are to be equal to or
less than 0.5 footcandle (see § 510-95).
(3) Tree houses and similar platforms shall not exceed a platform
height of eight feet and shall be set back twice their elevation from
any property line.
L. Residential kennel or stable. A residential kennel is the housing of any
combination of more than three dogs and/or cats over six months of age
within a residential dwelling unit. A residential stable is an accessory
structure that is designed for the keeping of equines for the private use
of the occupants of the principal dwelling and their guests, but in no
event for hire. Residential kennels and stables shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) Outdoor containments for animals shall be located a minimum of 25
feet from any residentially zoned property.
(2) A minimum lot area of 175,000 square feet (four acres) is required
for a private residential stable.
(3) A maximum of one horse per two acres of fully enclosed (by fencing
and/or structures) area is permitted.
(4) The minimum permitted size of a horse or similar animal stall shall
be 100 square feet.
M. On-site parking. On-site parking lots are any areas located on the same
site as the principal land use which are used for the temporary parking
of vehicles which are fully registered, licensed, and operable. On-site
parking areas shall adhere to the following regulation: access and
vehicular circulation shall be designed to discourage cut-through
traffic.
§ 510-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-47
1:823
N. Company cafeteria. A company cafeteria is a food service operation
which provides food only to company employees and their guests.
Company cafeterias shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Company cafeterias shall meet state food service requirements.
(2) Company cafeterias shall be located on the same property as a
principal land use engaged in an operation other than food service.
O. Company on-site recreation. This land use includes any active or
passive recreational facility located on the same site as a principal land
use and which is reserved solely for the use of company employees and
their guests. Company on-site recreational facilities shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) All structures and actively used outdoor areas shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property.
(2) Outdoor recreation facilities using night lighting and adjoining a
residentially zoned property shall install and continually maintain a
bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see Article XIV). Said
bufferyard shall be located at the property line adjacent to said
residentially zoned property.
(3) Facilities using night lighting shall require a conditional use
permit.
P. Incidental outdoor display. Incidental outdoor display includes the sale
and display of merchandise or equipment outside of an enclosed
building and is incidental to a principal commercial or industrial land
use. Incidental outdoor display land uses shall comply with all
regulations of § 510-42E, and the display area shall not exceed 25% of
gross floor area of the principal building on the site.
Q. Incidental indoor sales. Incidental indoor sales include any retail sales
activity conducted exclusively indoors which is incidental to a principal
land use such as warehousing, wholesaling, or any light industrial land
use on the same site. Incidental indoor sales shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) The total area devoted to sales activity shall not exceed 25% of the
total area of the buildings on the property. Areas devoted to artisan
studio uses such as custom ceramics, glass, wood, paper, fabric,
and similar crafts may exceed 5,000 square feet with the granting
of a conditional use permit for such use.
(2) Shall provide rest room facilities directly accessible from retail
sales area.
(3) The retail sales area shall by physically separated by a wall from all
other activity areas.
§ 510-47 EAST TROY CODE § 510-47
1:824
(4) Minimum required parking. Adequate parking, per the
requirements of § 510-42D, shall be provided for customers. Said
parking shall be in addition to that required for the principal land
use.
R. Incidental light industrial. These land uses include any light industrial
activity conducted exclusively indoors which is incidental to a principal
land use, such as indoor sales or service, on the same site. Incidental
light industrial shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) The total area devoted to light industrial activity shall not exceed
15% of the total area of the buildings on the property or 5,000
square feet, whichever is less.
(2) The production area shall be physically separated by a wall from
other activity areas and shall be soundproofed to the level required
by § 510-100 for all adjacent properties.
(3) Minimum required parking: per § 510-93.
S. Exterior communications device. This land use includes any structures
used for communication reception, such as satellite dishes. Exterior
communications devices shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) Installation standards. Signal receiving antennas installed in any
zoning district within the Village shall comply with the following
provisions:
(a) Any signal receiving antenna and its mounting post shall be
located a minimum of 15 feet from any property line.
(b) Subject to the provisions herein, signal receiving antennas
shall only be located in the rear yard of any lot. If reasonable
reception of signals is not possible with a rear yard placement
due to the physical characteristics of the lot and area, the
signal receiving antenna shall be placed in the side yard of the
lot. In the event that reasonable reception of signals is not
possible by locating the signal receiving antenna on the rear or
side yard of the property, such antenna may be placed in the
front yard or on the roof of structures on the property. For
corner lots, a side yard is only a yard that does not face a
street.
(c) If side yard, front yard, or roof mounting is requested, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine where reasonable
reception is possible, based on evidence provided by the
person seeking to erect or construct the antenna.
(2) Mounting. Signal receiving antennas attached to the wall or roof of
any principal or accessory structure shall be permitted only if the
structure is properly constructed to carry all imposed loading and
§ 510-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-47
1:825
complies with applicable state and local building code
requirements. The Zoning Administrator may require engineering
calculations.
(3) Diameter. The diameter of signal receiving antenna shall not
exceed 10 feet, and six feet for a roof-mounted antenna, except for
systems used to provide community antenna television services.
(4) Height.
(a) A ground-mounted signal receiving antenna, including any
platform or structure upon which said antenna is mounted or
affixed, may not exceed 10 feet in height, as measured from the
ground to the highest point of the antenna.
(b) A roof-mounted antenna may not exceed eight feet in height
above the surrounding roofline as measured from the lowest
point of the existing roofline.
(5) Exterior communication devices shall be erected and installed in
accordance with the State Electrical Code adopted by reference in
Chapter 210, Building Construction, of the Village Code, the
National Electrical Safety Code, the Federal Communications
Commission and the instructions of the manufacturer. In cases of
conflict, the stricter requirements shall govern.325
T. Ham radio tower and antenna. This land use includes any structures,
appurtenances, and components used for ham radio purposes that are
located outside of a permitted principal or accessory structure.
Depending on the height of the structure, ham radio towers and
antennas either are permitted by right or may require a conditional use
permit, as indicated in Subsection T(1) through (3), below. Ham radio
towers and antennas shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Ham radio devices up to 45 feet in height are permitted by right as
an accessory use in all zoning districts. Such ham radio devices
shall adhere to the following regulations:
(a) Such ham radio devices shall require a building permit and onsite
inspection (and related fees) for all installations for
placement, height, structural integrity, and electrical
connections.
(b) No portion of such ham radio device is permitted between the
principal structure and a public street.
(c) All portions of such ham radio device shall comply with the side
and rear yard setback requirements for accessory structures
for the subject property's zoning district.
325. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-47 EAST TROY CODE § 510-47
1:826
(2) Ham radio devices between 45 and 75 feet in height are permitted
by right as an accessory use in all zoning districts. Such ham radio
devices shall adhere to the following regulations:
(a) Such ham radio devices shall require a building permit and onsite
inspection (and related fees) for all installations for
placement, height, structural integrity and electrical
connections.
(b) No portion of such ham radio device is permitted between the
principal structure and a public street.
(c) Device shall be subject to the site plan review process per
§ 510-160. As part of this process, the agenda for the Plan
Commission's consideration of the site plan shall be mailed to
the owners of properties adjacent (including properties
adjacent at lot corners) to the subject property. The purpose of
this notice is to provide the owners of adjacent properties an
opportunity to learn about the federal limitations on the
Village's regulation of ham radio devices and the details of the
proposed installation and to provide comments about the
proposed site plan. A formal public hearing is not required.
(d) All portions of such ham radio device exceeding the maximum
height for an accessory structure shall provide minimum side
and rear yard setbacks equivalent to the requirements for
accessory structures for the subject property's zoning district,
plus one additional foot of setback for every three feet of
additional maximum height over 45 feet.
(3) Ham radio devices not complying with all requirements for either
Subsection T(1) or (2) above, including proposed device with a
height of over 75 feet, shall adhere to the following regulations:
(a) Such ham radio devices shall require a building permit and onsite
inspection (and related fees) for all installations for
placement, height, structural integrity, and electrical
connections.
(b) Such ham radio devices shall be subject to the conditional use
process per § 510-157. The applicant shall demonstrate the
necessity to seek a waiver from any and all requirements of
either Subsection T(1) or (2), to the satisfaction of the Plan
Commission. As consistent with any proposed conditional use,
the Plan Commission may approve the proposal, may add
conditions of approval, or may deny the application.
U. Lawn care. Lawn care includes any activity involving the preparation of
the ground and/or installation and maintenance of vegetative ground
cover (including gardens). Lawn care is not permitted in certain
permanently protected green space areas.
§ 510-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-47
1:827
V. Stormwater facilities. These include all improvements, including but
not limited to swales, ditches, culverts, drains, tiles, gutters, levees,
basins, detention or retention facilities, impoundments, and dams,
intended to affect the direction, rate and/or volume of stormwater
runoff, snowmelt, and/or channelized flows across, within, and/or away
from a site. Stormwater facilities shall also adhere to applicable state
regulations and regulations in the Village of East Troy Municipal Code.
W. Septic systems. This land use includes any state-enabled, countyapproved
septic disposal system. Septic systems shall comply with the
applicable state regulations and regulations in the Village of East Troy
Municipal Code related to the protection of natural resources. The
minimum lot size for installation of a septic system is 1/2 acre (21,780
square feet).
X. Vehicle towing establishment. A place where tow trucks may be kept
along with towed vehicles, provided such use is associated with a
vehicle sales establishment under § 510-42, and the scale of the
operation is clearly incidental to the vehicle sales establishment as may
be established by the Plan Commission. Vehicle towing establishments
shall adhere to the following listed regulations: [Added 3-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-04]
(1) One parking space for each tow truck kept on the premises if the
principal use does not comply with the number of parking spaces as
required by this code.
(2) Towed vehicles stored on the premises shall be kept inside of an
enclosed building.
Y. Swimming pool. A swimming pool is a receptacle or other container
that can hold 36 inches or more of water at any point and that is used
for recreational purposes and which is not located within a building
with exterior walls. The term includes above-ground designs, belowground
designs, and hot tubs and spas, whether such pools are
temporary or permanent. The term also includes structural facilities,
appliances, appurtenances, equipment, and other items used and
intended to be used for the operation and maintenance of a swimming
pool. Swimming pools must comply with the following requirements:
[Added 8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-09]
(1) Exemptions.
(a) Modular or one-piece aboveground pools erected on a seasonal
basis are exempt from the provisions of this subsection, except
that they shall be located a minimum of six feet from any lot
line or building and must be in rear or side yards only.
(b) Storable one-piece swimming or wading pools that may be
readily disassembled for storage and reassembled to their
original integrity are exempt from the provisions of this
subsection.
§ 510-47 EAST TROY CODE § 510-47
1:828
(c) Spas and hot tubs with lockable tops are also exempt.
(2) All materials and methods of construction in the construction,
alteration, addition, remodeling, or other improvements and pool
installation shall comply with all state regulations and with any and
all ordinances of the Village now in effect or hereafter enacted.
(3) All plumbing shall comply with all applicable ordinances of the
Village and all state plumbing codes. Every private or residential
swimming pool shall be provided with a suitable draining method,
and in no case shall waters from any pool be drained into the
sanitary sewer system, onto lands of other property owners
adjacent to that on which the pool is located, or in the general
vicinity. Provisions may be made for draining the contents of any
swimming pool into a storm sewer, but such installation shall be
subject to prior approval by the Director of Public Works.
(4) All electrical installations, including lighting and heating, which
are used in conjunction with a swimming pool shall comply with
applicable state laws and Village ordinances regulating electrical
installations.
(5) Setbacks and other requirements. A swimming pool shall be
erected or constructed in rear or side yards only, and only on a lot
occupied by a principal building. No swimming pool shall be
erected or constructed on an otherwise vacant lot. A lot shall not be
considered vacant if the owner owns the contiguous lot and said lot
is occupied by a principal building. All swimming pools shall be at
least six feet from any lot line or building unless designed and
approved as an addition to a building.
(6) Principal use required. No swimming pool shall be erected or
constructed on an otherwise vacant lot. A lot shall not be
considered vacant if the owner owns the contiguous lot and said lot
is occupied by a principal building.
(7) Safety features. A fence as described in this subsection must be
installed around the perimeter of an in-ground pool and around an
above-ground pool, except when the side wall of the above-ground
pool is 48 inches or more and the grade extending away from the
pool for a distance of four feet is at the same or a lower grade as the
base of the pool. When required, a fence (i) must be of sufficient
strength to prevent access to the pool; (ii) may not have any voids,
holes, or openings larger than four inches in diameter; (iii) must be
at least four feet in height; (iv) may not be closer than four feet to
the pool edge; and (v) must be located so that the surrounding
grade extending away from the fence for a distance of four feet is at
the same or a lower grade as the base of the fence. Ladders that
provide access to an above-ground pool with a wall height of 48
inches or more must be secured to prevent use when the pool is not
being actively used. Variations in enclosure requirements that do
§ 510-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-47
1:829
not adversely affect the safety of the public may be approved. This
section shall not apply to existing fences on the date of adoption of
this chapter at least 40 inches in height that otherwise comply with
this section.
(8) Compliance. All swimming pools existing at the time of adoption of
this chapter not satisfactorily fenced as described in Subsection
Y(7) above shall comply when water is placed in the pool.
Enclosures on existing pools shall be inspected by the Building
Inspector for compliance.
(9) Filter system required and electrical permit required. All private
swimming pools within the meaning of this section, except those
exempted in Subsection E, must have some filtration system to
assure proper circulation of the water therein and maintenance of
the proper bacterial quality thereof. Any swimming pool served by
an electrical device, including otherwise exempted pools in
Subsection E above, shall require an electrical permit.
(10) Side and bottom materials. All swimming pools of a permanent
nature shall have the sides and bottom of a smooth finish, and no
sand or dirt bottom shall be permitted.
Z. Outdoor furnace. An outdoor furnace is an outdoor device, structure,
building or apparatus in which combustion of solid fuel takes place and
such combustion supplies (either directly or indirectly) heat, hot water,
or both for the interior of another building. An outdoor furnace shall
adhere to the following listed regulations: [Added 8-19-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-09]
(1) Fuel. The outdoor furnace shall only use seasoned wood or other
materials which have low smoke, odor, and pollutant generating
properties and which have been approved for such use by the State
of Wisconsin. The outdoor furnace shall not be used to burn any
prohibited materials, including rubbish or garbage, food waste,
food wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted
materials, furniture, composite shingles, construction or demolition
debris, or other household or business wastes, waste oil, asphalt,
tires, and synthetic rubber-like products.
(2) Spark protector. The outdoor furnace shall have a spark protector
that shall be adequately maintained at all times.
(3) Location. The outdoor wood-burning furnace must be located at
least 300 feet from the property line.
(4) Chimney height. Chimney heights shall comply with the
manufacturer's recommendations.
(5) Nonconforming wood-burning furnaces. Use of any outdoor
furnace in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter may
continue until such time that replacement or maintenance is
§ 510-47 EAST TROY CODE § 510-47
1:830
§ 510-48. Temporary uses.
required, at which time all requirements of this subsection must be
met.
A. Temporary farm product sales. This land use includes the temporary
outdoor display and sales of farm products, typically from a roadside
stand. Temporary farm product sales shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) Shall comply with § 510-158, standards and procedures applicable
to all temporary uses.
(2) Display shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation,
including vehicular sight distances.
(3) If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area, sales
and display activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
(4) Adequate parking shall be provided.
(5) Signage for temporary farm product sales shall comply with all
applicable requirements set forth in Article XV. [Added 7-21-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-08]
B. Temporary outdoor sales. Includes the display of any items outside the
confines of a building which is not otherwise permitted as a permitted
or conditional use or a special event otherwise regulated by the
Municipal Code. Examples of this land use include, but are not limited
to, sidewalk sales, seasonal garden shops, tent sales, Christmas tree
sales, bratwurst stands, and more than three garage sales per year.
Temporary outdoor sales shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) Shall comply with § 510-158, standards and procedures applicable
to all temporary uses.
(2) The user shall provide a layout of the activities to the Zoning
Administrator for approval prior to any event or sales activity.
(3) Signage for temporary outdoor sales shall comply with all
applicable requirements set forth in Article XV. [Added 7-21-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-08]
C. Temporary outdoor assembly. Includes any organized outdoor assembly
of more than 100 persons, such as an outdoor wedding or tent
meetings. Temporary outdoor assembly shall adhere to the following
regulations:
(1) Shall comply with § 510-158, standards and procedures applicable
to all temporary uses.
§ 510-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-48
1:831
(2) Activities shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation,
including vehicular sight distances.
(3) If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area,
activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
(4) Adequate provisions for crowd control shall be made and shall be
described within the temporary use application.
(5) Adequate parking, drinking water, and toilet facilities shall be
provided and shall be described in the temporary use application.
D. Temporary shelter structure. These shelters are typically supported by
poles, have a fabric roof and/or sides, and may be used for temporary
events such as receptions or farmers markets. Temporary shelter
structures shall adhere to the following regulations: [Amended
7-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-06]
(1) Temporary shelter structures to be placed for extended use (i.e.,
beyond seven days) shall require a temporary use permit.
(2) Temporary shelter structures in place for more than seven days
without approval of a temporary use permit, including but not
limited to those temporary shelter structures to cover automobiles,
boats, recreational vehicles, or firewood, are in violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to the provisions of § 510-153.
E. Temporary storage container. These containers are portable storage
containers designed and used primarily for the temporary storage of
household goods and other such materials for use on a limited basis on
residential property. Temporary storage containers shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) Shall comply with § 510-158, standards and procedures applicable
to all temporary uses.
(2) The container shall not exceed outside dimensions of 16 feet in
length, eight feet in width, and nine feet in height.
(3) The container shall be permitted on the property for up to 14 days
associated with each change of occupancy as defined by a recorded
change in property ownership or valid lease.
(4) The container cannot encroach on the public right-of-way,
neighboring property, or sidewalk or be placed in the street.
(5) The unit must be placed on asphalt, concrete, gravel, or other hardpaved
surface.
(6) For all multifamily uses, including multiplexes, apartments, and
townhouses, use of temporary storage containers shall require
review and approval by the Zoning Administrator. The applicant
shall provide written permission from the landowner to place the
§ 510-48 EAST TROY CODE § 510-48
1:832
temporary storage container on the property in accordance with
the regulations listed in this section.326
F. Temporary construction storage. Includes any structure or outdoor
storage area designed for the on-site storage of construction equipment
and/or materials for an active construction project. Temporary
construction storage shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) The structure shall comply with § 510-158, standards and
procedures applicable to all temporary uses.
(2) The structure shall be removed within 10 days of issuance of
occupancy permit.
(3) Projects requiring the structure to be in place for more than 365
days shall require a conditional use permit. Said time limit may be
extended with Village Board approval.
(4) The structure shall be limited to a maximum area not exceeding
10% of the property's gross site area.
G. Temporary relocatable building. Includes any manufactured building
which serves as a temporary building for less than six months.
Temporary relocatable buildings shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) The structure shall comply with § 510-158, standards and
procedures applicable to all temporary uses.
(2) Facilities serving for more than six months shall be considered
conditional uses and are subject to the general standards and
procedures presented in § 510-157.
(3) The unit must be places on asphalt, concrete, gravel, or other hardpaved
surface.
(4) The structure shall be limited to a maximum area not exceeding
10% of the property's gross site area.
H. Temporary garage or estate sale (auction). Temporary garage or estate
sales include the sale or offering for sale of miscellaneous used items
commonly associated with residential use. Temporary garage or estate
sales shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Sales shall be limited to a period of no more than three consecutive
days.
(2) Sales shall occur only during daylight hours.
326. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-48
1:833
(3) Signage for temporary garage or estate sales shall comply with all
applicable requirements set forth in Article XV. [Added 7-21-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-08]
I. Farmers market. Farmers markets include the temporary or occasional
outdoor retail sales of farm produce, plants and flowers, bakery goods,
and/or crafts from vehicles or temporary stands located within a
parking lot or public right-of-way. Farmers markets shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall have vehicular access to a collector or higher
classification street.
(2) Minimum required parking: one space per vendor, plus adequate
parking to accommodate customer traffic.
(3) Signage for a farmers market shall comply with all applicable
requirements set forth in Article XV. [Added 7-21-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-08]
§ 510-48 EAST TROY CODE § 510-48
1:834
ARTICLE VII
Density and Intensity
§ 510-49. Purpose.
This article regulates the development potential of all property within the
jurisdiction of this chapter in order to protect and enhance the desired
community character of the Village of East Troy. The purpose of this article
is to indicate the maximum permitted density (for residential projects) and
maximum permitted intensity (for nonresidential projects) of development
on any given site within the jurisdiction of this chapter. This article is
designed to ensure the implementation of many goals and objectives of
the Village of East Troy Comprehensive Plan. Many of these are extremely
difficult to address using conventional zoning techniques, particularly those
which rely on minimum lot area requirements to establish maximum
permitted residential densities and maximum floor area ratios to establish
the character of nonresidential developments. Such approaches provide for
a minimum flexibility and/or the needless destruction of sensitive natural
resources. Any nonconforming situation (lot, use, structure and/or site)
shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
§ 510-50. Approach.
§ 510-51. Natural resources site evaluation.
A. The approach employed by this article considers both the development
potential of a given lot as well as the natural resources requiring
protection and preservation located on the site and applies the
following methods to ensure a high degree of site design flexibility and
the protection of community character and natural resources:
(1) Maximum gross densities (MGD).
(2) Minimum green space ratios (GSR).
(3) Minimum landscape surface ratios (LSR).
(4) Floor area ratios (FAR).
B. The development potential of any site is determined by a variety of
factors, including but not limited to:
(1) Area of the site.
(2) Proportion of the site not containing sensitive natural resources.
(3) Zoning district(s) in which the site is located.
(4) Development option(s) the site is developed under.
(5) Use(s) considered for development.
§ 510-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-51
1:835
§ 510-52. Instructions to determine density and intensity.
This article, in conjunction with the density and intensity regulations
included in Articles III, IV and V, contains the standards which determine
the maximum amount of development permitted on any given site. This
article recognizes inherent differences between residential and
nonresidential land uses and thus regulates their development in slightly
different manners.
A. Purpose. An important goal of the Village of East Troy is to protect
natural resources that are sensitive to disruption caused by
development and/or other land use activities. These resources include
floodways, floodplain areas, flood-fringe, shorelands, wetlands,
lakeshores, steep slopes, and woodlands. These resources serve
important functions which are lost in the absence of correct mitigation
approaches when these areas are subject to development and/or other
land use activities. In many instances, these functions cannot be
provided by other natural or man-made features. Specific broad
categories of such functions include the protection and enhancement of
air, surface water, groundwater, and soil quality; habitat provisions and
diversification; aesthetic diversification; and buffering effects.
B. Natural Resources Site Evaluation Worksheet. This worksheet is
intended to determine which areas of a site are considered natural
areas, requiring protection and preservation, and which areas are most
suited for development.327
A. Instructions to determine density and intensity are applicable to both
residential and nonresidential development.
(1) The Village's Comprehensive Plan should be reviewed for
implications related to the subject property, particularly the Future
Land Use and Transportation Maps.
(2) The Village's Official Map should be reviewed for planned capital
facilities and dedication requirements, including schools, parks,
stormwater management facilities, and street improvements,
which may affect the subject property.
(3) The amount and type of development any given site may contain is
directly related to the zoning district in which the site is located.
The current zoning designation as depicted on the Official Zoning
Map should be compared with the description of that district
provided in Article II.
(4) The effect of protected natural resources on the development
potential of the subject property should be evaluated. A Natural
Resources Site Evaluation Worksheet (see § 510-51B above) should
be completed for the site. All resources listed should be identified
327. Editor's Note: The Natural Resources Site Evaluation Worksheet is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 510-51 EAST TROY CODE § 510-52
1:836
on the subject property, and the total area of the property (in acres)
covered by those resources [resource protection areas (RPA)]
should be determined, as should the gross site area (GSA) and the
net developable area (NDA) of the subject property.
B. The following instructions apply only to residential development. In
addition to Subsection A(1) through (4) above, the following steps shall
be completed to determine residential density:
(1) Determine the types of dwelling units permitted on the subject
property by checking the zoning district in Articles III, IV and V.
Article VI provides detailed descriptions and regulations for each
dwelling unit (land use) type.
(2) Check the minimum site area (MSA) requirement against the gross
site area (GSA) of the subject property (refer to Articles III, IV and
V), as determined under the natural resources site evaluation in
Subsection A(4) above. If the GSA is less than the MSA required by
the selected development option, then a different development
option must be selected or additional property should be acquired.
(3) Determine the maximum gross density permitted on the site. The
maximum gross density, per the zoning district of the subject
property (see Articles II, III, IV and V), should be noted and used in
Subsection B(4) below.
(4) Determine the maximum number of units permitted on the site. The
maximum gross density, identified in Subsection B(3) above,
multiplied by the gross site area calculated in Subsection B(2)
above, equals the maximum number of dwelling units permitted on
the subject property under the selected development option within
the zoning district of the subject property. The ability to actually
develop this number of dwelling units on the subject property is not
guaranteed by the provisions of this article. Inefficient site design,
poor property configuration, and other factors may result in a lower
number of units actually fitting on the site.
(5) Check the minimum lot area (MLA) requirement of the subject
property (refer to Articles III, IV and V). The MLA must be equal to
or less than the lot size requirement for the type of dwelling unit
proposed for the project in Subsection B(1) above. If the MLA given
in the zoning district is larger than the lot size requirement given in
Subsection B(1), then a dwelling unit type with a larger lot size
must be selected [in which case, it may be advantageous to repeat
Subsection B(1) through (5) using a different dwelling unit type].
C. The following instructions apply only to nonresidential development. In
addition to Subsection A(1) through (4) above, the following steps shall
be completed to determine nonresidential intensity:
(1) Determine the types of land uses permitted on the subject property
by checking the zoning district in Articles III, IV and V. Article VII
§ 510-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-52
1:837
provides detailed descriptions and regulations for each land use
type.
(2) Check the minimum lot area requirement against the gross site
area present on the subject property as determined under the
natural resources site evaluation in Subsection A(4) above. If the
GSA is less than the MLA required by the zoning district, then
additional property should be acquired. In other words, the GSA
must be greater than or equal to the MLA.
(3) Check the minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR) requirement
(refer to Articles III, IV and V) against the required resource
protection area (RPA) present on the subject property. The LSR
should be multiplied by the GSA used in Subsection C(2) above. The
resulting product is the area of the site which must be permanently
protected as green space. This area should be compared with the
required RPA on the subject property as determined under the
natural resource site evaluation in Subsection A(4) above. If the
area of the site containing sensitive natural resources exceeds the
area of permanently protected landscape surface required, then
more floors may have to be used in order to approach maximum
development potential on the site. In other words, if the RPA is
greater than the LSR, the use of more floors may permit the
development of more floor area on the subject property.
(4) Determine the maximum floor area ratio (FAR) permitted on the
site, which is calculated by dividing the total floor area of all
buildings on a site by the gross site area (see "maximum floor area
ratio"). This number will be used in Subsection C(5) below.
(5) Determine the maximum floor area permitted on the site. The
maximum floor area ratio (FAR), identified in Subsection C(4)
above, multiplied by the gross site area (GSA) calculated in
Subsection C(2) above, equals the maximum square footage of
gross floor area permitted on the subject property within that
zoning district. The ability to actually develop this amount of floor
area is not guaranteed by the provisions of this article. Inefficient
site design, poor property configuration, and other factors may
result in a smaller amount of area actually fitting on the site.
(6) Check the maximum building size (MBS) requirement indicated in
Articles III, IV and V. If the MBS given in Articles III, IV and V is
smaller than the proposed building size calculated in Subsection
C(5) above, then a smaller building must be built or the use of
additional buildings should be considered.
§ 510-52 EAST TROY CODE § 510-52
1:838
ARTICLE VIII
Bulk Regulations
§ 510-53. Purpose.
This article regulates the location and bulk of buildings in both residential
and nonresidential developments in order to protect and enhance the
desired community character of the Village of East Troy. The provisions
of this article interact closely with the density and intensity provisions
described in Article VII. Any nonconforming situation (lot, use, structure
and/or site) shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
§ 510-54. Residential bulk standards.
All residential lots shall comply with the standards prescribed by this
section, § 510-39, and the bulk requirements listed for each residential
zoning district in Articles II, III, IV and V.328
§ 510-55. Nonresidential bulk standards.
All nonresidential lots created under the provisions of this chapter shall
comply with the standards of this section and the bulk requirements related
to the specific zoning district used as listed in Articles III, IV and V.329
§ 510-56. Yard setback adjustments.
Front yard setbacks should be adjusted as follows when the described
conditions or circumstances exist:
A. Limitations on yard setback adjustments.
(1) No yard shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such
yard less than the minimum required by this chapter. If an existing
yard is less than the minimum required, it shall not be reduced
further, except where exempted by the provisions of this section.
(2) No required yard or lot area allocated to satisfy the minimum yard
or lot area requirements for one building or structure shall be used
to satisfy the minimum yard or lot area requirement for another
building or structure.
B. Side and rear yard adjustments for bufferyards. In instances where the
required bufferyard width (per Article XIV) exceeds the minimum
required setback width, the minimum required bufferyard width shall
prevail. Absolutely no intrusions of a building or structure are
permitted within the required bufferyard.
C. Street side (front yard) setback adjustments.
328. Editor's Note: Figure 510-54: Residential Bulk Regulations, is included as an attachment
to this chapter.
329. Editor's Note: Figure 510-55: Nonresidential Bulk Regulations, is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 510-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-56
1:839
§ 510-57. Intrusions into required yards.
The minimum setback requirements of each zoning district establish the
minimum required yards for all uses, except those exempted by the
provisions of this section.
(1) For lots located adjacent to a street with an officially mapped or
existing right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet, a forty-foot
setback is required to address anticipated future conditions of
noise and air quality.
(2) The required street side (front yard) setback for any use may be
reduced for a principal structure on any lot where more than 50%
of the same type of principal structure on the same block or same
street does not meet the required front yard setback. In such
instances, the required front yard setback for the proposed
structure shall be the average of all the adjoining same type
principal structures on said block or street.
(3) In order to preserve and maintain the character of established
neighborhoods that are typified by front yard setbacks
substantially in excess of the minimum required front yard setback,
the following shall apply: blocks with an average street side (front
yard) setback more than five feet over the minimum required front
yard setback shall be increased to the average of the adjoining
same type of principal structures on said block or street.
A. Permitted intrusions into required street side yard:
(1) Chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features,
cornices, eaves, and gutters for residential buildings, provided that
they do not extend more than 2 1/2 feet into the required yard.
(2) Yard lights, ornamental lights, and nameplate signs for residential
lots, provided that they comply with the illumination requirements
of § 510-95 and provided that they do not locate closer than five
feet to the front or street property line.
(3) Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, decks, stoops, or similar
appurtenances to residential buildings which do not extend above
the floor level of the adjacent building entrance, provided that they
do not locate closer than 20 feet to any street right-of-way.
(4) Fences on residential or nonresidential lots which do not exceed
four feet in height, provided that they do not locate closer than six
inches to any street right-of-way. Permitted fence types shall
comply with the provisions of § 510-97.
B. Permitted intrusions into required side yards.
§ 510-56 EAST TROY CODE § 510-57
1:840
§ 510-57.1. Lawn accessories. [Added 11-20-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-15]
The following structures are allowed in all yard setback areas, but not closer
than three feet to an abutting property boundary line:
§ 510-58. Exceptions to maximum height regulations.
The maximum height regulations listed for residential and nonresidential
uses and accessory structures in each zoning district in Articles III, IV and V
are the maximum permitted heights for all buildings and structures, except
those exempted by this section.
(1) Sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, and
gutters for residential buildings, provided that they do not extend
more than 2 1/2 feet into the required yard.
(2) Fences may locate on the property line. Permitted fence types shall
comply with the provisions of § 510-97.
(3) Fire escapes (on residential buildings) which do not extend more
than three feet into the required yard.
C. Permitted intrusions into required rear yards. Terraces, steps,
uncovered porches, decks, stoops, or similar appurtenances to
residential buildings which do not extend more than one foot above
grade, provided that they do not locate closer than 20 feet to the rear
lot line.
D. All street side (front yard) setback areas. With the exception of fences,
no accessory structures shall be permitted within any portion of a street
yard (front yard), except where there is a shore yard. In instances
where there is a shore yard, shore yards shall be treated as front yards
and street yards as rear yards, whereby accessory structures may be
located between a principal building and a street frontage on the same
lot.
A. Garden pools, fountains, and statuary.
B. Flagpoles on residential properties, not exceeding 24 feet in height
above the ground surface. The area around the flagpole may not be
mounded or built up in any manner to increase the overall height of the
flagpole above the surrounding grade.
C. Flagpoles on commercial, industrial, and institutional properties, not
exceeding 32 feet in height above the ground surface, as depicted on an
approved site plan. The area around the flagpole may not be mounded
or built up in any manner to increase the overall height of the flagpole
above the surrounding grade.
A. The following are permitted to exceed the maximum height regulations
within any district where permitted: church spires, belfries, cupolas,
§ 510-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-58
1:841
§ 510-59. Canopies and awnings. [Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-08]
domes which do not contain usable space, public monuments, water
towers, fire and hose towers, and flagpoles.
B. The following require a conditional use permit to exceed 10 feet in
height: chimneys, smokestacks, cooling towers, and elevator
penthouses.
C. Any building or structure not otherwise accounted for by Subsections A
and B above may exceed said maximum height regulations with the
granting of a conditional use permit which specifically states the
maximum permitted height of the proposed building or structure.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CANOPY and AWNING — A permanent structure without walls for the
purpose of shielding driveways, sidewalks, or service areas from the
elements. Canopies are composed of solid materials such as metal and/
or wood. Awnings may have a metal or wood frame but typically have
surfaces composed of canvas, vinyl or similar flexible material.
B. Districts permitted. Canopies and awnings are permitted in all zoning
districts.
C. Regulations.
(1) Plan Commission approval required. All canopies and awnings shall
require Plan Commission approval either through the site review
process (§ 510-160) or the Downtown Overlay Zoning District
review process (§ 510-78) for the properties located in that overlay
district.
(2) Structural requirements.
(a) The structural support of all canopies and awnings shall be
approved by the Zoning Administrator as in compliance with
the Building Code of the Village of East Troy and shall meet the
State Building Code.330
(b) All frames and supports of all canopies and awnings shall be of
metal and designed to withstand a wind pressure of not less
than 40 pounds per square foot of area and shall be
constructed to receive dead loads as required in the Village of
East Troy Building Code and other ordinances.
(c) Canopies and awnings shall be attached to a building, and no
ground-mounted supports shall be placed within a public rightof-
way.
330. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Building Construction.
§ 510-58 EAST TROY CODE § 510-59
1:842
(3) Height. All canopies and awnings shall be constructed and erected
so that the lowest portion thereof shall not be less than eight feet
above nor greater than 20 feet above the level of the sidewalk or
public thoroughfare.
(4) Setback. Canopies and awnings shall comply with all setbacks
applicable to the principal structure; except, however, that in the
Central Business District all canopies and awnings may extend to
the side property lines and may extend out from the building facade
up to one foot of the back of the curb pursuant to § 510-129.1.
[Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
§ 510-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-59
1:843

ARTICLE IX
Nonconforming Situations
§ 510-60. Purpose. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations for nonconforming
uses, nonconforming lots, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming
sites created legally prior to July 18, 2011, the effective date of this chapter.
Nonconforming signs are addressed in Article XV.
§ 510-61. Nonconforming uses. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-04]
A. Continuance of a nonconforming use.
(1) Any nonconforming use lawfully existing upon the effective date of
this chapter, or any amendment to it, may be continued at the size
and in a manner of operation existing upon such date, except as
specified in this section.
(2) A use now regulated as a conditional use which was approved as a
legal land use, either permitted by right or as a conditional use,
prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be considered a
legal, conforming land use so long as any previously approved
conditions of use and site plan are followed. Any modification of the
previously approved conditions of use or site plan shall require
application and Village consideration under the requirements of
§ 510-160.
(3) Any prior legal use made nonconforming by a modification to the
Official Zoning Map after the effective date of this chapter may be
granted legal conforming use status by changing the zoning district
of the affected property to an appropriate district through an
amendment to the Official Zoning Map. Such requested
amendment shall be subject to the standards and procedures
prescribed by § 510-155.
B. Modification of a nonconforming use.
(1) Except as permitted in Subsection B(3) below, a nonconforming use
shall not be expanded, enlarged, extended, or reconstructed,
unless the use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which
the use is located.
(2) Substitution of new equipment may be permitted by the Plan
Commission.
(3) A nonconforming nonresidential use not served by public sanitary
sewer and/or public water may be permitted to expand without
being served by public sanitary sewer and/or public water if either
or both facilities are not available within 1,000 feet of the subject
property.
§ 510-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-61
1:845
§ 510-62. Nonconforming lots. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
C. Discontinuance of a nonconforming use. When any nonconforming use
of any structure or land is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive
months, or is changed into a conforming use, any future use of said
structure or land shall be in complete conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
D. Maintenance and repair of a nonconforming use. The ordinary
maintenance and repair of a nonconforming use is permitted, including
necessary repairs and incidental alterations which do not exacerbate
the adverse impacts of the nonconforming use in relation to the purpose
of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided in this section, whenever
a nonconforming use is damaged to the extent of more than 50% of its
current equalized assessed value, it shall not be restored except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Notwithstanding the previous sentence, the structural repairs or
alterations in a structure either itself nonconforming or containing a
nonconforming use shall not during its lifetime exceed 50% of the
present equalized assessed value of said structure unless permanently
changed to a conforming use.
A. Blanket conforming status. Blanket conforming status for any and all
requirements of this chapter is hereby automatically granted to all
nonconforming lots in their configuration existing or as finally approved
as of the effective date of this chapter. However, after the effective date
of this chapter, no lot shall be created which does not meet the
dimensional (density, intensity and bulk) requirements of each zoning
district, per Articles III, IV and V. This subsection ensures that lots
approved and created prior to the adoption of this chapter do not
encounter difficulty because the lots would otherwise be considered
nonconforming.
B. A lot of record existing upon the effective date of this chapter in a
residential zoning district, which does not meet the minimum lot
dimensional requirements for the zoning district, may be utilized for a
detached single-family dwelling unit, provided that the measurements
of such area and dimensions are equal to or greater than 80% of the
minimum requirements of the SR-4 Zoning District. Said lot shall not be
more intensively developed (with nonresidential uses) unless combined
with one or more abutting lots (or portions thereof) so as to create a lot
which meets the requirements of this chapter.
C. A lot of record existing upon the effective date of this chapter in the
RH-35 Zoning District which is less than 35 acres in area and which has
no dwelling units (neither farm residence or single-family residence)
may be utilized, or one detached single-family dwelling unit may be
constructed, provided that the measurements of such area and
dimensions are equal to or greater than 80% of the minimum
§ 510-61 EAST TROY CODE § 510-62
1:846
§ 510-63. Nonconforming structures. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02]
requirements of the RH-35 Zoning District and adequate access to a
public right-of-way is provided.
A. Blanket conforming status. Blanket conforming status for any and all
requirements of this chapter is hereby automatically granted to any
structure lawfully existing upon the effective date of this chapter. After
the effective date of this chapter, structures may not be enlarged,
expanded, or extended without bringing the enlargement, expansion, or
extension into compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or unless
a variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals under § 510-161.
(1) This subsection is intended to eliminate the continued classification
and/or creation of structures as nonconforming subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
(a) This provision addresses two different situations:
[1] Any structure in the community erected prior to the
adoption of zoning that does not meet some or all of the
bulk requirements of this chapter.
[2] In some instances, this chapter establishes new bulk or
intensity requirements that existing legal structures under
the previous zoning ordinance do not meet.
(b) This subsection therefore ensures that owners of such
structures legally established prior to the adoption of this
chapter do not encounter difficulty because the structures
would otherwise be considered nonconforming.
B. Restoration. A damaged, destroyed, or removed nonconforming
structure may be restored to the size, location, design and use that it
had immediately before the damage, destruction, or removal occurred
without any limits on the costs of the repair, reconstruction, or
improvement if Subsection B(1) through (3) below apply. The burden of
proof in regard to the location, dimensions, configuration, and exterior
building materials of the damaged or removed structure shall be upon
the property owner to demonstrate prior to the issuance of a building
permit.
(1) The nonconforming structure was damaged or destroyed on or
after the effective date of this chapter.
(2) The damage or destruction was caused by violent wind, vandalism,
fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation.
(3) If removed, the structure was removed or partially removed with
the permission of the Village.
§ 510-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-63
1:847
§ 510-64. Nonconforming sites.331
C. Unsafe structures. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Building
Inspector or any other Village official from initiating remedial or
enforcement actions when a lawful nonconforming structure is
declared unsafe or presents a danger to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
D. Future modification. When any lawful nonconforming structure in any
district is modified so as to be in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter, any future modification of said structure shall be in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
E. Ordinary maintenance. Ordinary maintenance repairs, including
repairs reasonably necessary to prevent the deterioration of a
structure, and remodeling of a nonconforming structure are permitted,
as well as necessary nonstructural repairs and alterations which do not
extend, enlarge, or intensify the nonconforming structure. Ordinary
maintenance repairs and remodeling include internal and external
painting, decorating, paneling, the addition of acoustical ceilings, the
installation of heating, electricity, plumbing (including fixtures) or
insulation, and the replacement of doors, windows, and other
nonstructural components.
F. Alterations. Structural alterations may be made to a building containing
lawful nonconforming residential units, provided that such alterations
do not increase the number of dwelling units or the bulk of the building.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a conforming garage may be added if
none previously existed. However, after the effective date of this
chapter, such buildings shall not be enlarged, expanded or extended
without bringing the enlargement, expansion or extension into
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, unless a variance is
granted under § 510-161 and except as permitted under this section.
G. Timing of building permit. Any structure for which a building permit
has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of this chapter, or
an amendment to it, which will become nonconforming under the
provisions of this chapter, or that amendment thereto, may be
completed in accordance with the approved plans, provided that
construction is started within 365 calendar days after issuance of the
permit for single- and two-family construction and within 365 calendar
days after issuance of a permit for all other development and
construction is completed within 730 calendar days (two years) after
the start of construction. If all such conditions are met, the structure
shall thereafter be a legal nonconforming structure.
A. Blanket conforming status. Blanket conforming status for any and all
requirements of this chapter is hereby automatically granted to all
331. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-63 EAST TROY CODE § 510-64
1:848
development sites in their configuration existing or as finally approved
as of the effective date of this chapter. However, after the effective
date of this chapter, additional site development that would result in
the enlargement, expansion, or extension of uses or structures will
not be allowed to occur without bringing the enlargement into full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or to the extent practical
without removal of lawful structures in accordance with the following
Subsections C through E below.
(1) This subsection is intended to prevent the creation of certain
nonconforming sites related to building and site design subject to
the requirements of this chapter. These building and site design
components may include one or more of the following:
(a) Build-to design requirements.
(b) Exterior building materials requirements.
(c) Exterior building design requirements.
(d) Parking, loading, access drive and other paved area design
requirements.
(e) Landscaping design requirements.
(f) Bufferyard design requirements.
(g) Fencing design requirements.
(h) Lighting design requirements.
(2) This subsection ensures that sites approved prior to the adoption of
this chapter do not encounter difficulty because they would
otherwise be considered nonconforming.
B. On lots where the site configuration and undeveloped area are
sufficient to comply with nonconformities in site design, no
enlargement, expansion, or extension of a use or structure shall be
permitted if it makes compliance with site regulations of this chapter
impossible, even if said enlargement, expansion, or extension of the use
or structure would otherwise be permissible.
C. Enlargements, expansions, or extensions that would result in creation
of one or more nonconformities, render a nonconforming site incapable
of being brought into full or greater compliance with nonconforming
site requirements, or increase the degree of existing nonconformities
with the site development standards of this chapter shall not be
permitted, unless a variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals
under § 510-161.
D. On lots with adequate configuration and area to bring the site into full
or greater compliance with site design standards, said compliance shall
be required at the time of any property improvement, modification,
§ 510-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-64
1:849
enlargement, or expansion requiring site plan review by the Plan
Commission. The degree to which the property shall be made to comply
with substandard site design elements shall be proportional to the
degree of property improvement per the following:
(1) Total additions or expansions to structures on nonconforming sites
shall require correction of existing nonconformities of on-site
improvements in accordance with the following:
(a) Renovations that do not result in expansions of the total gross
square footage of the existing structure(s) and/or outdoor
storage areas less than 50% of the existing structural and/or
outdoor storage area within any continuous five-year period
shall require a corresponding percentage increase in
compliance with the site improvements required by this
chapter until the site achieves 100% compliance. (Example: A
property with a permitted, expandable use currently has only
50% of the required landscaping. An addition to the structure
equaling 20% of the combined area of the existing structures
and outdoor operations/storage uses on a site is proposed.
Therefore, as a condition of approval, an additional 20% of
landscaping required for the whole site must be added. In this
instance, 70% of the landscaping requirement would be met
upon completion of the improvements.)
(b) Complete replacement of existing structures or expansions of
the existing structures that result in a total of 50% or greater
increase of total gross square footage within any continuous
five-year period require the entire property to meet all of the
site improvement requirements of this chapter. The same
requirements also apply to increased or new outdoor areas
used for outdoor operations/storage.
E. On lots where the configuration and undeveloped area of the
nonconforming site provide insufficient space to bring the site into full
compliance with all site requirements but nevertheless provide space to
reduce the degree of one or more nonconformities, the Plan
Commission shall make a determination as to the manner and degree to
which each site nonconformity shall be brought into conformance.
§ 510-64 EAST TROY CODE § 510-64
1:850
ARTICLE X
Overlay Zoning Districts
§ 510-65. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish overlay zoning districts wherein
certain additional requirements are superimposed on the underlying
standard zoning districts set forth in Articles II, III, IV and V of this chapter.
Each overlay district is intended to address a special land use circumstance
beyond those addressed by the underlying zoning district. Special
requirements include mandatory protections against natural hazards,
mandatory protections of valued natural resources, special design
guidelines, and measures to ensure compatibility with airport flight
operations. Each overlay district is intended to implement one or more
aspects of the Comprehensive Plan and to ensure compliance with federal
and state requirements. Any nonconforming situation (lot, use, structure
and/or site) shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
§ 510-66. Interpretation.
A given property may lie within one or more overlay zoning districts based
on its geographic location. The provisions of this article are intended to
be consulted before issuance of any building permit, site plan approval,
conditional use permit, zoning permit, zoning change, or land division to
ensure the intended use meets all of the requirements of any applicable
overlay district, in addition to the underlying standard zoning district (see
Articles II, III, IV and V). For each overlay district established in this article,
a definition of the resource or geographic area is provided, followed by
the specific purposes of the protective regulations governing the resource
or geographic location, the method of delineating the boundaries of the
overlay district, and the mandatory development regulations.
§ 510-67. Overlay zoning districts. [Amended 7-21-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-07]
For the purpose of this chapter, the overlay zoning districts listed below are
hereby established:
AHR Airport Height Restriction
FP Floodplain
S Shoreland
SW Shoreland-Wetland
GP Groundwater Protection
NFC Natural Features Conservancy
DD Downtown Design
PD Planned Development
§ 510-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-68
1:851
§ 510-68. Official Overlay Zoning Map. [Amended 12-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
Except where otherwise indicated in this article, the overlay zoning districts
are represented on the Official Overlay Zoning Map adopted and from time
to time amended by the Village of East Troy.332
§ 510-69. Airport Height Restriction Overlay District.
A. Purpose. This district is intended to regulate the height of buildings,
structures, and fixtures within the vicinity of the East Troy Municipal
Airport to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of both airport
users and residents of the surrounding communities. Regulations of the
AHR District apply to all properties within the AHR District regardless
of ownership. The AHR District is intended to prevent or more closely
regulate buildings, structures, and fixtures to ensure safe landing,
takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft within the vicinity of the airport.
B. Height regulations. The following regulations shall apply to the Airport
Height Restriction District:
(1) The determination of the overall height of a building, structure, or
fixture within the AHR District shall include any appurtenance
installed thereon (see also "building height" under § 510-12).
(2) Height limitation zones. Except as otherwise provided in this
article, no structure shall be constructed, altered, or located or
permitted to remain after such construction, alteration, or location
at a height in excess of the height limitation indicated on the
Height Limitation Zoning Map, East Troy Municipal Airport,
Walworth County, Wisconsin, dated November 17, 1988, which is
hereby adopted and made part of this chapter.
(3) All lighting fixtures within the AHR District, including building and
pole-mounted, shall be full cutoff fixtures and shall not exceed 12
feet in height.
(4) Trees, shrubs, bushes, and other plants shall not exceed 20 feet in
height. The Zoning Administrator and/or Building Inspector shall
have the right to trim, prune, or remove, at the owner's expense,
any plant which was planted after adoption of this chapter and
found to be in violation of the height restriction for the zone in
which it is located.
(5) Exemptions from height regulations. The restrictions contained in
Subsection B(2) above shall not apply to objects which are less than
35 feet in height above ground level at the object site within 1/2
mile of the airport boundary or to structures less than 50 feet in
height above the ground within the area beginning 1/2 mile from
332. Editor's Note: The Official Overlay Zoning Map is on file at the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 510-68 EAST TROY CODE § 510-69
1:852
§ 510-70. Shoreland Overlay District. [Added 7-21-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-07]
the airport boundary extending to three miles from the airport
boundary.
C. Nonconforming buildings, structures and fixtures.
(1) The regulations prescribed in Subsection B above shall not be
construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or
alterations of any nonconforming buildings, structures, fixtures, or
uses or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any such
nonconformity, except as provided in Subsection D below.
(2) Nothing herein contained shall require any change in construction,
alteration, or intended use of any structure, if the construction or
alteration of such was begun prior to September 3, 1996, and if
such is diligently prosecuted. This section shall not interfere with
the removal of nonconformities by purchase or the use of eminent
domain.
(3) Before nonconformities may be replaced, altered, or rebuilt, a
permit shall be applied for and secured in the manner prescribed
under Subsection D below authorizing such change, replacement,
or repair. No such permit shall be denied if the structure will not
become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the
effective date of this article or than it was when the application for
permit was made.
D. Permits. No structure that exceeds the height limitations indicated in
Subsection B shall be constructed, erected or installed, or be permitted
to remain, in any zone created by Subsection B until the applicant has
applied for and been granted a building permit. Said permit shall be
posted in a prominent place on the premises prior to and during the
construction period, erection, installation, or establishment.
Application for such permit shall indicate the use for which the permit
is desired and shall describe and locate the use with sufficient
particularity to permit the Zoning Administrator and/or Building
Inspector to determine whether such use would conform to the
regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the
affirmative, the Zoning Administrator and/or Building Inspector shall
issue the permit applied for.333
A. Legislative findings. The Village Board makes the following legislative
findings relating to the Shoreland Overlay District:
333. Editor's Note: Original § 13-1-85, Floodplain Overlay District, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 8-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09. See now Art. XVIII, Floodplain
Overlay District.
§ 510-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-70
1:853
(1) Villages are required by § 61.353, Wis. Stats., to adopt shoreland
zoning regulations meeting the minimum standards set forth in
that section by July 1, 2014.
(2) Uncontrolled use of the shorelands and pollution of the navigable
waters of the municipality would adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare and impair the tax base.
B. Purpose. This section promotes the public health, safety, and welfare
and is intended to:
(1) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions and
prevent and control water pollution.
(2) Protect spawning grounds, fish, and aquatic life by controlling the
removal of shoreline vegetation.
(3) Control the placement of principal buildings by establishing
setbacks from waterways.
(4) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by:
(a) Restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover;
(b) Preventing shoreline encroachment by structures;
(c) Controlling shoreland excavation and other earthmoving
activities; and
(d) Regulating the use and placement of boathouses and other
structures.
C. Boundary of district. The Shoreland Overlay District includes land
located within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable
lake, pond, or flowage or within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water
mark of a navigable river or stream or to the landward side of the onehundred-
year floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Any feature
designated as a lake or as a stream on the Zoning Map has been
determined to be navigable for the purpose of this section. The Flood
Insurance Rate Maps adopted under § 510-167 of this chapter are used
in determining the extent of the one-hundred-year floodplain.
D. Vegetation management within shoreline buffer zone. Woody vegetation
not located in a wetland and woody and nonwoody vegetation in a
wetland located in the shoreline buffer zone (i.e., 35 feet landward from
the ordinary high-water mark) shall not be removed, except as
described in this subsection. Vegetation listed by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources as an invasive species under Ch. NR
40, Wis. Adm. Code, may be removed, provided that the property owner
reestablishes vegetation within the shoreline buffer zone consistent
with a management plan approved by the Plan Commission. Vegetation
may be removed to create and maintain a viewing/access corridor no
more than 30 feet wide for every 100 feet of shoreline frontage.
§ 510-70 EAST TROY CODE § 510-70
1:854
E. Shoreline setback.
(1) Principal buildings shall be no closer than 50 feet to the ordinary
high-water mark, except that a lesser setback is allowed if all of the
following apply:
(a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or
parcel of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot
or parcel of land containing a principal building.
(b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a
distance equal to the average setback of the principal building
on the adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water
mark, whichever distance is greater.
(2) Accessory buildings shall comply with the setback standards for
principal buildings described in this subsection, except that a
boathouse may be constructed within 35 feet of the ordinary highwater
mark as set forth in Subsection F below.
Figure 510-70: Shoreline Setback Requirements (Sample
Graphic)
§ 510-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-70
1:855
Key:
Lot 1 The principal building is existing and is more than 50 feet
from the ordinary high-water mark (OHWM).
Lot 2 The lot is vacant. Because the lots on both sides have a
principal building, setback averaging may be used, but the
setback may not be less than 35 feet. In the instance
depicted above, the setback would be calculated as
follows: (50 feet plus the actual distance of the building on
Lot 3) divided by two.
Lot 3 The principal building is existing and is less than 50 feet
from the ordinary high-water mark.
Lot 4 The lot is vacant. A principal building on this lot must
comply with the fifty-foot setback requirement because
setback averaging does not apply (i.e., a principal building
is only on one side).
Lot 5 The lot is vacant.
F. Boathouses. A boathouse constructed within the Shoreland Overlay
District shall comply with each of the following requirements:
(1) The boathouse shall be located in the viewing/access corridor as
allowed in Subsection D above.
(2) The boathouse shall be designed and constructed solely for the
storage of watercraft and related equipment; human habitation is
strictly prohibited.
(3) One boathouse is permitted on a lot as an accessory structure.
(4) The boathouse shall not be constructed where the existing slope is
more than 20%.
(5) The boathouse shall not be closer than five feet to the ordinary
high-water mark of the stream or lake on which it fronts. A
boathouse shall not be closer than five feet to a side lot line.
(6) If the boathouse is located, in whole or in part, within the
Floodplain Overlay District, all applicable standards of that district
shall apply.
(7) The boathouse shall not exceed 12 feet in height at the roof peak
above the original grade or final grade as measured on the side
facing the water body.
(8) The floor area of the boathouse shall not exceed 450 square feet.
(9) The boathouse must have an appropriate door or double-wide doors
facing the water body for the purpose of entry and exit for
watercraft. French, patio, or glass doors are prohibited.
§ 510-70 EAST TROY CODE § 510-70
1:856
§ 510-71. Shoreland-Wetland Overlay District.
(10) The boathouse may contain plumbing for two sinks and one toilet,
provided that such fixtures are connected to an approved
wastewater system. Showers and/or bathtubs are prohibited.
A. Statutory authorization. This section is authorized pursuant to §§ 61.35,
61.351, 87.30 and 281.31, Wis. Stats.
B. Findings of fact. Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and the
pollution of the navigable waters of the Village of East Troy would
adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare and impair the tax base. The Wisconsin Legislature has
delegated responsibility to all municipalities to:
(1) Promote the public health, safety, convenience, and general
welfare.
(2) Maintain the stormwater and floodwater storage capacity of
wetlands.
(3) Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which
filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals, or organic
compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters.
(4) Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife
by preserving wetlands and other aquatic habitat.
(5) Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland areas.
(6) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal
of natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland
excavation, filling, and other earthmoving activities.
C. Compliance. The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within
the shoreland-wetland area of the Village of East Troy shall be in full
compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable local,
state, or federal regulations.
D. Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to
comply with shoreland-wetland regulations and obtain all necessary
permits. State agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis.
Stats., applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and
repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation are exempt when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
E. Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this section to
repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing
easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules,
regulations, ordinances, or permits previously adopted or issued
pursuant to law. However, wherever this section imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this section shall govern.
§ 510-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-71
1:857
F. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this section shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the municipality and shall not be deemed
a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by Wisconsin
Statutes. Where a provision of this section is required by a standard in
Ch. NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the provision in this section is
unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Chapter NR
117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this section or in
effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this section.
G. Shoreland-wetland zoning maps. The following are hereby adopted and
made part of this section and are on file with the Zoning Administrator:
Wisconsin wetland inventory map stamped "Final" on July 7, 1987 (and
any amendments thereto), and the Floodplain Zoning Map (see
§ 510-167).
H. Boundary. The Shoreland-Wetland District includes all wetlands in the
Village of East Troy which are five acres or more and are shown on the
wetland inventory map that has been adopted and made a part of this
section and which are:
(1) Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable
lakes, ponds, or flowages. Lakes, ponds, or flowages in the Village
of East Troy shall be presumed to be navigable if they are shown on
the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps.
(2) Within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers
or streams or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever
distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be
navigable if they are designated as either continuous or
intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey
quadrangle maps.
I. Determination of navigability. Determinations of navigability and
ordinary high-water mark shall initially be made by the Zoning
Administrator. When questions arise, the Zoning Administrator shall
contact the appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources (WisDNR) for the final determination of navigability
or ordinary high-water mark.
J. Discrepancies. When an apparent discrepancy exists between the SW
District boundary shown on the Wisconsin wetland inventory map or
the Floodplain Zoning Map and the actual field conditions, the Zoning
Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the
WisDNR to determine if the SW District boundary as mapped is in error.
If WisDNR staff concur with the Zoning Administrator that a particular
area was incorrectly mapped as a shoreland or wetland, the Zoning
Administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a
zoning or building permit in accordance with the regulations applicable
to the underlying standard zoning district. In order to correct shoreland
and/or wetland mapping errors or acknowledge filled wetlands
§ 510-71 EAST TROY CODE § 510-71
1:858
designated in Subsection K, the Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable
period.334
K. Filled wetlands. Wetlands which were filled prior to July 2, 1987, the
date on which the Village received final wetland inventory maps, in a
manner which affects their wetland characteristics, to the extent that
the area can no longer be defined as wetland, are not subject to this
section.
L. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted subject to the
provisions of Chs. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., and the provisions of other
local, state, and federal laws, if applicable:
(1) Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning
permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
(a) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling,
or boating.
(b) Harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild
rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not
injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops.
(c) Practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and
harvesting of timber.
(d) Pasturing of livestock.
(e) Cultivation.
(f) Construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
(2) Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and
which may involve wetland alterations only to the extent
specifically provided below:
(a) The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water
level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate
abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse
impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected.
(b) The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland
alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and
harvesting cranberries.
(c) The maintenance and repair of existing drainage to restore
preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum amount
of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that
the filling is otherwise permissible and that dredged spoil is
placed on existing spoil banks where possible.
334. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-71
1:859
(d) The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing
of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary
for such construction or maintenance.
(e) The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and
walkways, observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings,
including limited excavating and filling necessary for such
construction or maintenance.
(f) The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the
purpose of draining lands outside the Shoreland-Wetland
Zoning District, provided that such installation or maintenance
is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact
upon the natural functions of the shoreland and/or wetland.
(g) The maintenance, repair, replacement, and reconstruction of
existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating
and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction.
(3) Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a zoning permit and
which may include wetland alterations only to the extent
specifically provided below:
(a) The construction and maintenance of roads which are
necessary for the continuity of the municipal street system, the
provision of essential utility and emergency services, or to
provide access to uses permitted in this section, provided that:
[1] The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside
the wetland.
[2] The road shall be designed and constructed to minimize
the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the
wetland.
[3] The road shall be designed and constructed with the
minimum cross-sectional area practical to serve the
intended use.
[4] Road construction activities shall be carried out in the
immediate area of the roadbed only.
[5] Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the
construction or maintenance of the road.
(b) The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings,
provided that:
[1] The building is used solely in conjunction with a use
permitted in the SW District or for the raising of
waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals.
§ 510-71 EAST TROY CODE § 510-71
1:860
[2] The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located
outside the wetland.
[3] The building shall not exceed 500 square feet in floor area.
[4] Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide
structural support for the building shall be permitted.
(c) The establishment and development of public and private
parks and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic,
natural and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas,
fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and
animal farms, wildlife preserves, and public boat launching
ramps, provided that:
[1] Any private development allowed under this subsection
shall be used exclusively for the permitted purpose.
[2] Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the
development of public boat launching ramps, swimming
beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar
structures are allowed.
[3] The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for
the uses permitted under this subsection are allowed only
where such construction and maintenance meet the
criteria in Subsection L(3)(a) above.
[4] Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish
and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and
animal farms, and wildlife preserves shall be for the
purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise
enhance wetland values.
(d) The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone
transmission lines, gas and water distribution lines, and
sewage collection lines and related facilities and the
construction and maintenance of railroad lines, provided that:
[1] The utility transmission and distribution facilities and
railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located
outside the wetland.
[2] Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such
construction or maintenance shall be permitted.
[3] Such construction or maintenance shall be done in a
manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the
natural functions of the wetland.
M. Prohibited uses. Any use not listed in Subsection L of this section is
prohibited, unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been
§ 510-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-71
1:861
rezoned by amendment of this section in accordance with Subsection
O.
N. Nonconforming structures and uses. The lawful use of a building,
structure, or property which existed at the time this section, or an
applicable amendment to this section, took effect and which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this section, including the routine
maintenance of such a building or structure, may be continued, subject
to the following conditions:
(1) The shoreland-wetland provisions of this chapter, authorized by
§ 61.351, Wis. Stats., shall not limit the repair, reconstruction,
renovation, remodeling or expansion of a nonconforming structure
or of any environmental control facility related to such a structure
in existence on the effective date of the shoreland-wetland
provisions. All other modifications to nonconforming structures are
subject to § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., which limits total lifetime
structural repairs and alterations to 50% of current fair market
value.
(2) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the
building, structure or property shall conform to the appropriate
provisions of this section.
(3) Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve
the use of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption
or subsequent amendment of this section adopted under § 62.231
or 61.351, Wis. Stats., may be continued although such use does
not conform to the provisions of this section; however, such
nonconforming use may not be extended.
(4) The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which
are located below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable
waters shall comply with the requirements of § 30.121, Wis. Stats.
(5) Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be
permitted to continue as nonconforming uses.
O. Amending shoreland-wetland regulations. The Village Board may alter,
supplement, or change the district boundaries and the regulations
contained in this section in accordance with the requirements of
§ 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats., Ch. NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code, and the
following:
(1) A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted
to the appropriate district office of the WisDNR within five days of
the submission of the proposed amendment to the Village Plan
Commission.335
335. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-71 EAST TROY CODE § 510-71
1:862
(2) All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland
zoning regulations shall be referred to the Plan Commission and a
public hearing shall be held as required by § 62.23(7)(d), Wis.
Stats. The appropriate district office of the WisDNR shall be
provided with written notice of the public hearing at least 10 days
prior to such hearing.336
(3) In order to ensure that the shoreland protection objectives in
§ 281.31, Wis. Stats., will be accomplished by the amendment, the
Village Board may not rezone a wetland in a SW District, or any
portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning may result in a
significant adverse impact upon any of the following:
(a) Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity.
(b) Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of
groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a
wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a
wetland.
(c) Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals, or
organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable
waters.
(d) Shoreline protection against soil erosion.
(e) Fish spawning, breeding, nursery, or feeding grounds.
(f) Wildlife habitat or areas of special recreational, scenic or
scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and habitat
of endangered species.
(4) Where the district office of the WisDNR determines that a proposed
rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the
criteria listed in Subsection O(3) above, the WisDNR shall so notify
the Village of its determination either prior to or during the public
hearing held on the proposed amendment.
(5) The appropriate district office of the WisDNR shall be provided
with a copy of the recommendations and report, if any, of the Plan
Commission on the proposed text or map amendment within 10
days after the submission of those recommendations to the Village
Board and written notice of the Village Board's action on the
proposed text or map amendment within 10 days after the action is
taken.337
(6) If the WisDNR notifies the Plan Commission in writing that a
proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon
336. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
337. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-71
1:863
§ 510-72. Groundwater Protection Overlay District. [Amended
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
any of the criteria listed in Subsection O(3) above, that proposed
amendment, if approved by the Village Board, may not become
effective until more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice
of the Village Board approval was mailed to the WisDNR, as
required by Subsection O(5) of this section. If, within the thirtyday
period, the WisDNR notifies the Village Board that the WisDNR
intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning
ordinance for the Village under §§ 62.231(6) and 61.351(6), Wis.
Stats., the proposed amendment may not become effective until the
ordinance adoption procedure under §§ 62.231(6) and 61.351(6),
Wis. Stats., is completed or otherwise terminated.338
P. Enforcement and penalties. Any development, building, structure, or
accessory building or structure constructed, altered, added to,
modified, rebuilt, or replaced or any use or accessory use established
after the effective date of this section in violation of the provisions of
this section by any person, firm, association, or corporation (including
building contractors or their agents) shall be deemed a violation.
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall refer violations to the Village Board
and the Village Attorney, who shall prosecute such violations. Any
person, firm, association or corporation who or which violates or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 510-153 of this chapter,
together with the taxable costs of such action.339
(2) Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Every violation of this section is a public nuisance and the creation
thereof may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be
abated by action at suit of the Village, the state or any citizen
thereof pursuant to § 87.30(2), Wis. Stats.
A. Purpose. The residents of the Village of East Troy depend exclusively on
groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use
practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater
quality. The purpose of this Groundwater Protection (GP) Overlay
District is to institute land use regulations and restrictions protecting
the municipal water supply of the Village of East Troy and to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. Authority. Statutory authority of the Village to enact these regulations
was established by the Wisconsin Legislature in 1983, Wisconsin Act
410, effective May 11, 1984, which specifically added groundwater
338. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
339. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-71 EAST TROY CODE § 510-72
1:864
protection, in §§ 59.69(1) and 62.23(7)(c), Wis. Stats., to the statutory
authorization for county and municipal planning and zoning to protect
the public health, safety, and general welfare.
C. Definition. The GP Overlay District encompasses the area of land which
contributes water to the well out to a line delineating the five-year time
of travel to the well. Time of travel delineations must be based upon
accepted hydrogeological research as outlined in the State Wellhead
Protection Program Plan for Public Water Utilities, Appendix 2, with
zoning boundaries normalized to road center lines, railways, surface
water features, public land survey section lines (i.e., 1/2, 1/4, 1/8 or 1/
16 section lines), existing property lines, or a stated distance from the
aforementioned lines.
D. Boundary. The boundary of the GP Overlay District is established by this
chapter and is depicted on the Zoning Map.
E. Groundwater Technical Review Committee. The Groundwater Technical
Review Committee shall consist of the Village Administrator, Zoning
Administrator, Village Engineer, and Director of Public Works. The
purpose of the Groundwater Technical Review Committee is to provide
objective and scientific technical review of requests for conditional use
permits and make recommendations to the Plan Commission to grant or
deny conditional use permits based upon the facts discovered in that
review, to make recommendations on any and all conditions placed on a
conditional use permit, and to give advice on matters concerning
groundwater. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
F. Separation distance requirements. The following separation distances,
as specified in § NR 811.12, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be maintained,
provided that the use is otherwise allowed in the standard zoning
district in which it is located:
(1) Ten feet between a well and an emergency or standby power
system that is operated by the same facility which operates the well
and that has a double wall aboveground storage tank with
continuous electronic interstitial leakage monitoring. These
facilities shall meet the installation requirements of § ATCP 93.260,
Wis. Adm. Code, and receive written approval from the Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services or its designated
Local Program Operator under § ATCP 93.110, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) Fifty feet between a well and a storm sewer main or a sanitary
sewer main where the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water
main class materials and joints. Gravity sanitary sewers shall be
successfully air pressure tested in place. The air pressure test shall
meet or exceed the requirements of the four psi low-pressure air
test for plastic gravity sewer lines found in the latest edition of
Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in
Wisconsin. Force mains shall be successfully pressure tested with
water to meet the AWWA (American Water Works Association)
§ 510-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-72
1:865
C600 pressure and leakage testing requirements for one hour at
125% of the pump shutoff head.
(3) Two hundred feet between a well and any sanitary sewer main not
constructed of water main class materials, sanitary sewer manhole,
lift station, one- or two-family residential heating fuel oil
underground storage tank or aboveground storage tank or private
on-site wastewater treatment system (POWTS) treatment tank or
holding tank component and associated piping.
(4) Three hundred feet between a well and any farm underground
storage tank system or other underground storage tank system
with double wall and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the
system, which means the tank and any piping connected to it.
These installations shall meet the most restrictive installation
requirements of § ATCP 93.260, Wis. Adm. Code, and receive
written approval from the Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services or its designated Local Program Operator
under § ATCP 93.110, Wis. Adm. Code. These requirements apply
to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, biodiesel, ethanol, other
alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner
fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances.
(5) Three hundred feet between a well and any farm aboveground
storage tank with double wall, or single wall tank with other
secondary containment and under a canopy, other aboveground
storage tank system with double wall, or single wall tank with
secondary containment and under a canopy, and with electronic
interstitial monitoring for a double wall tank or electronic leakage
monitoring for a single wall tank secondary containment structure.
These installations shall meet the most restrictive installation
requirements of § ATCP 93.260, Wis. Adm. Code, and receive
written approval from the Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services or its designated Local Program Operator
under § ATCP 93.110, Wis. Adm. Code. These requirements apply
to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, biodiesel, ethanol, other
alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner
fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances.
(6) Four hundred feet between a well and a private on-site wastewater
treatment system (POWTS) treatment dispersal component with a
design capacity of less than 12,000 gallons per day, a cemetery, or a
stormwater retention or detention pond.
(7) Six hundred feet between a well and any farm underground storage
tank system or other underground storage tank system with double
wall and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the system,
which means the tank and any piping connected to it; any farm
aboveground storage tank with double wall, or single wall tank
with other secondary containment and under a canopy; or other
aboveground storage tank system with double wall, or single wall
§ 510-72 EAST TROY CODE § 510-72
1:866
tank with secondary containment and under a canopy, and with
electronic interstitial monitoring for a double wall tank or
electronic leakage monitoring for a single wall tank secondary
containment structure. These installations shall meet the standard
double wall tank or single wall tank secondary containment
installation requirements of § ATCP 93.260, Wis. Adm. Code, and
receive written approval from the Wisconsin Department of Safety
and Professional Services or its designated Local Program
Operator under § ATCP 93.110, Wis. Adm. Code. These
requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, biodiesel,
ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor
fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances.
(8) One thousand feet between a well and land application of
municipal, commercial, or industrial waste; the boundaries of a
landspreading facility for spreading of petroleum-contaminated soil
regulated under Ch. NR 718, Wis. Adm. Code, while that facility is
in operation; agricultural, industrial, commercial or municipal
wastewater treatment plant treatment units, lagoons, or storage
structures; manure stacks or storage structures; or private on-site
wastewater treatment system (POWTS) treatment dispersal
component with a design capacity of 12,000 gallons per day or
more.
(9) One thousand two hundred feet between a well and any solid waste
storage, transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain
destructor, processing, wood burning, one-time disposal or small
demolition facility; sanitary landfill; any property with residual
groundwater contamination that exceeds Ch. NR 140, Wis. Adm.
Code, enforcement standards; coal storage area; salt or deicing
material storage area; any single wall farm underground storage
tank or single wall farm aboveground storage tank; or other single
wall underground storage tank or aboveground storage tank that
has or has not received written approval from the Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services or its designated
Local Program Operator under § ATCP 93.110, Wis. Adm. Code, for
a single wall tank installation. These requirements apply to tanks
containing gasoline, diesel, biodiesel, ethanol, other alternative
fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant,
waste oil, or hazardous substances and bulk pesticide or fertilizer
handling or storage facilities.
G. Permitted uses. The following permitted uses are subject to the
separation distance requirements in Subsection F above:
(1) Public and private parks, playgrounds, and beaches, provided that
there are no on-site wastewater disposal systems or holding tanks.
(2) Wildlife and natural and woodland areas.
(3) Biking, hiking, skiing, nature, equestrian and fitness trails.
§ 510-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-72
1:867
(4) Residential land uses which are connected to the municipal
sanitary sewer system.
(5) Single-family residences on a minimum lot of 20,000 square feet
with a private on-site sewage treatment system receiving less than
8,000 gallons per day which meets the county and state health
standards for the effluent and is in conformance with Ch. SPS 383,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(6) Routine tillage, planting, and field management operations in
support of agricultural crop production where nutrients from
legume, manure, and commercial sources are accounted for and
credited towards crop nutrient need. The combination of all
nutrient sources applied or available on individual fields may not
exceed University of Wisconsin soil test recommendations for that
field.
(7) Commercial and industrial establishments which are connected to
the municipal sanitary sewer system.
(8) Residential land uses containing aboveground liquid propane gas
tanks for heating, provided that the tank does not exceed 1,000
gallons.
H. Prohibited uses.
(1) The method of regulation by prohibition of certain uses is employed
to provide the greatest assurance that inadvertent discharge of
pollutants into the groundwater supply will not occur, since such an
event would result in almost certain contamination of the public
water supply and costly mitigation or remediation for which
liability is difficult or impossible to establish.
(2) The prohibited uses, activities, or structures inside the GP Overlay
District include:
(a) Cemeteries;
(b) Buried hydrocarbon, petroleum or hazardous chemical storage
tanks (e.g., identified by OSHA criteria under 40 CFR Part
370);
(c) Dry cleaners;
(d) Chemical manufacturers (Standard Industrial Classification
Major Group 28);
(e) Coal storage;
(f) Landfills and any other solid waste facility, except postconsumer
recycling;
(g) Stockyards and feedlots;
§ 510-72 EAST TROY CODE § 510-72
1:868
(h) Manure and animal waste storage, except animal waste
storage facilities regulated by the county;
(i) Nonmetallic earthen materials extraction or sand and gravel
pits;
(j) Pesticide and fertilizer dealer, transfer, or storage;
(k) Railroad yards and maintenance stations;
(l) Rendering plants and slaughterhouses;
(m) Salt or deicing material storage;
(n) Industrial lagoons and pits;
(o) Septage or sludge spreading, storage or treatment;
(p) Private on-site wastewater treatment systems or holding tanks
receiving 8,000 gallons per day or more;
(q) Stormwater infiltration basins without pretreatment, including
vegetative filtration and/or temporary detention;
(r) Salvage yards or junkyards;
(s) Motor vehicular services, including filling and service stations,
repair, renovation, and body working;
(t) Wood preserving operations; and
(u) Hazardous, toxic, or radioactive materials transfer and
storage.
I. Conditional uses. Any person may request a conditional use permit for
certain uses, activities and structures otherwise prohibited by
Subsection H within the GP Overlay District if these uses, activities, and
structures are outside of the required separation distances listed in
Subsection F. Procedures for review and approval of conditional use
permits in the GP Overlay District shall be the same as those outlined in
§ 510-157 of this chapter, in addition to the following requirements:
(1) An environmental assessment report prepared by a licensed
environmental engineer which details the risk to, and potential
impact of, the proposed use, activities, and structures on
groundwater quality.
(2) An operational safety plan which details the operational
procedures for material processes and containment, best
management practices, stormwater runoff management and
groundwater monitoring.
(3) A contingency plan which addresses, in detail, the actions that will
be taken should a contamination event caused by the proposed
uses, activities, or structures occur.
§ 510-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-72
1:869
J. Nonconforming uses and structures. Existing facilities within the GP
Overlay District at the time of enactment of said district that may cause
or threaten to cause environmental pollution, including but not limited
to those listed on the WisDNR's Inventory of Sites or Facilities Which
May Cause or Threaten to Cause Environmental Pollution, Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services' list of underground
storage tanks, list of facilities with hazardous solid waste permits, and
all other facilities which are considered a prohibited use in Subsection
H or a conditional use in Subsection I, shall adhere to the following
additional requirements:
(1) Such facilities as above which exist within the district at the time of
enactment of a district shall provide copies of all current, revised,
or new federal, state, and local facility operation approvals, permits
or certificates, operational safety plans, and ongoing
environmental monitoring results to the Village for review by the
Groundwater Technical Review Committee.
(2) Such facilities as above which exist within the district at the time of
enactment of a district shall have the responsibility of devising,
filing, and maintaining with the Village a current contingency plan
which details how they intend to respond to any emergency which
may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution that occurs
at their facility, including notifying municipal, county, and state
officials.
(3) Such facilities as above cannot engage in or employ a use, activity,
or structure listed as a prohibited use in Subsection H or a
conditional use in Subsection I which they did not engage in or
employ at the time of enactment of a district and can only expand,
replace, or rebuild those present uses, activities, equipment, or
structures on the site or property of record associated with the
facility at the time of enactment of a district and in a manner that
improves the environmental and safety technologies already being
utilized. No existing use, activity, or structure listed as a prohibited
use or conditional use shall be expanded, replaced, or rebuilt
unless a conditional use permit is granted for such expansion,
replacement, or rebuilding. This subsection does not apply to
normal maintenance or minor repairs.
(4) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the
building, structure or property shall conform to the appropriate
provisions of this chapter.
K. Changing technology.
(1) The uses prohibited by the GP Overlay District are prohibited based
upon the combined pollution experience of many individual uses
and the technology generally employed by a particular use
considered to be of a high risk for pollution to the groundwater
§ 510-72 EAST TROY CODE § 510-72
1:870
§ 510-73. Natural Features Conservancy Overlay District.
resource. As the technology of other uses changes to low- or nonrisk
materials or methods, upon petition from such use, after
conferring with the Groundwater Technical Review Committee or
other expert opinion, and after appropriate public notice and
hearing, the Village, through appropriate procedures and
amendments to this chapter, may remove from the designated
prohibited uses list such uses that are convincingly demonstrated
to no longer pose a groundwater pollution hazard.
(2) In dealing with uses which attempt to become permissible under
the terms of this district by continuing to utilize pollutant materials
by altering their processing, storage, and/or handling, it is not the
intention to accept alternate or reduced hazards as the basis for
making a use permissible. It is the intention to continue a
prohibition on such uses until the technology of the use removes
reliance upon the pollutant materials or processes deemed to be a
groundwater hazard.
L. Enforcement and penalty. Any person who violates, neglects, or refuses
to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 510-153 of this chapter.
(1) In addition to any other remedy, the Village of East Troy may seek
an injunction or restraining order against the party alleged to have
violated the provisions herein, the cost of which shall be charged to
the defendant in such action.
(2) As a substitute for and in addition to any other action, the Village of
East Troy may commence legal action against both the person who
releases the contaminants and the owner of the facility the
contaminants were released from to recover the costs of cleanup
together with the costs of prosecution. Any person who causes the
release of any contaminants which may endanger or contaminate
the municipal water supply system associated with a GP Overlay
District shall immediately cease such discharge and immediately
initiate cleanup satisfactory to the Village of East Troy and other
state and federal regulatory agencies. The person who releases
such contaminants and the person who owns the facility the
contaminants have been released from shall be jointly and solely
responsible for the cost of cleanup, consultant or other contractor
fees, including all administrative costs for oversight, and review
and documentation, including the Village employees, equipment,
and mileage.
A. Purpose. This district is intended to be used to preserve, protect,
enhance, and restore areas of rough topography and areas where
depressions in the terrain alternate with small hills, forming kettle and
kame topography. Regulation of these areas will serve to protect unique
topographic features from encroachment by urban development,
§ 510-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-73
1:871
§ 510-74. Downtown Design Overlay District. [Amended 10-17-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-13]
This district is intended to implement the urban design recommendations of
the Comprehensive Plan by attaining a consistent, visually pleasing image
for the downtown area. This district is designed to advance both aesthetic
and economic objectives of the Village of East Troy by controlling the
site design and appearance of development within the DD District in a
control erosion and sedimentation, and promote and maintain the
beauty of the Village.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the NFC District:
(1) Agricultural uses when conducted in accordance with County Soil
and Water Conservation District standards.
(2) Fishing, hunting, and forest and game management.
(3) Park and recreational use.
(4) Preservation of scenic, historic, and scientific areas.
(5) Sustained yield forestry.
(6) Harvesting of wild crops.
(7) Water retention and wildlife preserves.
(8) Hiking and nature trails.
C. Conditional uses. None.
D. Permitted accessory uses. Nonhabitable structures associated with a
permitted use.
E. Lot area and width. No minimum lot area or lot width required.
F. Building height and area. No principal building or parts of a principal
building shall exceed 35 feet in height. The sum total of the ground level
area of all buildings or structures shall not exceed 1% of the total area
of a parcel in the NFC District.
G. Setback and yards. There shall be a minimum building setback of 45
feet from the right-of-way of all streets. There shall be two side yards.
Each side yard shall be not less than 30 feet in width. There shall be a
rear yard of not less than 35 feet.
H. Special regulations. To encourage uses that are compatible with the
residential character of the Village of East Troy, zoning permits for
permitted uses in the NFC District shall not be issued without prior
review by and approval of the Plan Commission. Said review and
approval shall be concerned with general layout, building plans,
ingress, egress, parking, loading and unloading, and landscape plans.
§ 510-73 EAST TROY CODE § 510-74
1:872
manner that is consistent with sound economic, land use, and urban design
principles. The boundaries of the DD District are as depicted on the Official
Overlay Zoning Map. Refer to Article XI for the regulations and procedures
applicable to proposal review in this overlay district.
§ 510-75. Planned Development Overlay District.
Planned development overlay districts may be established pursuant to
Article XII, and other applicable sections of this chapter, to accommodate
development projects that do not fit the standards established for the
various zoning districts described in Articles III, IV, and V.
§ 510-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-75
1:873

ARTICLE XI
Downtown Design District
§ 510-76. Purpose.
The Downtown Design Overlay District is intended to implement the urban
design recommendations of the Village of East Troy Comprehensive Plan
by preserving and enhancing the aesthetic qualities (historical and visual)
of the community and by attaining a consistent visually pleasing image
for various portions of the Village. Any nonconforming situation (lot, use,
structure and/or site) shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
§ 510-77. Design theme and district standards.
A. Overall design theme. The design theme for the Downtown Design
District, as determined by the Plan Commission, shall be based on the
Village's historic, pedestrian-oriented development pattern in the
downtown that incorporates retail service, residential, and institutional
uses. Building orientation and character include minimum setbacks at
the edge of the sidewalk; one-, two-, and three-story structures; a
variety of loading access arrangements, typically to the rear of
buildings; and a mix of on-street and other off-site parking.
§ 510-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-77
1:875
Figure 510-77A: Sample Overall Design Theme
B. Residential construction. Proposed residential construction within the
Downtown Design District, including new structures, building
additions, building alterations, and restoration or rehabilitation, shall
be reviewed by the Plan Commission. The building setback, height,
mass, roof form, exterior materials, exterior surface appurtenances,
exterior colors, landscaping, and lighting shall be compatible and
harmonious with the overall design theme noted above.
C. Nonresidential design standards. Nonresidential construction,
including new structures, building additions, building alterations, and
restoration or rehabilitation, shall correspond to the urban design
guidelines and the following requirements:
(1) Building setbacks. Throughout the district, the setback of buildings
from street yard and side yard property lines shall be compatible
with existing buildings in the immediate area which conform to the
overall design theme noted above.
(2) Building height. Throughout the district, the height of buildings
shall be compatible with existing buildings in the immediate area
which conform to the overall design theme noted above. In no
§ 510-77 EAST TROY CODE § 510-77
1:876
instance shall buildings be more than one story taller or shorter
than the height of the immediately adjoining properties, which
conform to the overall design theme.
(3) Building mass. Throughout the district, the mass of buildings shall
be compatible with existing buildings in the immediate area which
conform to the overall design theme. The characteristic proportion
(relationship between facade height and width) of the overall
design theme shall be maintained. Building mass for large
structures (with a facade area exceeding 5,000 square feet) shall
be disguised through the use of facade articulations or through the
use of exterior treatments which give the impression of directly
adjoining individual buildings.
(4) Horizontal rhythms. The horizontal pattern of exterior building
elements formed by patterns of building openings for windows and
doors and related elements such as piers and columns shall be
spaced at regular intervals across all visible facades of the building
and shall be compatible with those of existing buildings in the
immediate area which conform to the overall design theme.
(5) Vertical rhythms. The floor heights on main facades shall appear
visually in proportion to those of adjoining buildings. The rhythm of
the ground floor shall harmonize with the rhythm of upper floors.
The vertical pattern of exterior building elements formed by
patterns of building openings for windows and doors and related
elements such as sills, headers, transoms, cornices, and sign bands
shall be compatible in design and elevation with those of existing
buildings in the immediate area which conform to the overall
design theme.
(6) Roof forms. Flat or gently sloping roofs which are not visible from
the street shall generally be used. For nonresidential buildings,
gable and hip roofs may also be appropriate in certain locations.
Mansards or other exotic roof shapes are not characteristic of the
overall design theme and are prohibited.340
(7) Exterior materials. Selected building materials shall be compatible
with those of existing buildings in the immediate area which
conform to the overall design theme. In addition:
(a) A traditional storefront design shall be employed for all new
nonresidential buildings. Traditional storefronts are
characterized by strong horizontal and vertical rhythms
formed by building openings, storefront columns, storefront
cornices, upper cornices, kick plates, sign bands, large display
windows, and transom windows.
340. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-77
1:877
(b) Throughout the district, avoid cluttering building facades with
brackets, wiring, meter boxes, antennas, gutters, downspouts,
and other appurtenances. Unnecessary signs shall also be
avoided. Where necessary, such features shall be colored so as
to blend in, rather than contrast, with the immediately
adjacent building exterior. Extraneous ornamentation which is
inconsistent with the overall design theme is also prohibited.
Figure 510-77B: Traditional Storefront Elements
(8) Awnings. Throughout the district, awning size, color and placement
should complement the architectural character of the building.
Soft, weather-treated canvas or vinyl materials which allow for
flexible or fixed installation shall be used. Aluminum or suspended
metal canopies shall be prohibited. Signage applied to awnings
shall be simple and durable and shall meet the requirements in
§ 510-135A(4). Backlit awnings are prohibited. [Amended
9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-08]
§ 510-77 EAST TROY CODE § 510-77
1:878
(9) Exterior colors. Selected exterior colors for structures and
appurtenances, including fixtures and signs, shall be compatible
and harmonious with those of existing buildings in the immediate
area which conform to the overall design theme. Specifically,
throughout the district:
(a) Fluorescent, day glow and/or neon colors shall not be
permitted. Where such colors constitute a component of a
standardized corporate theme or identity, muted versions of
such colors shall be used.
(b) High-gloss paints, lacquers, varnishes or other shiny
nonglazing surfaces shall not be used.
(c) Color combination schemes shall be limited to no more than
four different colors for all the structures and appurtenances
on a property. Varying shades, tints or intensities of a color
shall count as a different color for this purpose.
(d) Color schemes shall be used consistently throughout the
property, including on both the upper and lower portions of
buildings, and on all facades of a building or structure.
(10) Exterior lighting. Throughout the district, on-site exterior lighting
shall be compatible and harmonious with the overall design theme.
Specifically:
(a) The design, color, height, location, and light quality of on-site
pedestrian lighting shall be consistent with the pedestrian
lighting fixtures.
(b) The design, color, height, location, and light quality of on-site
vehicular circulation lighting shall be consistent with the
lighting fixtures approved by the Plan Commission under
Subsection C(10)(a) above.
(c) Additional lighting standards are found in § 510-95.
(11) Signage. All signage existing upon the adoption date of this chapter
which does not comply with the standards of Article XV may be
continued as long as it is well maintained. However, the
maintenance of such legal nonconforming signs shall be limited to
repair of the sign structural or lighting elements and to the
repainting or replacement of the sign face with identical new
material, message, and original appearance. Should a change in
material, message, or original appearance be desired, the legal
nonconforming sign shall be removed.
(12) Cleaning. Structural components and exterior materials shall be
cleaned when necessary and with only the gentlest possible
methods. Low-pressure water and soft natural bristle brushes are
§ 510-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-77
1:879
acceptable. Sandblasting is never acceptable. Other methods shall
be preapproved by the Plan Commission.
(13) Rehabilitation and restoration. New projects, building additions,
and new appurtenances and features shall comply with the
provisions of Subsection C(1) through (12) above. The following
standards shall apply where existing construction is proposed for
rehabilitation and/or restoration:
(a) Buildings shall be restored relying on physical evidence (such
as photographs, original drawings, and existing architectural
details) as much as possible and in keeping with the overall
design theme.
(b) Exterior materials and surface features identical to the original
shall be used. Where such knowledge is lacking, materials and
features in common use at the time of building erection, as
determined by the Plan Commission, shall be used. Significant
architectural features, including cornices, moldings, and
coursings, shall be preserved or replaced with identical
features and materials where possible.
(c) The size, proportion, and rhythm of original windows and doors
shall not be altered. Original window and door openings shall
not be blocked, except with a dark opaque panel placed behind
the window or door to preserve the appearance of the opening.
Where now blocked in another manner, blocked windows and
doors shall be restored using said method. Window and door
features, including lintels, sills, architraves, shutters,
pediments, hoods and hardware, shall be preserved where
possible or replaced with identical features and materials.
Dark frames (i.e., anodized bronze) shall be used to replace
storefront and upper-story windows. Clear aluminum finishes
and mill finish aluminum storm windows are prohibited. Real
shutters and awnings shall be used if there is evidence that
they were a component of the original building design. Vinyl
and plastic shutters and awnings shall be prohibited.
(d) Shop fronts should fit inside the original shop front in terms of
all three dimensions (i.e., vertical, horizontal, and front to back
articulation).
(e) Display windows should be restored to their original
appearance, if in keeping with the overall design theme.
(f) Original porches and entrances shall be retained, except as
required to meet accessibility standards. Porches, steps, and
related enclosures which do not comply with the overall design
theme shall be removed.
(g) The original roof shape and character of visible materials shall
be retained. Original architectural features which give the roof
§ 510-77 EAST TROY CODE § 510-77
1:880
§ 510-78. Project review and approval procedures.
All design and/or development applications for proposals within the
Downtown Design District are subject to one of the following review
processes, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. These include
renovation review, design review, and project review, described below. See
Figure 510-78 for a summary of the process for proposal review.341
its essential character, including dormer windows, cupolas,
cornices, brackets, chimneys and weather vanes, shall be
preserved if in keeping with the overall design theme.
A. Renovation review. Applications involving only a renovation of the
exterior appearance of a property (such as repainting, reroofing,
residing or replacing with identical colors, finishes, and materials), as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, may proceed with appropriate
building and related permits. No additional processes are required.
B. Design review. Applications involving only a change in the appearance
of a property (such as painting, roofing, siding, architectural
component substitution, fencing, paving, or signage with different
colors, finishes, or materials) are subject to design review by the Zoning
Administrator and the Plan Commission. The Zoning Administrator
shall facilitate the thorough and expedient review of the application and
shall ensure that the technical and procedural requirements of this
chapter are met. The Plan Commission shall serve as the final
discretionary review body and shall focus its review of the application
on compliance with sound aesthetic, land use, site design, and
economic revitalization practices. In part, this effort shall be guided by
the Comprehensive Plan.
(1) Design review proposals shall follow the procedures for site plan
review (see § 510-160).
(2) In addition to the application requirements for site plan review, all
applications for design review shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator. Applications shall be accompanied by a building
permit application and shall be accompanied by all of the following:
(a) A clear depiction of the existing appearance of the property.
Color photographs are recommended for this purpose. Scaled
and dimensioned drawings of existing components such as
windows, doors, railings, fencing or other site components
and/or detailed building elevations which are proposed for
alteration or replacement may be required by the Village.
(b) A written description of the proposed modification, including a
complete listing of proposed components, materials, and
colors.
341. Editor's Note: Figure 510-78 is included at the end of this section.
§ 510-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-78
1:881
(c) A clear depiction of the proposed appearance of the property.
Paint charts, promotional brochures, and/or clear color
photographs of replacement architectural components are
recommended for this purpose. Scaled and dimensioned
drawings of proposed components such as windows, doors,
railings, fencing or other site components and/or detailed
building elevations which are proposed for alteration or
replacement may be required by the Village.
(d) Written justification for the proposed alteration, including the
reasons why the applicant believes the requested alteration is
in harmony with the overall design and standards of the
Downtown Design District (refer to § 510-77).
C. Project review. Applications involving modification to the physical
configuration of a property (such as grading, erection of a new building,
demolition of an existing building, or the addition or removal of bulk to
an existing building) are subject to project review by the Zoning
Administrator and the Plan Commission. The Zoning Administrator
shall facilitate the thorough and expedient review of the application and
shall ensure that the technical and procedural requirements of this
chapter are met. The Plan Commission shall make a recommendation to
the Village Board, which will serve as the final discretionary review
body and shall focus its review of the application on compliance with
sound aesthetic, land use, site design, and economic revitalization
practices. In part, this effort shall be guided by the Comprehensive
Plan.342
(1) Project review proposals shall follow procedures for conditional
use permits (see § 510-157).
(2) In addition to the application requirements for conditional use
permits, applications for project review shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator. Applications shall be accompanied by a building
permit application and all of the following unless specifically
waived in writing by the Zoning Administrator:
(a) A clear depiction of the existing appearance of the property.
Clear color photographs are recommended for this purpose.
Scaled and dimensioned drawings of existing components such
as windows, doors, railings, fencing or other site components
and/or detailed building elevations which are proposed for
alteration or replacement may be required by the Village.
(b) A written description of the proposed project, including a
complete listing of proposed components, materials, and
colors.
342. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-78 EAST TROY CODE § 510-78
1:882
(c) A clear depiction of the proposed appearance of the property.
Paint charts, promotional brochures, and/or clear color
photographs of replacement architectural components are
recommended for this purpose. Scaled and dimensioned
drawings of proposed components such as windows, doors,
railings, fencing or other site components and/or detailed
building elevations which are proposed for alteration or
replacement may be required by the Village.
(d) For all projects involving a new building, or an addition
exceeding 100 square feet of gross floor area, the following
shall be required:
[1] A detailed site plan per the requirements of § 510-160.
[2] A detailed landscaping plan of the subject property, at the
same scale as the site plan, showing the location, species,
and size of all proposed plant materials.
(e) Written justification for the proposed alteration consisting of
the reasons why the applicant believes the requested
alteration is in harmony with the overall design and standards
of the Downtown Design District (see § 510-77).
Figure 510-78: Review Process for Renovations,
Redesign and New Projects in the Downtown Design
Overlay District
Procedure Renovation Design Project
Optional meeting
with the Zoning
Administrator to
confirm type of
proposal
Recommended RecommendedRecommended
Submittal of
building permit
application to
Zoning
Administrator
Not required Optional Recommended
Color photos/
drawings of
existing property
Not required Required Required
Written
description of
proposal
Not required Required Required
Drawings/
depictions of
proposed
changes to site/
building
Not required Required Required
§ 510-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-78
1:883
§ 510-79. Violations and penalties; appeals.
Penalty for violation of the provisions of this article shall be per the
provisions of §§ 510-152 and 510-153. Appeals from the decisions of the
Zoning Administrator may be made per the provisions of this chapter and
state statutes.
Figure 510-78: Review Process for Renovations,
Redesign and New Projects in the Downtown Design
Overlay District
Procedure Renovation Design Project
Site plan Not required Not required Required
Landscaping
plan
Not required Not required Required
Written
justification for
proposal
Not required Required Required
Review and
action by Zoning
Administrator
Not required Required Required
Review and
action by Plan
Commission on
site design
Not required Not required Required
§ 510-78 EAST TROY CODE § 510-79
1:884
ARTICLE XII
Planned Developments
§ 510-80. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide regulations which govern the
procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of
proposed planned developments and to provide for the possible relaxation
of certain development standards pertaining to the underlying standard
zoning district (see Articles II, III, IV and V). In exchange for such flexibility,
planned developments shall provide a much higher level of site design,
architectural control, and other aspects of aesthetic and functional
excellence than normally required for other developments.
§ 510-81. Intent.
Planned developments are intended to encourage, promote, and provide
improved environmental design by allowing for greater freedom,
imagination, and flexibility in the development of land while ensuring
substantial compliance with the basic intent of this chapter and the Village
of East Troy Comprehensive Plan. To this end, planned developments allow
diversification and variation in the relationship of uses, structures, open
spaces, and heights of structures in developments conceived and
implemented as comprehensive and cohesive unified projects. It is further
intended to encourage economic development and more rational
developments with regard to public services and to encourage and facilitate
preservation of open space and natural resources. Planned developments
are not intended to circumvent the intent of other zoning districts or this
chapter.
§ 510-82. Permitted locations.
Planned developments shall be permitted in a location where a Planned
Development Overlay District (see Article X) has been depicted on the
Overlay Zoning District Map (see § 510-68).
§ 510-83. Provision of flexibility.
The following exemptions to the development standards of the underlying
standard zoning district may be provided with the approval of a planned
development:
A. Land use requirements. All land uses listed as residential, institutional,
industrial or commercial may be permitted within a planned
development. [Amended 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
B. Density, intensity, and bulk requirements. All requirements listed in
Articles VII and VIII for residential density and nonresidential intensity
may be waived within a planned development.
§ 510-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-83
1:885
§ 510-84. Application requirements and procedure.
§ 510-85. Preapplication conference.
C. Parking and loading requirements. All requirements listed in §§ 510-93
and 510-94 may be waived within a planned development.
D. Only development improvements which are explicitly depicted on the
required site plan approved by the Village Board as part of the planned
development shall be permitted, even if such development
improvements (including all aspects of land use, density, intensity, bulk,
landscaping, parking, and loading) are otherwise listed as permitted in
this chapter. Requested exemptions from these standards shall be made
explicit in the application and shall be recommended by the Plan
Commission and approved explicitly by the Village Board. If not so
requested and approved, such exemptions shall not be permitted.
A. Initiation of planned development procedure. Proceedings for approval
of a planned development shall be initiated by an application of the
owner(s) of the subject property, a recommendation of the Plan
Commission to the Village Board, or by action of the Village Board.
B. Review and approval. Steps included in the planned development
review and approval process are outlined in §§ 510-85 through 510-88
below.
(1) The process for review and approval of the general development
plan (GDP) shall be identical to that for Official Zoning Map
amendments per § 510-155 of this chapter and (if land is to be
divided) to that for preliminary and final plats of subdivision per
Chapter 495, Subdivision of Land, of the Village Code.
(2) The process for review and approval of the final development plan
(FDP) shall be identical to that for site plans per § 510-160 of this
chapter and (if land is to be divided) to that for preliminary and
final plats of subdivision per Chapter 495, Subdivision of Land, of
the Village Code.
A. The applicant shall contact the Zoning Administrator to place an
informal discussion item for the planned development on the Plan
Commission agenda. No details beyond the name of the applicant and
the identification of the discussion item as a planned development are
required to be given in the agenda.
B. At the Plan Commission meeting, the applicant shall engage in an
informal discussion with the Plan Commission regarding the potential
planned development. Appropriate topics for discussion may include
the location of the planned development, general project themes and
images, the general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses being
considered, approximate residential densities and nonresidential
intensities, the general treatment of natural features, the general
§ 510-83 EAST TROY CODE § 510-85
1:886
§ 510-86. Concept plan review and approval.
Upon completion of the preapplication conference described in § 510-85,
the applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a concept plan
submittal, the contents of which are listed under Subsection C below. Upon
determination of completeness by the Zoning Administrator, the planned
development concept plan may be placed on the Plan Commission agenda
for review.
relationship to nearby properties and public streets, and relationship to
the Comprehensive Plan.
C. Points of discussion and conclusions reached in this stage of the process
shall in no way be binding upon the applicant or the Village but should
be considered as the informal basis for proceeding to the next step.
A. At the Plan Commission meeting, the applicant shall engage in an
informal discussion with the Plan Commission regarding the planned
development concept plan. Appropriate topics for discussion may
include any of the information provided in the concept plan submittal
packet or other items as determined by the Plan Commission.
B. Points of discussion and conclusions reached in this stage of the process
shall in no way be binding upon the applicant or the Village but should
be considered as the informal, nonbinding basis for proceeding to the
next step. The preferred procedure is for one or more iterations of Plan
Commission review of the concept plan to occur prior to introduction of
the formal petition for rezoning which accompanies the general
development plan application (see § 510-87).
C. Contents of the concept plan submittal shall include the following
items:
(1) A location map of the subject property and its vicinity.
(2) A general written description of the proposed planned
development, including:
(a) General project themes and images.
(b) The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses.
(c) Approximate residential densities and nonresidential
intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor area
ratio, and impervious surface area ratio.
(d) General treatment of natural features.
(e) General relationship to nearby properties and public streets.
(f) General relationship of the project to the Comprehensive Plan.
(g) A written description of potentially requested exemptions from
the requirements of the most comparable zoning district. The
§ 510-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-86
1:887
§ 510-87. General development plan review and approval.
Upon completion of the concept plan review process described in § 510-86,
the applicant shall submit a general development plan (GDP) to the Zoning
Administrator for determination of completeness. Upon determination of
completeness by the Zoning Administrator, the GDP may be placed on the
Plan Commission agenda for review.
purpose of this listing shall be to provide the Plan Commission
with information necessary to determine the relative merits of
the project in regard to private benefit versus public benefit
and in regard to the mitigation of potential adverse impacts
created by design flexibility.
[1] Requested underlying standard zoning district
exemptions.
[2] Requested land use exemptions.
[3] Requested density, intensity, and bulk exemptions.
[4] Requested landscaping exceptions.
[5] Requested parking and loading requirements exceptions.
(3) A conceptual plan drawing of the general land use layout and the
general location of major public streets and/or private drives.
A. Contents of the GDP submittal shall include the following items:
(1) A map of the subject property (at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 800 feet) showing all lands for which the planned
development is proposed and all other lands within 300 feet of the
boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and
addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same
appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds. Said map
shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and
its environs and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. All
lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a North
arrow shall be provided.
(2) A general written description of the proposed planned
development, including:
(a) General project themes and images.
(b) The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses.
(c) Approximate residential densities and nonresidential
intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor area
ratio, and impervious surface area ratio.
(d) General treatment of natural features.
§ 510-86 EAST TROY CODE § 510-87
1:888
(e) General relationship to nearby properties and public streets.
(f) General relationship of the project to the Comprehensive Plan.
(g) A statement of rationale as to why planned development zoning
is proposed. This shall identify barriers that the applicant
perceives in the form of requirements of the most comparable
zoning district and opportunities for community betterment
the applicant suggests are available through the proposed
planned development zoning.
(3) A written description of potentially requested exemptions from the
requirements of the most comparable zoning district. The purpose
of this listing shall be to provide the Plan Commission with
information necessary to determine the relative merits of the
project in regard to private benefit versus public benefit and in
regard to the mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by
design flexibility.
(a) Requested underlying standard zoning district exemptions.
(b) Requested land use exemptions.
(c) Requested density, intensity, and bulk exemptions.
(d) Requested landscaping exceptions.
(e) Requested parking and loading requirements exceptions.
(4) A GDP map (at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet) of the
proposed project showing at least the following information in
sufficient detail to make an evaluation against criteria for approval:
(a) Location of recreational and open space areas and facilities,
and specifically describing that those areas are to be reserved
or dedicated for public acquisition and use.
(b) Statistical data on the minimum lot sizes in the development,
the approximate areas of large development lots and pads,
density/intensity of various parts of the development, floor
area ratio, impervious surface area ratio, landscape surface
ratio of various land uses, expected staging, and any other
plans required by the Plan Commission.343
(c) Notations relating the written information provided in
Subsection A(2) above to specific areas on the GDP map.
(5) A conceptual landscaping plan, noting approximate locations of
foundation, street, yard and paving, and landscaping and the
compliance of development with all landscaping requirements of
343. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-87
1:889
§ 510-88. Final development plan review and approval.
Upon completion of the GDP review process described in § 510-87, the
applicant shall submit a final development plan (FDP) to the Zoning
Administrator for determination of completeness. Upon determination of
completeness by the Zoning Administrator, the planned development FDP
may be placed on the Plan Commission agenda for FDP review.
this chapter (except as noted in the listing of exceptions) and the
use of extra landscaping and bufferyards.
(6) A general signage plan for the project, including all project
identification signs and concepts for public fixtures and signs (such
as streetlight fixtures and/or poles or street sign faces and/or poles)
which are proposed to vary from Village standards or common
practices.
(7) Written justification for the proposed planned development. The
applicant shall use the requirements of the Official Zoning Map
amendment procedure (§ 510-155) to develop said written
justification.
B. All portions of an approved GDP not fully developed within five years of
final Village Board approval shall expire and no additional development
shall be permitted. The Village Board may extend this five-year period
an additional five years via a majority vote following a public hearing by
the Plan Commission. Completed portions of the planned development
general development plan shall retain the planned development GDP
status.
A. Contents of the FDP submittal shall include the following items:
(1) A map of the subject property (at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 800 feet) showing all lands for which the planned
development is proposed and all other lands within 200 feet of the
boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and
addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same
appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds. Said map
shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and
its environs and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. All
lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a North
arrow shall be provided.
(2) A general written description of proposed FDP, including:
(a) Specific project themes and images.
(b) Specific mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses.
(c) Specific residential densities and nonresidential intensities as
described by dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio, and
impervious surface area ratio.
§ 510-87 EAST TROY CODE § 510-88
1:890
(d) Specific treatment of natural features.
(e) Specific relationship to nearby properties and public streets.
(f) A statement of rationale as to why planned development zoning
is proposed. This shall identify barriers that the applicant
perceives in the form of requirements of standard zoning
districts and opportunities for community betterment the
applicant suggests are available through the proposed planned
development zoning.
(3) A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met by the
proposed FDP and the location(s) in which they apply, and a
complete list of zoning standards which will be more than met by
the proposed FDP and the location(s) in which they apply, shall be
identified as compared to the most comparable zoning district. The
purpose of this listing shall be to provide the Plan Commission with
information necessary to determine the relative merits of the
project in regard to private benefit versus public benefit and in
regard to the mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by
design flexibility.
(4) A FDP map (at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet) of the
proposed project showing at least the following information in
sufficient detail to make an evaluation against criteria for approval:
(a) Recreational and open space areas and facilities, and
specifically describing that those areas are to be reserved or
dedicated for public acquisition and use.
(b) Statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the development, the
precise areas of all development lots and pads, density/
intensity of various parts of the development, floor area ratio,
impervious surface area ratio, and landscape surface ratio of
various land uses, expected staging, and any other plans
required by the Plan Commission.344
(c) Notations relating the written information provided in
Subsection A(2) above to specific areas on the FDP.
(5) A site plan conforming to all the requirements of § 510-160. If the
proposed planned development is a group development (per
§ 510-108) or a large development (per § 510-109), a proposed
preliminary plat or conceptual plat may be required by the Zoning
Administrator in addition to the required site plan.
(6) A landscaping plan for subject property, specifying the location,
species, and installed size of all trees and shrubs. This plan shall
also include a chart which provides a cumulative total for each
344. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-88
1:891
species, type, and required location (foundation, yard, street,
paved area or bufferyard) of all trees and shrubs.
(7) A series of building elevations for the entire exterior of all buildings
in the proposed final development plan, including detailed notes as
to the materials and colors proposed.
(8) A general signage plan for the project, including all project
identification signs, concepts for public fixtures and signs (such as
streetlight fixtures and/or poles or street sign faces and/or poles),
and group development signage themes which are proposed to vary
from Village standards or common practices.
(9) A general outline of the intended organizational structure for a
property owners' association, if any, deed restrictions and
provisions for private provision of common services, if any.
(10) A written description which demonstrates the full consistency of
the proposed FDP with the approved GDP.
(11) All variations between the requirements of the approved planned
development GDP zoning district and the proposed FDP.
(12) The applicant shall submit proof of financing capability pertaining
to construction and maintenance and operation of public works
elements of the proposed development.
B. The area included in a FDP may be only a portion of the area included in
a previously approved GDP.
C. The FDP submittal may include design information, such as within the
Downtown Design District, allowing the Plan Commission to combine
design review and review of the FDP. Design review may, at the choice
of the applicant, be deferred until a later time when specific site and
building developments will be brought forth.
D. The Plan Commission may specify other plans, documents, or schedules
that must be submitted prior to consideration or approval of the FDP, as
such may be relevant to review.
E. All portions of an approved planned development FDP not fully
developed within five years of final Village Board approval shall expire
and no additional development shall be permitted. The Village Board
may extend this five-year period by an additional five years via a
majority vote following a public hearing by the Plan Commission.
Completed portions of the planned development FDP shall retain the
FDP status.
§ 510-88 EAST TROY CODE § 510-88
1:892
ARTICLE XIII
Performance Standards
§ 510-89. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to indicate the standards and minimum
requirements for exterior site and building design, access, visibility, offstreet
parking and traffic circulation, off-street loading, exterior lighting,
exterior storage, fencing, swimming pools, vibration, noise, air pollution,
odor, signal receiving antennas, glare and heat, fire and explosions, toxic
or noxious materials, waste materials, exterior construction material,
hazardous materials, group and large developments, and outdoor woodburning
furnaces within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Any nonconforming
situation (lot, use, structure and/or site) shall adhere to the provisions of
Article IX.
§ 510-90. Exterior site and building design standards.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the design and
materials used for the exterior of buildings and structures within the
Village so as to attain a degree of uniformity in exterior appearance and
quality of materials and thus maintain and enhance the attractiveness
and values of property in the community.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all structures
and buildings within the Village. Beyond the general rules in
Subsections C through J below, additional rules apply to group and
large developments, which are provided in §§ 510-108 and 510-109.
C. Review and approval. Through the site plan review process, the Plan
Commission shall be responsible and have authority to hear, review, and
act upon all proposed exterior architectural plans for all proposed
development, except as exempt under § 510-36N.
D. Site design. In addition to complying with required setbacks, no
building, structure, pavement, or improvement shall be placed or
oriented in a manner that would unnecessarily reduce the appearance
of the subject property in comparison to typical development practices
that are fully consistent with the requirements of this chapter or would
have a substantial negative impact on the value or enjoyment of
permitted land uses on nearby properties.
E. Avoidance of exteriors specific to a particular occupant. Trademark
architecture is prohibited. Specifically, no building, other structures,
pavement or improvement shall have an integral exterior design which
is specific to a particular site occupant, including exterior building
forms, materials, textures, colors, and patterns. Exterior elements
which are specific to a particular site occupant shall be limited to
attached signage, awnings and other appurtenances which are easy to
remove or modify for subsequent site occupants without causing
significant damage and/or restoration expenses.
§ 510-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-90
1:893
F. Exterior design compatibility and avoidance of monotony. No building,
other structures, pavement or improvement shall have an exterior
design which is of such unorthodox or abnormal character in relation to
its surroundings as to be unsightly or offensive to generally accepted
taste. In addition, no building shall be permitted within any residential
or business zoning district to have an exterior appearance which is too
similar to nearby buildings so as to create unacceptable monotony.
Restrictive covenants shall incorporate provisions to prohibit
unacceptable monotony of the design, materials and colors for building
exteriors for any multi-lot or group development.
G. Requirements for exterior materials. The following requirements shall
apply regarding exterior materials for buildings and structures:
(1) Building color. Building facade colors shall be nonreflective, subtle,
neutral, or earth tone. The use of high-intensity colors, metallic
colors, fluorescent colors, or black on facades shall be prohibited.
Building trim and architectural accent elements may feature bright
colors or black, but such colors shall be muted, not metallic, not
fluorescent, and not specific to particular uses or tenants. Standard
corporate and trademark colors shall be permitted only on signage,
subject to the limitations in Article XV.
(2) Building materials. Exterior building materials shall be of
comparable aesthetic quality on all sides. Building materials such
as glass, brick, tinted, and decorative concrete block, wood, stucco,
and exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) shall be used, as
determined appropriate by the Plan Commission. Decorative
architectural metal with concealed fasteners or decorative tilt-up
concrete panels may be approved if incorporated into the overall
design of the building.
(3) Prohibited materials. No building or structure shall be constructed
or faced with any material or texture which is aesthetically
incompatible with other building exteriors in the area which are
fully consistent with the requirements of this chapter or which
presents an unattractive appearance to the public or surrounding
properties. The following materials are prohibited on the exterior
of all buildings and structures:
(a) Plain faced concrete walls or panels.
(b) Plain faced cinder block or concrete block.
(c) Asphaltic siding.
(d) Plywood, chipboard, or other nondecorative wood or composite
material as determined by the Plan Commission.
(e) Metal siding which does not meet any one or more of the
following exceptions:
§ 510-90 EAST TROY CODE § 510-90
1:894
[1] Is determined by the Plan Commission to be a decorative
element of the building or structure that can be readily
removed or replaced with a permitted exterior material.
[2] Uses a method of exterior wall fastening which is fully
concealed from view by means of an interlocking panel,
panel overlap, or other method approved by the Plan
Commission which results in full concealment.
[3] Uses visible exterior fasteners which are the same color as
the attached wall for any principal or accessory structure
within the Rural Holding (RH-35), Highway Business (HB),
Business Park (BP), Light Industrial (LI), or General
Industrial (GI) Zoning District, in any location on the
building or structure which meets all of the following
criteria:
[a] Is located more than 100 feet from any portion of a
residential zoning district boundary and more than
100 feet from any portion of a public right-of-way.
[b] Is located more than 100 feet from any visitor or
customer door.
[c] Transitions to any other exterior material, texture,
color, or pattern at a building corner, pier, pilaster,
eave, parapet, or other physical change in the wall
plane, so as to complement the overall exterior design
of the building or structure as determined by the Plan
Commission.
(f) Fiberglass or poly-roofing or siding.
(g) Other materials as determined by the Plan Commission.
(h) Structures exceeding 100 square feet which are not erected on
a permanent foundation and/or do not comply with the Uniform
Building Code.
H. Waste receptacles. The development shall contain a sufficient number
of waste bins to accommodate all trash and recyclable materials
generated by the land uses in a convenient manner and in accordance
with the building design and performance standards of this article.
I. Pedestrian and bicycle access. The entire development shall provide for
full and safe pedestrian and bicycle access within the development,
which shall include appropriate connections to the existing and planned
pedestrian and bicycle facilities in the community and in surrounding
neighborhoods; sidewalk connections to all building entrances from all
public streets; secure bicycle parking and pedestrian furniture in
appropriate quantities and locations; and a central pedestrian
gathering area.
§ 510-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-90
1:895
§ 510-91. Access standards.
J. Exceptions and appeal. The conditional use process may be used to
seek exemptions to the requirements of this section. An appeal of the
Plan Commission's determination may be taken to the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of public rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for
the provision of access to public rights-of-way in accordance with the
utilization of various sites.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to each
access point onto a public street or right-of-way in all new
developments.
C. Review and approval. Through the site plan review process (see
§ 510-160), the Plan Commission shall review and approve all proposed
access drives on the subject property.
D. Number of access points.
(1) Each lot shall have not more than two access points on any street
frontage adjacent to any lot. Said access shall require approval by
the Director of Public Works.
(2) No lot shall be permitted more than one access point on any one
street if its frontage on said street is less than 100 linear feet (as
measured along the right-of-way line).
(3) On arterial streets, and in areas experiencing, or expected to
experience, congestion and/or safety problems, access to a lot may
be required to be located via an access point located on an adjacent
property or another street frontage.
(4) For residential uses, two access points serving the same street
frontage may be approved as a conditional use.
E. Residential uses. Residential uses shall not have access points onto a
nonresidential collector or arterial street unless such street has the
only available frontage.
F. Nonresidential uses. Nonresidential uses shall not have access points
onto a residential street unless such street has the only available
frontage.
G. Access near street intersections. At its intersection with the street
right-of-way line on an arterial or nonresidential collector street, no
access point shall be located closer than 100 feet to the intersection of
any two street rights-of-way unless such street is the only available
frontage on the subject property. In all cases, access points shall be
located as far from an intersection as the lot size permits.
§ 510-90 EAST TROY CODE § 510-91
1:896
§ 510-91.1. Driveway standards for residential properties. [Added
11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-15]
Nonconforming driveways may be replaced in their current location,
except as part of site plan review and approval.
H. Distance between access drives. The minimum distance between access
drives serving the same property shall be 25 feet (edge to edge), as
measured at the property line. A distance in excess of 25 feet may be
required if existing or projected traffic warrants a greater distance.
I. Angle of intersection with public right-of-way. All access drives shall
intersect with any public right-of-way at an angle of not less than 75°
and shall intersect at an angle of 90° wherever possible.
J. Distance from property line. The distance from a nonresidential access
drive to the property line of an adjacent property shall not be less than
five feet, as measured along the right-of-way line. [Amended
11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-15]
K. Width of driveways. All access drives shall have a minimum width of 10
feet for single- and two-family dwellings and 18 feet for all other land
uses. All curb openings for access drives shall have a maximum width of
24 feet for all residential uses and 30 feet for all nonresidential uses, as
measured at the right-of-way line. Access drives may be flared between
the right-of-way line and the roadway up to a maximum of five
additional feet. This requirement may be exceeded with explicit Plan
Commission approval for uses other than single family.
L. Traffic control. The traffic generated by any use shall be channelized
and controlled in a manner which avoids congestion on public streets
and other safety hazards. Traffic into and out of all off-street parking,
loading, and traffic circulation areas serving six or more parking spaces
shall be forward moving, with no backing into streets or
pedestrianways. Traffic control devices shall be required as determined
by the Director of Public Works.
M. Depiction on required site plan. Any and all proposed access drives on
the subject property shall be depicted as to their location and
configuration on the site plan required for the development of the
subject property.
N. Paving of access. All access approach areas located within a street
right-of-way shall be paved to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator with a hard, all-weather surface and shall be maintained
so as to prevent the transport of gravel, dirt, or other eroded material
from the subject property into the right-of-way. This requirement must
be fulfilled before building occupancy, unless granted a time-specific
extension in writing by the Zoning Administrator.
A. Surfacing. Driveways and any related parking area shall be hardsurfaced
with asphaltic pavement, concrete pavement, or pavers that
§ 510-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-91.1
1:897
provide the same structural support as the aforementioned. Such
surface must be completed within 12 months following occupancy of a
new construction.
B. Drainage. Driveways and any related parking area shall be graded and
drained to not cause a nuisance to adjoining properties.
C. Setback. Driveways and any related parking area must be set back at
least five feet from side lot lines, except as allowed in this subsection. A
shared driveway may be located along a common lot line. A driveway
accessing the bulb of a cul-de-sac street may be closer than five feet to a
side lot line within 20 feet of the front lot line.
D. Minimum width. The minimum width of a driveway is 10 feet.
E. Maximum width.
(1) Where the garage doors are more than 40 feet from the right-ofway
line, the maximum width of a driveway at the right-of-way line
is 12 feet. Where the garage doors are less than 40 feet from the
right-of-way line, the maximum width of a driveway at the right-ofway
line is 24 feet.
(2) The width of a driveway directly in front of the garage door(s) must
not exceed the width of the garage on that side. Where the width of
the driveway directly in front of the garage doors exceeds the width
of the driveway at the right-of-way line, there must be a taper
starting at least eight feet from the right-of-way line.
(3) The width of a driveway for a single-family residence without a
garage (if existing or otherwise allowed) must not exceed 12 feet.
The width of a driveway for a duplex without a garage (if existing or
otherwise allowed) must not exceed 24 feet.
(4) In the event the driveway accesses an arterial street, the Plan
Commission may authorize a driveway turnaround on the property
so vehicles do not need to back out into potentially heavy traffic.
F. Auxiliary parking bay. An auxiliary parking bay may be located along
the side of an attached garage or detached garage, but not both, as
follows:
(1) The parking bay must not be located in the front yard.
(2) The parking bay must taper into the driveway.
(3) The parking bay must be screened along the adjoining lot line.
(4) The parking bay shall be uncovered.
(5) The maximum width of the parking bay is 10 feet.
(6) The maximum length of the parking bay is 20 feet, not including the
taper.
§ 510-91.1 EAST TROY CODE § 510-91.1
1:898
§ 510-92. Visibility standards.
Figure 1
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of public and private rights-of-way so as to promote the
safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum
requirements for the provision of vehicular visibility.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all new
development.
C. Review and approval. Through the site plan review process (see
§ 510-160), the Plan Commission shall review and approve all
developments for conformance with this section.
D. Required. To provide a clear view of intersecting streets to motorists,
there shall be a triangular area of clear vision formed by the two
intersecting streets and a chord connecting the center lines of said
streets. Generally, the following standards listed in Figure 510-92 shall
apply. Within the triangular area, no signs, parking spaces, structures,
earthwork, vegetation, fencing, or other obstructions above 30 inches
in height or exceeding opacity of 0.2 (see Article XIV) shall be permitted
above the center-line elevations of said two streets.
§ 510-91.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-92
1:899
§ 510-93. Off-street parking and traffic circulation.
E. Depiction on required site plan. Except in the downtown where no
requirement is imposed, any and all visibility triangles located on the
subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration
on the site plan required for the development of the subject property.
Figure 510-92: Vision Clearance Triangle Standards
Right-of-Way Width
Distance From Right-of-Way
Intersection
Less than or equal to 66 feet 10 feet
Greater than or equal to 67
feet
20 Feet
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of public rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for
the provision of off-street parking and circulation in accordance with
the utilization of various sites.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all new
development.
C. Review and approval. Through the site plan review process (see
§ 510-160), the Plan Commission shall review and approve all
development for conformance with this section.
D. Depiction on required site plan. Any and all parking and traffic
circulation areas proposed to be located on the subject property shall
be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan
required for the development of the subject property. Each and every
on-site parking space designed to serve as required parking shall not be
located farther than 300 feet, except as permitted by a conditional use
permit, of shortest walking distance from the access to all of the various
areas it is designated to serve. A garage stall, meeting the access
requirements of Subsection F(4) below, shall be considered a parking
space. Parking spaces for any and all vehicles exceeding 18 feet in
length shall be clearly indicated on said site plan.
E. Minimum required off-street parking spaces. Off-street parking
requirements for each land use (see Article VI) are generally tied to the
use's capacity and gross floor area or the number of employees at the
subject property during the largest work shift. The term "capacity"
means the maximum number of persons that may be accommodated by
the use as determined by its design or by State Building Code
regulations, whichever number is greater. The term "employee(s) on
the largest work shift" means the maximum number of employees
working at the facility during a single given day, regardless of the time
period during which this occurs, and regardless of whether any such
person is a full-time employee. The largest work shift may occur on any
§ 510-92 EAST TROY CODE § 510-93
1:900
particular day of the week or during a lunch or dinner period in the
case of a restaurant. In all cases, one reserved parking space shall
be provided for each vehicle used by the operation during business
hours. Where said parking needs of any land use exceed the minimum
requirements of this chapter, additional parking spaces sufficient to
meet the average maximum weekly peak-hour parking space demand
shall be provided by said land use.
F. Off-street parking and traffic circulation standards.
(1) Circulation. The site shall be designed to provide for the safe and
efficient movement of all traffic entering, exiting, and circulating
on the site. Circulation patterns shall conform to the general rules
of the road. All traffic control measures shall meet the
requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(2) Surfacing and marking. All off-street parking and traffic circulation
areas (including all residential driveways except those in the RH-35
District) shall be paved with a hard, all-weather or other surface
that advances the goals of the Comprehensive Plan or other
adopted plan, policy, or regulation of the Village to the satisfaction
of the Director of Public Works. Said surfaces intended for six or
more parking stalls shall be marked in a manner which clearly
indicates required parking spaces.
(3) Curbing. All off-street parking areas designed to have head-in
parking within 6.5 feet of any lot line shall provide a tire bumper or
curb of adequate height and properly located to ensure that no part
of any vehicle will project beyond the required setbacks of this
chapter.
(4) Access. Each off-street parking space shall open directly upon an
aisle or driveway that is wide enough and designed to provide a
safe and efficient means of vehicular access to the parking space
without directly backing or maneuvering a vehicle into a public
right-of-way exceeding 82.5 feet in width. All off-street parking and
traffic circulation facilities shall be designed with an appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street or alley, in a manner which
least interferes with traffic movements. No driveway across public
property, or requiring a curb cut, shall exceed a width of 40 feet for
commercial and industrial land uses or 25 feet for residential land
uses (see Figure 510-93A). Off-street parking spaces for residential
uses may be stacked or in front of one another for the same
building unit. Parking spaces located behind an enclosed garage
and located directly off a through aisle shall be a minimum of 30
feet deep.
(5) Snow storage. Required off-street parking and traffic circulation
areas shall not be used for snow storage.
(6) Lighting. All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas serving
six or more cars shall be lit so as to ensure the safe and efficient use
§ 510-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-93
1:901
of said areas during the hours of use. An illumination level of
between 0.4 and 1.0 footcandle is recommended for said areas, and
said illumination level shall not exceed the standards of § 510-95.
(7) Signage. All signage located within, or related to, required offstreet
parking or traffic circulation shall comply with the
requirements of Article XV.
(8) Landscaping. Parking lot landscaping shall comply with the
requirements of the paved area landscaping requirements in
Article XIV.
(9) Parking space design standards. Other than handicapped parking,
each off-street parking space shall comply with the minimum
requirements of Figure 510-93A. The minimum required length of
parking spaces shall be 16 feet. All parking spaces shall have a
minimum vertical clearance of at least seven feet.
(10) Handicapped parking spaces. Handicapped parking shall be
provided at a size, number, location, and with signage as specified
by state and federal regulations.
(11) Parking lot design standards. Horizontal widths for parking rows,
aisles, and modules shall be provided at widths no less than listed
in Figure 510-93A. Additional design standards apply to group
developments (see § 510-108) and large developments (see
§ 510-109).
(12) Partial development of required parking spaces. Any development
may seek permission to not install a portion of its required parking
at time of site plan review; however, the site plan shall depict the
minimum number of required parking spaces.
(13) Limit on the maximum number of required parking spaces. No site
plan may be approved for a multifamily or nonresidential use which
contains more than 120% of the development's minimum number of
required parking spaces, except as granted through a conditional
use permit.
G. Joint and off-site parking facilities.
(1) Parking facilities which have been approved by the Director of
Public Works to provide required parking for one or more uses shall
provide a total number of parking spaces which shall not be less
than the sum total of the separate parking needs for each use
during any peak hour parking period when said joint parking
facility is utilized at the same time by said uses. However, this
aggregate requirement may be reduced or expanded by the Plan
Commission by explicit motion associated with this site plan review
process.
§ 510-93 EAST TROY CODE § 510-93
1:902
(2) Each parking space designed to serve as joint parking shall not be
located farther than 300 feet, except as permitted by a conditional
use permit, from the access to all of the various areas it is
designated to serve.
(3) The applicant(s) for approval of a joint parking facility shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that
there is no substantial conflict in the demand for parking during the
principal operating hours of the two of more uses which the joint
parking facility is proposed to serve.
(4) A legally binding instrument, approved by the Village Attorney,
shall be executed by any and all parties to be served by a joint
parking facility. This instrument shall be recorded with the Register
of Deeds office and filed with the Village Clerk. A fee shall be
required to file this instrument (see § 510-149). [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
H. Parking within the Central Business District. Within the Central
Business (CB) District, the parking requirements of this chapter are
hereby waived.
I. Locational prohibitions for off-street parking areas.
(1) Off-street parking shall not be located between the principal
structure on a residential lot and a street right-of-way, except
within residential driveways and parking lots designated on the
approved site plan.
(2) No private parking shall occur on street terraces, driveways, or any
other areas located within a public right-of-way not explicitly
designated by the Director of Public Works.
J. Minimum permitted throat length. Figure 510-93B shall be used to
determine the minimum permitted throat length of access drives
serving parking lots as measured from the right-of-way line along the
center line of the access drive. This regulation may be modified by the
Plan Commission by explicit motion associated with this site review
process.
K. Potential reduction in parking. The Plan Commission may decrease the
required number of off-street automobile parking spaces by up to 25%
of the normal requirements based upon one or more of the following
criteria:
(1) Technical documentation furnished by the applicant that indicates,
to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission, that actual off-street
parking demand for that particular use is less than the required
standard set forth in this chapter.
(2) Bicycle parking spaces will be provided through racks, lockers, or
equivalent structures located convenient to the proposed use.
§ 510-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-93
1:903
(3) A public transportation route is located within 500 feet of the
property.
L. Installation and maintenance. All off-street parking and traffic
circulation areas shall be completed prior to building occupancy and
shall be maintained in a dust-free condition at all times. In no instance
or manner shall any off-street parking or traffic circulation area be used
as a storage area, except as provided for by § 510-96.
M. Use of off-street parking areas. The use of all required off-street parking
areas shall be limited to the parking of licensed operable vehicles not
for lease, rent, or sale. Within residential districts, required parking
spaces shall only be used by operable cars and trucks.
Figure 510-93A: Parking Layout Dimensions
Parking Angle in Degrees
Minimum Permitted
Dimensions 0° 45° 60° 75° 90°
Stall width at parking
angle (SW) (feet)
9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0
Stall width parallel to aisle
(WP) (feet)
17 12.7 10.4 9.3 9.0
Stall depth to wall (D)
(feet)
9.01 17.51 19.01 19.51 18.51
Stall depth to interlock (DI)
(feet)
N/A 15.3 17.5 18.8 N/A
Stall length (SL) (feet) 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0
Aisle width (AW) (feet) 12.02 12.02 16.02 17.202 24.0
Throat length (right-of-way
to parking angle) (T)
Refer to requirements in Figure 510-93B
Parking module width
(PMW)
Wall to wall (singleloaded)
(W1) (feet)
21.0 29.5 35.0 42.5 44.5
Wall to wall (doubleloaded)
(W2) (feet)
30.0 47.0 54.0 62.0 63.0
Wall to interlock
(double-loaded) (W3)
(feet)
N/A 44.8 52.5 61.3 N/A
Interlock to interlock
(double-loaded) (W4)
(feet)
N/A 42.6 51.0 60.6 N/A
§ 510-93 EAST TROY CODE § 510-93
1:904
Notes:
1 Parking spaces located
behind an enclosed garage
and located directly off a
thorough aisle shall be at
least 30 feet deep.
2 This dimension represents
(AW) for one-way traffic.
Figure 510-93B: Minimum Permitted Throat Length
Type of Access
Street
Land
Use Type
Scale of
Development
Collector
(feet)
Arterial
(feet)
Any residential 0 to 100 dwelling
units
25 N/A
101 to 200
dwelling units
Residential 50 75
201+ dwelling
units
75 125
Office 0 to 50,000 gross
square feet
25 50
50,001 to 100,000
gross square feet
25 75
100,001 to
200,000 gross
square feet
50 100
200,001+ gross
square feet
100 150
In-vehicle sales
or service
0 to 2,000 gross
square feet
25 75
2,001+ gross
square feet
50 100
Commercial
indoor lodging
0 to 150 rooms 25 75
151+ rooms 25 100
Commercial
Other
commercial uses
0 to 25,000 gross
square feet
25 50
§ 510-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-93
1:905
§ 510-93.1. Motor vehicles and trailers on residential lots. [Added
3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
Figure 510-93B: Minimum Permitted Throat Length
Type of Access
Street
Land
Use Type
Scale of
Development
Collector
(feet)
Arterial
(feet)
25,001 to 100,000
gross square feet
25 75
100,001 to
500,000 gross
square feet
50 100
500,001+ gross
square feet
100 200
All industrial
uses
0 to 100,000
gross square feet
25 50
100,001 to
500,000 gross
square feet
50 100
Industrial
500,001+ gross
square feet
50 200
Other
uses
6+ spaces 25 50
A. Motor vehicles.
(1) The following may be kept out-of-doors overnight on a residential
lot:
(a) Passenger vehicles, pick-up trucks, and motorcycles;
(b) One motor home, fifth-wheel recreation vehicle, or camping
trailer; and
(c) One truck with a rated capacity not in excess of 16,000 pounds.
(2) All such motor vehicles must be 1) registered and licensed, 2) used
by the residents living on the subject property or their temporary
guests, and 3) placed on a driveway, but not within the public rightof-
way, or on an auxiliary parking bay as permitted by this Code.
B. Trailers. One trailer, or one boat, with or without a trailer; or one
camping trailer may be kept out-of-doors overnight on residential lots,
provided it is 1) registered and licensed, if so required for use by the
State of Wisconsin; 2) used by the residents living on the subject
property or their temporary guests; and 3) placed on a driveway, but not
§ 510-93 EAST TROY CODE § 510-93.1
1:906
§ 510-94. Off-street loading standards.
within the public right-of-way, or on an auxiliary parking bay as
permitted by this Code. In addition, the aforementioned trailers may be
kept overnight on an unsurfaced area of the lot, provided:
(1) Two trailers are allowed provided the cumulative total of the
trailer(s) shall not exceed 30 feet in length, excluding trailer hitch,
tongue, and bumper.
(2) The trailer must be at least six feet from a principal building and at
least five feet from any lot line.
(3) The trailer shall not be located in the front yard or the street yard.
(4) The trailer shall not exceed 10 feet in height above the ground
surface as parked, but excluding mast.
(5) The trailer shall not exceed nine feet in width, excluding any
auxiliary hardware.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent congestion of public
rights-of-way and private lots so as to promote the safety and general
welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the
provision of loading facilities on various sites.
B. Applicability. Any use which has a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet
or more, and which requires deliveries or makes shipments from large
trucks, shall provide off-street loading facilities in accordance with the
regulations of this section.
C. Review and approval. Through the site plan review process (see
§ 510-160), the Plan Commission shall review and approve all
development for conformance with this section.
D. Location. All loading berths shall be located 25 feet or more from the
intersection of two street right-of-way lines. Loading berths shall not be
located within any required front yard or street yard setback area.
Access to the loading berth shall be located in conformance with
§ 510-91. All loading areas shall be located on the private lot and shall
not be located within or interfere with any public right-of-way.
E. Size of loading area. The first required loading berth shall be designed
in accordance with Figure 510-94. All remaining required loading
berths shall be a minimum of 50 feet in length and 10 feet in width. All
required loading berths shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 14
feet. The following standards shall be the minimum used to design
loading areas:
(1) Access to loading area. Each loading berth shall be located so as to
facilitate access to a public street or alley and shall not interfere
with other vehicular or pedestrian traffic per § 510-93 and shall not
§ 510-93.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-94
1:907
interfere with the function of parking areas. In no instance shall
loading areas rely on backing movements into public rights-of-way.
(2) Surface and marking. All required loading areas shall be paved and
maintained in a dust-free condition at all times. Said surface shall
be marked in a manner which clearly indicates required loading
areas.
(3) Use of required loading areas. The use of all required loading areas
shall be limited to the loading and unloading of vehicles. Said area
shall not be used to provide minimum required parking spaces.
(4) Lighting. All loading areas shall be lit so as to not exceed the
standards of § 510-95.
(5) Signage. All signage located within, or related to, loading areas
shall comply with the requirements of Article XV.
F. Depiction on required site plan. Any and all required loading areas and
trailer and container storage areas proposed to be located on the
subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration
on the site plan required for the development of the subject property.
G. Calculation of required loading spaces.
(1) Indoor institutional land uses. One loading berth shall be required
for each building having a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet to
29,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a
gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or greater, two loading
berths shall be required.
(2) Commercial (except offices), storage, transportation, and industrial
land uses. One loading berth shall be required for each building
having a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet to 29,999 square feet.
For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor area of
30,000 square feet or greater, an additional loading berth shall be
required for any portion of each 50,000 square feet of gross floor
area in addition to the original 29,999 square feet.
(3) Office land uses. One loading berth shall be required for each
building having a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet to 99,999
square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor
area of 100,000 square feet or greater, an additional loading berth
shall be required for any portion of each 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area in addition to the original 99,999 square feet.
§ 510-94 EAST TROY CODE § 510-94
1:908
§ 510-95. Exterior lighting standards.
Figure 510-94: Loading Standards
Design
Vehicle
Length
(feet)
Dock
Angle(a)
Clearance
(D)
(feet)
Berth
Width
(W)
(feet)
Apron
Space
(A)
(feet)
Total
Offset
(T)
(feet)
10 63 113
90° 50 12 56 106
14 52 102
10 46 90
60° 44 12 40 84
14 35 79
10 37 73
12 32 68
WB-40 50
45° 36
14 29 65
10 77 132
90° 55 12 72 127
14 67 122
10 55 103
60° 48 12 51 99
14 46 94
10 45 84
12 40 79
WB-50 55
45° 39
14 37 76
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the spillover of light
and glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses in
the vicinity of a light source in order to promote traffic safety and to
prevent the creation of nuisances.
§ 510-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-95
1:909
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all private
exterior lighting within the jurisdiction of this chapter, except for
lighting within public rights-of-way and/or lighting located on public
property.
C. Review and approval. Through the site plan review process (see
§ 510-160), the Plan Commission shall review and approve all
development for conformance with this section.
D. Depiction on required site plan. Any and all exterior lighting shall be
depicted as to its location, orientation, and configuration on the site
plan required for the development of the subject property.
E. Exterior lighting requirements.
(1) In no instance shall an exterior lighting fixture be oriented so that
the lighting element (or a clear shield) is visible from a property
located within a residential zoning district. The use of shielded
luminaires and careful fixture placement is encouraged so as to
facilitate compliance with this requirement.
(2) Flashing, flickering and/or other lighting which may distract
motorists is prohibited.
(3) Intensity of illumination.
(a) In no instance shall the amount of illumination attributable to
exterior lighting, as measured at the property line, exceed 0.50
footcandle above ambient lighting conditions on a cloudless
night.
(b) The maximum average on-site lighting in nonresidential zoning
districts shall be 2.4 footcandles.
(c) The maximum average on-site lighting in residential zoning
districts shall be 0.90 footcandle.
(d) The following exceptions shall be permitted:
[1] The maximum average allowable on-site lighting of
outdoor recreation facilities and assembly areas is 3.60
footcandles.
[2] The maximum average on-site lighting of auto display lots
and gas station pump islands is 25.0 footcandles; all underthe-
canopy fixtures shall be fully recessed.
(e) Reflected glare onto nearby buildings, streets or pedestrian
areas is prohibited. To minimize any indirect overflow of light
on adjacent properties, the height of any proposed parking lot
light standard should be as short as possible and should stair
step down to a lower height when close to residential uses.
(4) Fixtures and luminaires.
§ 510-95 EAST TROY CODE § 510-95
1:910
§ 510-96. Exterior storage standards.
(a) Outdoor lighting shall be full cutoff fixtures and downward
facing, and no direct light shall bleed onto adjacent properties.
Exempt from this requirement are any fixtures using an
incandescent bulb of 100 watts or less or its equivalent.
(b) Light fixtures shall not be located within required bufferyards.
(c) Total cutoff luminaires with angles of less than 90° shall be
required for pole and building security lighting to ensure no
fugitive uplighting occurs.
(d) The color and design of fixtures shall be compatible with the
building and public lighting in the area and shall be uniform
throughout the entire development site.
(e) The maximum fixture height in the SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-6,
SR-7, TR-8, AR-9, MR-10, and NB Districts shall be 16 feet. The
maximum fixture height in the RH-35, HB, CB, BP, LI and GI
Districts shall be 25 feet.
(f) All lighting fixtures existing prior to the effective date of this
chapter shall be considered as legal conforming.
(5) All areas designated on required site plans for vehicular parking,
loading, or circulation and used for any such purpose after sunset
shall provide artificial illumination in such areas at a minimum
intensity of 0.2 footcandle.
(6) Any temporary use using exterior lighting which is not in complete
compliance with the requirements of this section shall secure a
temporary use permit (see § 510-158).
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to control the use of residential,
office, and commercial property for exterior storage so as to promote
the safety and general welfare of the public. For exterior storage in
agricultural and industrial districts, refer to Article VI.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all development.
C. Review and approval. If site plan review is determined to be necessary
by the Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission shall review and
approve all development for conformance with this section through the
site plan review process (see § 510-160).
D. Requirements for exterior storage in commercial districts. In all
commercial zoning districts, all materials and equipment shall be
stored within a completely enclosed building, except for the following,
which shall not be located within any front yard or required street yard
(except for vehicles in designated parking spaces) and shall be stored a
minimum of five feet from any and all property lines: screened refuse
containers; construction materials, landscape materials, and related
§ 510-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-96
1:911
§ 510-97. Fencing standards.
equipment connected within on-site construction; and off-street
parking.
E. Inoperative motor vehicles and junk. Refer to Chapter 461, Vehicles,
Junked, Stored or Abandoned, of the Village Code.
F. Exterior trash storage. All exterior trash storage shall be located within
an enclosure that completely screens the view of said trash. The
exterior of said enclosure shall be constructed of some or all of the
materials used on the main building. A solid wood fence shall be used to
gain access to the storage area.
G. Outdoor storage of firewood. No person shall store firewood in the front
yard on residentially zoned property, except that firewood may be
temporarily stored in the front yard for a period of 30 days from the
date of its delivery. Firewood should be neatly stacked and may be
stacked not closer than two feet to any lot line and not higher than six
feet from grade, except adjacent to a fence where firewood can be
stacked against the fence as high as the fence. "Fence" as used in this
section shall not include hedges and other vegetation.
(1) All brush, debris, and refuse from processing of firewood shall be
promptly and properly disposed of.
(2) Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of
transmitting disease to healthy trees and woodpiles, or that harbor
or are infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin, are public
nuisances and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
(3) Not more than 20% of the side and rear yard may be used for
storage of firewood at any one time.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the materials,
location, height, and maintenance of fencing, landscaping walls, and
decorative posts in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to
promote the general welfare of the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all fencing,
landscaping walls, and decorative posts equal to or exceeding 30 inches
in height for all land uses and activities.
C. Review and approval. If site plan review is determined to be necessary
by the Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission shall review and
approve all development for conformance with this section through the
site plan review process (see § 510-160).
D. Height standards.
(1) On corner lots in all zoning districts, no fence, wall, hedge,
planting, or structure shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed
§ 510-96 EAST TROY CODE § 510-97
1:912
to grow in such a manner as to obstruct vision between a height
of 2 1/2 feet and 10 feet above grade in the area bounded by the
street and a line joining the points along such street to lines 10 feet
from the point of intersection.
(2) A fence, wall, tree, hedge, or shrubbery may be erected, placed,
maintained, or grown along a lot line on or adjacent to a
residentially zoned property. The height of such fences or walls
shall not exceed six feet above the ground level. Where such lot line
is adjacent to property zoned NB, CB, BP, LI or GI, there shall be a
ten-foot limit on the height of fencing along such lot line. On
residential corner lots, the street side (front yard) setback will be
determined by the owner's choice. Any fence in the front setback
area shall not exceed four feet in height.
(3) Fences, walls, trees, hedges, or shrubbery erected, placed,
maintained, or grown along a lot line on any business or
industrially zoned property adjacent to residentially zoned property
shall be to a height of not less than six feet nor more than 10 feet in
height, except that there is no maximum height for trees, hedges,
or shrubbery. No barbed wire or electrical fences may be erected or
maintained.
E. Setback standards.
(1) Fences in or adjacent to a residential property may be placed,
erected or maintained along the lot line. A lot survey may be
required if property lines cannot be determined. [Amended
10-17-2011]
(2) Living fences or hedges shall be planted so that they may be
trimmed without entry on abutting lands. Species shall determine
distance, but in no case shall any shrub or plant be planted less
than three feet from the center of planting to the lot line.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
F. Wood fences. Wood fences on the perimeter of a lot shall be installed
with the finish side of the fence slats facing toward the neighboring
property.
G. Fence maintenance. All fences, including their painted surfaces, shall
be maintained and kept safe and in a state of good repair, including
painted surfaces.
H. Temporary fences. Fences erected for the protection of plantings or to
warn of construction hazards or for similar purposes shall be clearly
visible or marked with colored streamers or other such warning devices
at four-foot intervals. Such fences shall comply with the setback
requirements set forth in this section. The issuance of a permit shall not
be necessary for temporary fences as described in this subsection.
Snow fences shall be removed by April 1.
§ 510-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-97
1:913
§ 510-98. (Reserved)345
§ 510-99. Vibration standards.
I. Fencing for dumpsters. Apartments containing three or more dwelling
units shall provide a six-foot-high fence with four sides, accessible by a
gate, for dumpsters.
J. Orientation. Any and all fences, landscape walls, or decorative posts
shall be erected so as to locate visible supports and other structural
components toward the subject property.
K. Maintenance. Any and all fences, landscape walls, or decorative posts
shall be maintained in a structurally sound and attractive manner.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of
vibration which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to
prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all uses and
activities which create detectable vibrations, except that these
standards shall not apply to vibrations created during the construction
of the principal use on the subject property.
C. Review and approval. Through the site plan review process (see
§ 510-160), the Plan Commission shall review and approve all
development on the subject property.
D. Depiction on required site plan. Any activity or equipment which
creates detectable vibrations outside the confines of a building shall be
depicted as to its location on the site plan required for the development
of the subject property.
E. Requirements. No activity or operation shall cause or create earthborn
vibrations in excess of the displacement values given in Figure 510-99
below.
F. Method of measurement. Measurements shall be made at or beyond the
adjacent lot line or the nearest residential district boundary line.
Vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument capable
of simultaneously measuring in three mutually perpendicular
directions. The maximum permitted displacements shall be determined
in each zoning district by the following formula: D = K/f, where D =
displacement in inches; K = a constant to be determined by reference to
Figure 510-99 below; and f = the frequency of vibration transmitted
through the ground (cycles per second).
345. Editor’s Note: Former § 510-98, Swimming pool standards, as amended, was repealed
8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-09.
§ 510-97 EAST TROY CODE § 510-99
1:914
§ 510-100. Noise standards.
Figure 510-99: Vibration Measurement Constant
K
All Other
Districts
K
GI District
On or beyond any adjacent lot line
Continuous 0.003 0.015
Impulsive 0.006 0.030
Fewer than 8 pulses per
24-hour period
0.015 0.075
On or beyond any residential
district boundary line
Continuous 0.003 0.003
Impulsive 0.006 0.006
Fewer than 8 pulses per
24-hour period
0.015 0.015
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of noise
which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the
creation of nuisances and to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all uses and
activities which create detectable noise, except that these standards
shall not apply to noise created during the construction of the principal
use on the subject property or by incidental traffic, parking, loading,
maintenance, or agricultural operations.
C. Requirements. All noise shall be muffled so as to not be objectionable
due to intermittence, frequency, or shrillness. In no event shall the
sound-pressure level of noise continuously radiated from a facility
exceed the values given in Figure 510-100A as measured by a Type 2
sound meter that is in compliance with ANSI Standard S1.4-1983. The
measurement shall be conducted at the lot line of the subject property
where said lot abuts property within any residential or business zoning
district or the Light Industrial District.346
D. Nonconforming noise. Noise that was in effect as of the effective date of
this chapter shall be considered legal nonconforming. The burden of
proof to demonstrate that said noises were in effect prior to the
effective date of this chapter is the responsibility of the noise producer.
346. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-100
1:915
§ 510-101. Air pollution standards.
Figure 510-100A: Maximum Permitted Noise Level at Lot Line
for Continuous Noise
Zoning District Increase in Noise Level Over
Ambient Level
RH-35, SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-6,
SR-7, TR-8, AR-9, MR-10 and
MHR-6
Plus 3 dBA
NB, HB, CB and BP Plus 5 dBA
LI and GI Plus 8 dBA
Figure 510-100B: Adjustment Factors for Maximum Noise
Levels
Type of Operation in Character of
Noise Correction in Decibels
Daytime operation only Plus 5 dBA
Noise source operates less than 20% of
any 1-hour period
Plus 5 dBA*
Noise source operates less than 5% of any
1-hour period
Plus 10 dBA*
Noise source operates less than 1% of any
1-hour period
Plus 15 dBA*
Noise of impulsive character (hammering,
etc.)
Minus 5 dBA
Noise of periodic character (hum, speech,
etc.)
Minus 5 dBA
Notes:
* Apply only one of these corrections.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of air
pollution which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to
prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities, except that these standards shall not apply to air pollution
created during the construction of the principal use on the subject
property or by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance
operations.
C. Standards. In addition to all applicable state and federal standards, the
following shall apply:
§ 510-100 EAST TROY CODE § 510-101
1:916
§ 510-102. Odor standards.
§ 510-103. (Reserved)348
§ 510-104. Glare and heat standards.
(1) The emission of particulate matter containing a particle diameter
larger than 44 microns is prohibited.
(2) Emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density equal to or
greater than Number 2 on the Ringelmann Chart (U.S. Bureau of
Mines) is prohibited at all times.
(3) Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such
sources as storage areas, yards, and roads within the boundaries of
any lot shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping,
paving, oiling, or other acceptable means.
(4) All applicable state and federal standards.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of odor
which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the
creation of nuisances and to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities, except that these standards shall not apply to odors created
during the construction of the principal use on the subject property or
by incidental fertilizer application, traffic, parking, loading, or
maintenance operations. Public landfills and public sanitary sewage
treatment plants shall be exempted from the requirements of this
section as essential public services.
C. Standards. Except for food preparation and cooking odors emanating
from residential land uses and odors associated with property
development and maintenance (such as construction, lawn care, and
the painting and roofing of structures), no odors shall be created for
periods exceeding a total of 15 minutes per any day which are
detectable (by a healthy observer such as the Zoning Administrator or a
designee who is unaffected by background odors such as tobacco or
food) at the boundary of the subject property, where said lot abuts
property within any residential or business zoning district or the Light
Industrial (LI) District.347
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of glare
or heat in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
347. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
348. Editor's Note: Former § 510-103, Communication tower standards, was repealed 5-15-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-08. See now Art. XIX, Wireless Telecommunication Facilities.
§ 510-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-104
1:917
§ 510-105. Fire and explosions.
§ 510-106. Toxic, noxious and waste materials.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities, except that these standards shall not apply to glare created
during the construction of the principal use on the subject property or
by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance operations.
C. Standards. No direct or sky-reflected glare shall be visible at the lot line
of the subject property, whether from floodlights or from temperature
processes, such as combustion, welding, or otherwise. As determined
by the Zoning Administrator, there shall be no discernible transmission
of heat or heated air at the lot line. Solar systems regulated by
§ 66.0401, Wis. Stats., shall be entitled to the protection of its
provisions.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of fire
and/or explosion hazards which adversely affect adjoining properties in
order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities.
C. Standards. Any use involving materials which could decompose by
detonation shall be located not less than 400 feet from any residential
or commercial zoning district, except that this standard shall not apply
to the storage or usage of liquefied petroleum or natural gas for normal
residential or business purposes. All activities and storage of flammable
and explosive materials at any point shall be provided with adequate
safety and fire-fighting devices in accordance with all fire prevention
codes of the State of Wisconsin.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the handling of toxic,
noxious, or waste material which adversely affects adjoining properties
in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities.
C. Standards. No use shall discharge across the boundaries of the subject
property, or through percolation into the subsoil, toxic or noxious
material in such concentration as to be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort, or welfare or cause injury or damage to
private property or business. No use shall discharge at any point into
any public or private sewage disposal system or stream, or into the
ground, any liquid or solid materials except in accordance with the
regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Health Services.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
§ 510-104 EAST TROY CODE § 510-107
1:918
§ 510-107. Hazardous materials.
§ 510-108. Group development standards.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide information to the
Village regarding the nature of land uses which involve research,
production, storage, disposal, handling, and/or shipment of hazardous
materials.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities involving any one or more of the following:
(1) Microorganism cultures subject to § 94.65, Wis. Stats.
(2) Pesticides subject to § 94.67(25), Wis. Stats.
(3) Biological products subject to § 95.39, Wis. Stats.
(4) Hazardous substances subject to § 100.37(1)(c), Wis. Stats.
(5) Toxic substances subject to § 101.58(2)(j), Wis. Stats.
(6) Infectious agents subject to § 101.58(2)(f), Wis. Stats.
(7) Any material for which the State of Wisconsin requires notification
of a local fire department.
(8) Any other uses, activities, or materials which are subject to county,
state, or federal hazardous or related materials regulations.
C. Standards. All land uses involving such hazardous materials shall
submit a written description of such materials and the operations
involving such materials conducted on their property as part of the
required site plan submittal.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards that
ensure group developments are properly located and are compatible
with the surrounding area and the overall community character of the
Village of East Troy.
B. Applicability. A group development is any development of one lot
comprised of any single instance or any combination of the items in
Subsection B(1) through (6) below. Common examples of group
developments include apartment or condominium complexes,
commercial centers, shopping centers, and office centers. A group
development does not offer the ability to customize regulations of this
chapter as could be achieved through a planned development under
Article XII.
(1) One or more principal multifamily residential structures with a
total of five or more residential units on the same parcel.
(2) Two or more principal structures on the same parcel, whether
currently serving a single use or more than one use.
§ 510-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-108
1:919
§ 510-109. Large development standards.
(3) A mixed-use structure used for office or commercial land uses
containing one or more nonresidential uses and one or more
residential uses.
(4) A single principal structure used for office or commercial land uses
with a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or more.
(5) A single principal structure housing two or more leased or owned
tenant spaces.
(6) Any building additions or addition of principal buildings that brings
the total gross floor area of all principal structures to 5,000 square
feet or greater or increases the total number of principal structures
on the same parcel to two or more.
C. Review and approval. All group developments require a conditional use
permit (see § 510-157 for review and approval procedure) regardless of
whether individual use(s) within the development is permitted by right
within the applicable district. The subsequent addition of structures,
additions to structures, and expansions of parking or storage areas
shall require amendment to the approved conditional use permit
regardless of individual land use(s).
D. Group development standards. In addition to the general site and
design standards as provided in § 510-90, the following standards and
regulations are applicable to all group developments:
(1) Subsequent changes to individual uses within a group development
are permitted so long as the new use is listed as a use which is
permitted by right within the applicable zoning district, unless the
group development conditional use permit placed explicit
restrictions on future uses.
(2) Subsequent individual land uses permitted by conditional use in the
zoning district shall be permitted within the group development
only under subsequent conditional use permit approvals for the
specific use, regardless of whether said use entails modifications to
the building and/or site layout.
(3) All site development occurring within a group development shall
comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter, including
but not limited to density, intensity, bulk, and setbacks; building
separation; building and site design standards; landscaping and
green space preservation; access, parking, loading, and unloading;
and signage.
(4) A group development also meeting the description for a large
development shall also meet all of the large development standards
in § 510-109.
§ 510-108 EAST TROY CODE § 510-109
1:920
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish application
requirements and standards that are intended to ensure that large
developments (as defined in Subsection B below) are properly located
and are compatible with the surrounding area and the overall
community character of the Village of East Troy.
B. Applicability. Large developments may contain any combination of one
or more of the following land uses: indoor sales or service, outdoor
display, indoor commercial entertainment, outdoor commercial
entertainment, in-vehicle sales or service, or commercial indoor
lodging. (Refer to Article VI for definitions and requirements for each
land use.) A large development is comprised of one or more contiguous
parcels or building sites for one or more of the above-listed land uses
within which the total combined gross floor area exceeds 20,000 square
feet, including indoor and outdoor storage and display areas, and where
one or both of the following conditions exist:
(1) The parking area is or will be served by an integrated system of offstreet
parking benefiting all or substantially all improvements
within such area.
(2) The area is or will be subject to reciprocal access rights benefiting
all or substantially all improvements within such area.
C. Review and approval. The review and approval process for large
developments shall adhere to the conditional use permit procedures
(see § 510-157). Large developments require a conditional use permit
regardless of whether individual use(s) within the development is
permitted by right within the applicable district; however, a separate
conditional use permit is not required where such developments are
part of a planned development (see Article XII).
(1) All additions or modifications to structures, outdoor display areas,
in-vehicle drives, parking, or outdoor storage areas that are part of
an approved large development shall require an amendment to the
conditional use permit.
(2) Subsequent changes to individual land uses listed as permitted by
right uses within the applicable zoning district are permitted
without amendment to the large development conditional use
permit, unless said conditional use permit placed restrictions on
change of use.
(3) Subsequent individual land uses which are permitted only with a
conditional use permit may be allowed only under a subsequent
conditional use permit for the specific use, regardless of whether
said use entails modifications to the building and/or site layout.
D. Application requirements. Large development projects shall submit the
following application materials to the Zoning Administrator in addition
to those required for a conditional use permit under § 510-157:
§ 510-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-109
1:921
(1) Report. A written report providing evidence that the proposed
building and overall development project will be compatible with
the Village of East Troy Comprehensive Plan, any detailed
neighborhood plan for the area, and any other plans officially
adopted by the Village.
(2) Questionnaire. A Large Development Questionnaire shall be
completed and provided in the format included in Figure
510-109.349
(3) Economic and fiscal analysis. The Village may require completion
of an economic and fiscal impact analysis containing the following
items:
(a) Estimate of types and number of jobs created, including fulltime
equivalent (40 hours per week) and part time (less than
40 hours per week).
(b) The impact of the project on the overall local job market at year
one and year five.
(c) Estimate of the amount of local labor to be used in the
construction of the project and in employment. "Local" is
defined as Village or county residents or businesses.
(d) Analysis indicating the market of the proposed project and the
area from which patrons will be attracted.
(e) Evaluate the impact of the proposed project on commercial
and/or retail vacancy rates in the proposed market area.
(f) Estimate to what extent the proposed project would reduce the
proposed market area's economic base by eliminating existing
businesses.
(g) Compare and evaluate the projected costs and benefits to the
community resulting from the project, including:
[1] Projected costs arising from increased demand for and
required improvements to public services and
infrastructure.
[2] Value of improvements to public services and
infrastructure to be provided by the project.
[3] Projected tax revenues to the Village to be generated by
the project in the first five years of business.
[4] Projected impact of the project in the first five years on
land values (both residential and commercial) and
349. Editor's Note: Figure 510-109 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 510-109 EAST TROY CODE § 510-109
1:922
potential loss or increase in tax revenues to the Village of
East Troy.
(4) Traffic impact analysis. The Village may require that a traffic
impact analysis be completed in accordance with the most current
revision of the Traffic Impact Analysis Guidelines published by the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation. In addition, the following
provisions are required for all large developments:
(a) All projects shall have direct access to an arterial or collector
street deemed appropriate by the Plan Commission.
(b) Vehicle access shall be designed to accommodate peak on-site
traffic volumes without disrupting traffic on public streets or
impairing pedestrian safety. This shall be accomplished
through adequate parking lot design and capacity; access drive
entry throat length; design, location, and number of traffic
control devices; and sidewalks.
(c) The site design shall provide direct connections to adjacent
land uses if required by the Village.
(d) Where the traffic impact analysis indicates that a project may
cause off-site public roads, intersections, or interchanges to
function below a level of service (LOS) C, the Village may deny
the application, require a size reduction in the proposed
development, and/or require the developer to construct and/or
pay for required off-site improvements to achieve a LOS C for a
planning horizon of a minimum of 10 years assuming full buildout
of the development.
(e) The Village has the option to require a trip generation study.
(5) Detailed neighborhood plan. For a development exceeding 80,000
square feet in total gross floor area of all combined buildings within
the development, the Village may require that a detailed
neighborhood plan be submitted and approved by the Plan
Commission and Village Board. The detailed neighborhood plan
shall be prepared for all areas within 1,500 feet of the subject
property, as measured from the outer perimeter of the subject
property or group of properties proposed for development, and any
other nearby lands as determined by the Plan Commission to be
part of the defined neighborhood. The detailed neighborhood plan
shall:
(a) Contain the following specific elements at a scale of not less
than one inch equals 400 feet:
[1] Land use with specific zoning districts and/or land uses.
[2] Transitional treatments such as berms and/or landscaping
between areas with differing land uses or character.
§ 510-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-109
1:923
[3] Complete transportation network, including pedestrian
and bicycle facilities and transit routes and stops, where
applicable.
[4] Conceptual stormwater management facilities.
[5] Proposed public facility sites, including parks, schools,
conservation areas, public safety facilities and public
utility facilities.
[6] Proposed community character themes, including building
materials, landscaping, streetscaping, and signage.
(b) Demonstrate that the proposed detailed neighborhood plan is
in harmony with the land use, multi-modal transportation,
utility, stormwater management, and community character
provisions of the Village's Comprehensive Plan.
E. Large development standards. In addition to the general exterior site
and building design standards as provided in § 510-90, the following
standards and regulations are applicable to all large developments. In
the event that the applicant desires a deviation or exception from any
requirements of this section, the applicant shall present justification for
such deviation or exception, which may be approved or denied by the
Village Board after recommendation by the Plan Commission.
(1) Building location. Where buildings are proposed to be distant from
a public street, as determined by the Plan Commission, the overall
development design shall include smaller buildings on pads or
outlots closer to the street. Placement and orientation must
facilitate appropriate land use transitions and appropriate traffic
flow to adjoining roads and neighboring commercial areas and
neighborhoods and must advance community character objectives
as described in the Village's Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Building design. The building exterior shall complement other
buildings in the vicinity and shall be of a design determined
appropriate by the Plan Commission, including the following:
(a) The building shall employ varying setbacks, heights, roof
treatments, doorways, window openings, and other structural
or decorative elements to reduce apparent size and scale of the
building.
(b) A minimum of 20% of the structure's facades that are visible
from public streets shall employ actual protrusions or recesses
with a depth of at least six feet. No uninterrupted facade shall
extend more than 100 feet.
(c) Ground floor facades that face and are within 300 feet of any
public streets shall have arcades (i.e., a series of outdoor
spaces located under a roof or overhang and supported by
§ 510-109 EAST TROY CODE § 510-109
1:924
columns or arches), display windows, entry areas, awnings, or
other such features along no less than 50% of their horizontal
length.
(d) The integration of windows into building design is required,
and they shall be transparent, clear glass (not tinted or
spandrel glass) between three to eight feet above the walkway
along any facades facing a public street. The use of blinds shall
be acceptable where there is a desire for opacity.
(e) A minimum of 20% of all of the combined linear roof eave or
parapet lines of the structure shall employ differences in
height, with such differences being six feet or more as
measured eave to eave or parapet to parapet.
(f) Roofs with particular pitches may be required by the Village to
complement existing buildings or otherwise establish a
particular aesthetic objective.
(g) Building facades shall include a repeating pattern that includes
no fewer than three of the following elements: color change,
texture change, material modular change, and/or expression of
architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no
less than 24 inches in width, such as an offset, reveal or
projecting rib. At least one of these elements shall repeat
horizontally. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more
than 30 feet, either horizontally or vertically.
(h) Public building entryways shall be clearly defined and highly
visible on the building's exterior design and shall be
emphasized by on-site traffic flow patterns. Two or more of the
following design features shall be incorporated into all public
building entryways: canopies or porticos, overhangs,
projections, arcades, peaked roof forms, arches, outdoor
patios, display windows, and/or distinct architectural details.
When additional stores located in the principal building exceed
30% of the gross floor area, separate entrances may be
required by the Village for each such store that shall conform
to the above requirements.
(3) Screening.
(a) All ground-mounted and wall-mounted mechanical equipment,
refuse containers and any permitted outdoor storage shall be
fully concealed from on-site and off-site ground-level views
with materials identical to those used on the building exterior.
(b) All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened by
parapets, upper stories, or other areas of exterior walls or
roofs so as to not be visible from public streets adjacent to or
within 1,000 feet of the subject property. Fences or similar
§ 510-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-109
1:925
rooftop screening devices may not be used to meet this
requirement.
(c) Loading docks shall be completely screened from surrounding
roads and properties. Said screening may be accomplished
through loading areas internal to buildings, screen walls which
match the building exterior in materials and design, fully
opaque landscaping at time of planting, or combinations of the
above.
(d) Gates and fencing may be used for security and access, but not
for screening, and they shall be of high aesthetic quality.
Decorative metal picket fencing and screening is acceptable.
Chain-link, wire mesh, or wood fencing is prohibited.
Decorative, heavy-duty wood gates may be used.
(4) Parking.
(a) Parking lots in which the number of spaces significantly
exceeds the minimum number of parking spaces required per
land use in Article VI shall be allowed only with specific and
reasonable justification.
(b) Parking lot design shall employ interior, curbed landscaped
islands at all parking aisle ends. In addition, the project shall
provide landscaped islands within each parking aisle spaced at
intervals no greater than one island per every 20 spaces in that
aisle. Islands at the ends of aisles shall count toward meeting
this requirement. Each required landscaped island shall be a
minimum of 360 square feet in landscaped area.
(c) Landscaped and curbed medians, a minimum of 10 feet in
width from back of curb to back of curb, shall be used to create
distinct parking areas of no more than 120 parking stalls.
(d) For development exceeding 80,000 square feet in total gross
floor area, and where the subject property abuts an area zoned
or planned for residential, institutional, or office use, a
minimum six-foot-high berm shall be provided. The berm shall
be planted with a double row of white, green or blue spruce
plantings, or similar species and varieties approved by the
Village, and spaced 15 feet on center.
(5) Bicycle and pedestrian facilities.
(a) The entire development shall provide for safe pedestrian and
bicycle access to all uses within the development, connections
to existing and planned public pedestrian and bicycle facilities,
and connections to adjacent properties.
(b) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided from all building
entrances to existing or planned public sidewalks or
§ 510-109 EAST TROY CODE § 510-109
1:926
pedestrian/bike facilities. The minimum width for sidewalks
adjacent to buildings shall be 10 feet, and the minimum width
for sidewalks elsewhere in the development shall be five feet.
(c) Sidewalks other than street sidewalks or building aprons shall
have adjoining landscaping along at least 50% of their length.
Such landscaping shall match the landscaping used for the
street frontages.
(d) Crosswalks shall be distinguished from driving surfaces to
enhance pedestrian safety by using different pavement
materials, or pavement color, or pavement textures, and
signage.
(e) The development shall provide secure, integrated bicycle
parking at a rate of one bicycle rack space for every 50 vehicle
parking spaces.
(f) The development shall provide exterior pedestrian furniture in
appropriate locations at a minimum rate of one seat for every
20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(g) The development shall provide interior pedestrian furniture in
appropriate locations at a minimum rate of one bench seat for
every 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. Seating in food
service areas or other areas where food or merchandise
purchasing activities occur shall not count toward this
requirement. A minimum of four seats shall be located within
the store, with a clear view through exit doors to a passenger
pickup or dropoff area.
(6) Central areas and features. Each development exceeding 80,000
square feet in total gross floor area shall provide a central area(s)
and/or feature(s) such as a patio/seating area, pedestrian plaza
with benches, outdoor playground area, water feature, and/or
other such deliberately designated areas or focal points that
adequately enhance the development or community. All such areas
shall be openly accessible to the public, connected to the public and
private sidewalk system, and designed with materials compatible
with the building and remainder of the site and shall be maintained
over the life of the building project.
(7) Cart returns. A minimum of one two-hundred-square-foot cart
return area shall be provided for every 100 parking spaces. Cart
corrals shall be of durable, nonrusting, all-season construction and
shall be designed and colored to be compatible with the building
and parking lot light standards. There shall be no exterior cart
return or cart storage areas located so as to block or otherwise
conflict with customer doors, passenger or parcel loading areas,
pedestrian or bicycle circulation areas, or vehicle circulation areas.
§ 510-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-109
1:927
(8) Outdoor display areas. Exterior display areas shall be permitted
only where clearly depicted on the approved site plan. All exterior
display areas shall be separated from motor vehicle routes by a
physical barrier visible to drivers and pedestrians and by a
minimum of 10 feet. Display areas on building aprons must
maintain a minimum walkway width of 10 feet between the display
items and any vehicle drives.
(9) Outdoor storage. Exterior storage structures or uses, including the
parking or storage of service vehicles, trailers, equipment,
containers, crates, pallets, merchandise, materials, forklifts, trash,
recyclables, and all other items, shall be permitted only where
clearly depicted and labeled on the approved site plan; such
outdoor storage uses and areas shall be appropriately screened as
required by Subsection E(3).
(10) Signage. The plan for exterior signage shall provide for modest,
coordinated, and complimentary exterior sign locations,
configurations, and color throughout the development, including
outlots. All freestanding signage within the development shall
complement on-building signage. Monument-style ground signs are
required and shall not exceed a height of eight feet. Consolidated
signs for multiple users may be required instead of multiple
individual signs. The Village may require the use of muted
corporate colors on signage if proposed colors are not compatible
with the Village's design objectives for the area. The use of logos,
slogans, symbols, patterns, striping and other markings, and colors
associated with a franchise or chain is permitted and shall be
considered as contributing to the number and area of permitted
signs.
(11) Natural resources protection. Each project shall meet the erosion
control and stormwater management standards in the Village of
East Troy Municipal Code. In addition, post-development runoff
rates shall not exceed presettlement rates. In general, existing
natural features shall be integrated into the site design as a site
and community amenity. Maintenance of any stormwater detention
or conveyance features is solely borne by the developer/owner
unless dedicated and accepted by the Village.
F. Additional requirements. All large developments are subject to the
following additional requirements:
(1) Where such a building is proposed as a replacement location for a
business already located within the Village, the Village shall
prohibit any privately imposed limits on the type or reuse of the
previously occupied building through conditions of sale or lease.
(2) The developer shall enter into a development agreement with the
Village which shall include the payment of all utilities, including but
not limited to stormwater, sanitary sewer, and street infrastructure.
§ 510-109 EAST TROY CODE § 510-109
1:928
§ 510-110. (Reserved)350
§ 510-111. Administration and enforcement.
Determinations necessary for administration and enforcement of
performance standards set forth in this article range from those which can
be made with satisfactory accuracy by a reasonable person using normal
senses and no mechanical equipment to those requiring great technical
competence and complex equipment for precise measurement. It is the
intent of this chapter that:
Off-site improvements may also be required as part of the
development agreement.
(3) No individual building shall exceed a total of 155,000 square feet in
gross floor area. This cap may not be exceeded through the planned
development process.
(4) All buildings on outlots shall be of architectural quality comparable
to the primary structure, as determined by the Plan Commission.
A. Where determinations can be made by the Zoning Administrator using
equipment normally available to the Village or obtainable without
extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be so made before
notice of violation is issued.
B. Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it
unreasonable for the Village to maintain the personnel or equipment
necessary for making difficult or unusual determinations, procedures
shall be available for causing corrections of apparent violations of
performance standards, for protecting individuals from arbitrary,
capricious, and unreasonable administration and enforcement of
performance standard regulations, and for protecting the general
public from unnecessary costs for administration and enforcement.
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall give written notice, by certified
mail or other means, ensuring a signed receipt for such notice, to
the person or persons responsible for the alleged violation. The
notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation and the
reasons why the Zoning Administrator believes there is a violation
in fact and shall require an answer or correction of the alleged
violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator.
(2) The notice shall state, and it is hereby declared, that failure to reply
or to correct the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator within the time limit set constitutes admission of
violation of the terms of this chapter. The notice shall further state
that upon request of those to whom it is directed, technical
determination as described in this chapter will be made, and that if
350. Editor’s Note: Former § 510-110, Outdoor furnaces, was repealed 8-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-09.
§ 510-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-111
1:929
violations as alleged are found, costs of such determinations shall
be charged against those responsible for the violation, in addition
to such other penalties as may be appropriate, but that if it is
determined that no violation exists, the cost of the determination
will be paid by the Village.
§ 510-111 EAST TROY CODE § 510-111
1:930
ARTICLE XIV
Landscaping Requirements
§ 510-112. Purpose.351
The purpose of this article is to establish landscaping requirements and
other regulations intended to preserve and maintain vegetation in a manner
that promotes the natural resource protection, aesthetic, and public health
goals of the Village of East Troy. Any nonconforming situation (lot, use,
structure and/or site) shall adhere to the provisions of Article IX.
§ 510-113. Interpretation.
§ 510-114. Landscaping points.
All landscaping requirements are stated in terms of the number of
landscaping points required. The required number of landscaping points
is dependent upon the type of land use, the zoning district, and the size
of the development. Points are awarded based on plant type, which is
dependent upon its typical growth rate, its mature height, and whether it is
a deciduous or evergreen species. Figure 510-114 itemizes the number of
points awarded per plant type and the minimum installation size required
for each of these plant categories.
A. This article contains the standards which govern the amount, size, type,
installation and maintenance of required landscaping. This article
recognizes the important and diverse benefits which landscaping
provides in terms of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare
of the community.
B. Each section of this article is oriented to a specific category of required
landscaping. The landscaping requirements described in this article are
cumulative in nature and are required for all development, except
single-family residential and agricultural uses, in the following
locations: around building foundations, in developed lots, along street
frontages, in or around paved areas, in permanently protected green
space areas, in reforestation areas, and in bufferyards.
C. In each instance, a "landscaping point" concept is used to provide a
maximum amount of flexibility in terms of the selection of plant
materials. Sections 510-114 and 510-115 present sample landscape
point combination alternatives used by this chapter.
351. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-114
1:931
Figure 510-114: Landscaping Points
Plant Category
Landscaping Points
Per Plant
Minimum Permitted
Installation Size
Climax tree 75 2" caliper
Tall deciduous tree 30 1 1/2" caliper
Medium deciduous
tree
15 6' tall
Low deciduous tree 10 4' tall
Tall evergreen tree 40 5' tall
Medium evergreen
tree
20 4' tall
Low evergreen tree 12 3' tall
Tall deciduous shrub 5 36" tall
Medium deciduous
shrub
3 24" tall
Low deciduous shrub 1 18" tall
Medium evergreen
shrub
5 18" tall/wide
Low evergreen shrub 3 12" tall/wide
Noncontributory
plants
0 N/A
Source: A Guide to Selecting Landscape Plants for Wisconsin, E. R.
Hasselkus, UW-Extension Publication: A2865.
§ 510-115. Sample landscaping schemes.
A. Sample landscaping schemes that may be used for building
foundations, developed lots, street frontages, paved areas,
reforestation, and bufferyards are depicted in Figure 510-115A. In
general, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative A are best for
building foundations, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative B are
best for developed lots, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative C
are best for street frontages, landscaping schemes similar to
Alternative D are best for paved areas (including parking lots, walkways
and plazas), landscaping schemes similar to Alternative E are best for
reforestation, and landscaping schemes similar to Alternative F are
best for bufferyards.
§ 510-114 EAST TROY CODE § 510-115
1:932
Figure 510-115A: Sample Landscaping Schemes
Alternative A: Best suited for building foundations.
750 landscaping
points:
20 medium trees
15 small shrubs
60 shrubs
Alternative B: Best suited for developed lots.
1,250
landscaping
points:
6 climax trees
8 small trees
20 medium trees
41 evergreen
plantings
§ 510-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-115
1:933
Alternative C: Best suited for street frontages.
Option 1.
280 landscaping
points:
2 climax trees
2 tall trees
2 small trees
Option 2.
280 landscaping
points:
2 climax trees
2 tall trees
4 small trees
8 evergreen
shrubs
Alternative D: Best suited for paved areas.
Option 1.
880 landscaping
points:
2 climax trees
13 tall trees
68 evergreen
shrubs
Option 2.
880 landscaping
points:
5 climax trees
6 tall trees
68 evergreen
shrubs
§ 510-115 EAST TROY CODE § 510-115
1:934
Alternative E: Best suited for reforestation.
Alternative F: Best suited for bufferyards.
B. A minimum amount of landscaping points, based upon the zoning
district, is required for the linear feet of building foundations; the gross
area of buildings on developed lots; the linear feet of street frontage;
and the total combined area of paved areas. Figure 510-115B illustrates
the measurement techniques used to determine these requirements.
§ 510-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-115
1:935
§ 510-116. Landscaping requirements for regular developments.
Figure 510-115B: Measurement for Landscaping Requirements
Landscaping calculation equations for this example:
Paved area = (P1 x P2) + (P3 x P4) + (P5 x P6) + (P7 x P8) + (P9 x
P10)
Street frontage = S1 + S2
Building perimeter = F1 + F2 + F3 + F4 + F5 + F6 + F7 + F8
Building floor area = (B1 x B2) + (B3 x B4) + (B5 x B6)
A. Building foundations. As indicated in Figure 510-116,352 certain
buildings or building additions constructed after the effective date of
this chapter are required to be accented by a minimum amount of
landscaping placed near the building foundation.
(1) Foundation landscaping shall be placed so that, at maturity, the
plant's drip line is located within 10 feet of the building foundation.
Such landscaping shall not be located in those areas required for
landscaping as street frontages, paved areas, protected green
space areas, reforestation areas, or bufferyards. Foundation
landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained in
conformity with the requirements of §§ 510-121 and 510-122.
(2) For each 100 feet of building foundation perimeter, the landscaping
installed shall at a minimum meet the number of landscaping points
specified in Figure 510-116. The actual number of points required
for such landscaping shall be computed on a prorated basis and
352. Editor's Note: Figure 510-116 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 510-115 EAST TROY CODE § 510-116
1:936
installed and permanently maintained per the requirements of
§§ 510-121 and 510-122.
(3) Climax trees and tall trees shall not be used to meet the foundation
landscaping requirement. The intent of this section is to require a
visual break in the mass of buildings and to require a visual screen
of a minimum of six feet in height for all exterior perimeter
appurtenances (such as HVAC/utility boxes, standpipes,
stormwater discharge pipes and other pipes).
(4) If the officially approved site plan depicts a future building
extension, the foundation landscaping requirement shall be
calculated by measuring the length of the total perimeter. However,
foundation plantings need only be installed based on the landscape
points calculated from the portions of the building perimeter that
will not be affected by building extension. If this results in a point
requirement not met by the initial planting, then the requirement
shall be met within five years after the issuance of the building
permit or within such larger time period as established in writing
by the Plan Commission.
B. Street frontages. As indicated in Figure 510-116, street frontages on
certain lots developed after the effective date of this chapter must
contain a minimum amount of landscaping in those areas abutting the
right-of-way of a public street.
(1) All landscaping used to meet street frontage requirements shall be
located within 10 feet of the public right-of-way. Under no
circumstances shall such landscaping be located within a public
right-of-way. Landscaping shall not impede vehicle or pedestrian
visibility and shall be installed and permanently maintained in
conformity with the requirements of §§ 510-121 and 510-122.
(2) For every 100 linear feet of street frontage of a developed lot
abutting a public street right-of-way, the landscape installed shall
at a minimum meet the number of landscaping points specified in
Figure 510-116. The actual number of points required for such
landscaping shall be computed on a prorated basis and installed
and maintained per the requirements of §§ 510-121 and 510-122.
(3) Shrubs shall not be used to meet street frontage landscaping
requirements. A minimum of 50% of all points shall be devoted to
climax or tall trees, or a combination of such trees, and a minimum
of 30% of all points shall be devoted to medium trees.
C. Paved areas. As indicated in Figure 510-116, paved areas on certain lots
developed after the effective date of this chapter must contain a
minimum amount of landscaping within 10 feet of the paved area. The
intent is to require a continuous visual screen of parking areas from
public rights-of-way at a minimum height of 40 inches.
§ 510-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-116
1:937
(1) A minimum of 360 square feet of landscaped area, which shall be
located within 10 feet of the paved area, is required for the
placement of every 100 paved area landscaping points. Said area
does not have to be provided in one contiguous area. Sample
configurations are depicted in Figure 510-115A above. Plants used
to fulfill this requirement shall visually screen parking, loading and
circulation areas from view from public streets. Paved area
landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained in
conformity with the requirements of §§ 510-121 and 510-122.
(2) For every 20 off-street parking stalls or 10,000 square feet of
pavement (whichever yields the greater landscaping requirement)
located in a development, the landscaping installed shall at a
minimum meet the number of landscaping points specified in
Figure 510-116. The actual number of points required for such
landscaping shall be computed on a prorated basis and installed
and maintained per the requirements of §§ 510-121 and 510-122.
(3) A minimum of 30% of all points shall be devoted to climax or tall
trees, or a combination of such trees, and a minimum of 40% of all
points shall be devoted to shrubs.
(4) Parking lot design shall employ interior landscaped islands with a
minimum of 400 square feet at all parking aisle ends and in
addition shall provide a minimum of one landscaped island of a
minimum of 400 square feet in each parking aisle for every 20 cars
in that aisle. Aisle-end islands shall count toward meeting this
requirement. Landscaped medians shall be used to break large
parking areas into distinct pods, with a maximum of 100 spaces in
any one pod.
D. Developed lots. As indicated in Figure 510-116, lots developed after the
effective date of this chapter must contain a minimum amount of
landscaping.
(1) Landscaping required by this section is most effective if located
away from those areas required for landscaping as building
foundations, street frontages, paved areas, protected green space
areas, reforestation areas, or bufferyards.
(2) The number of landscaping points specified in Figure 510-116 shall
be provided on a prorated basis for every 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area and installed and maintained per the requirements of
§§ 510-121 and 510-122.
(3) The intent of this section is to provide yard shade and to require a
visual screen of a minimum of six feet in height for all detached
exterior appurtenances (such as HVAC/utility boxes, standpipes,
stormwater discharge pipes and other pipes).
§ 510-116 EAST TROY CODE § 510-117
1:938
§ 510-117. Permanently protected green space.
This section requires that each acre of other permanently protected green
space after the effective date of this chapter be planted with a minimum
amount of landscaping. For every one acre of other permanently protected
green space in a development, 200 landscaping points (as described in
§ 510-114) shall be provided. In addition, adequate ground cover shall be
provided to stabilize the soil.
§ 510-118. Reforestation requirements.
This section requires that each area requiring reforestation be reforested
and maintained in a manner appropriate to site conditions. The provisions
of this section are designed to ensure that reforestation efforts required as
part of woodland disruption mitigation standards result in the thorough and
reasonably rapid replacement of the important and varied environmental
functions that woodlands provide. A detailed reforestation plan shall be
submitted by the property owner and approved by the Village prior to
clear-cutting (see § 510-40E). This plan shall be reviewed by a reforestation
consultant chosen by the Village, with funding for consulting services
provided by the petitioner to the Village.
§ 510-119. Bufferyard requirements.
A. Purpose. This section provides the landscaping and width requirements
for bufferyards on lots developed after the effective date of this chapter.
A bufferyard is a combination of distance and a visual buffer or barrier.
It includes an area together with the combination of plantings, berms
and fencing that are required to eliminate or reduce existing or
potential nuisances. These nuisances can often occur between adjacent
zoning districts. Such nuisances are dirt, litter, noise, glare, signs, and
incompatible land uses, buildings, or parking areas.
B. Required locations for bufferyards. Bufferyards shall be located along
(and within) the outer perimeter of a lot wherever two different zoning
districts abut one another. Bufferyards shall not be required in front
yards.
C. Determination of required bufferyard opacity. The required level of
bufferyard opacity is determined using Figure 510-119A.353 Opacity is a
quantitatively derived measure which indicates the degree to which a
particular bufferyard screens the adjoining property. The required level
of opacity is directly related to the degree to which the potential
character of development differs between different zoning districts. The
provisions of this section indicate the minimum opacity requirements
for bufferyards located along zoning district boundaries.
D. Identification of detailed bufferyard requirements. If a proposed use
adjoins a parcel for which a bufferyard is required by the presence of a
353. Editor's Note: Figure 510-119A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 510-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-119
1:939
§ 510-120. Classification of plant species.
For the purpose of this chapter, plant materials are classified into the
following groupings: climax tree, tall deciduous tree, medium deciduous
tree, low deciduous tree, tall evergreen tree, medium evergreen tree, low
evergreen tree, tall deciduous shrub, medium deciduous shrub, low
deciduous shrub, medium evergreen shrub, low evergreen shrub, and
noncontributory plants. Species suitable for landscaping use and
compatible with local climate and soil factors are listed in Figure 510-120.
The Zoning Administrator shall review proposals for and the applicability of
species not contained in this list and is authorized to approve appropriate
similar species.
Figure 510-120: Classification of Plants
Classification
No. of
Landscaping
Points Common Name
Climax trees 75 Sugar Maple
Climax trees 75 Gingko
Climax trees 75 Oak (Red, Pin, White)
Tall deciduous trees 30 Map (Red, Silver)
Tall deciduous trees 30 Honey Locust
Tall deciduous trees 30 Big Tooth Aspen
Tall deciduous trees 30 Linden (Basswood, Redmond,
Little Leaf)
Medium deciduous
trees
15 Birch (River, Paper)
Medium deciduous
trees
15 Cherry (Choke, Pin)
zoning district boundary, that use shall provide a bufferyard with the
level of the opacity indicated in Figure 510-119A. For each level of
opacity listed in Figure 510-119A, a wide variety of width, landscaping
point, berm, and structure combinations are possible. These are listed
in Figure 510-119B.354 The requirements listed in Figure 510-119B
pertain to the number of landscaping points, the minimum bufferyard
width, and the type of berm or fencing required within every 100
feet of required bufferyard. A variety of landscaping point options
are available and may be mixed within distinct portions of the same
bufferyard. Section 510-115 describes the various available
landscaping point alternatives. Section 510-120 provides a listing of
tree and shrub species which correspond to the landscaping point
descriptions.
354. Editor's Note: Figure 510-119B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 510-119 EAST TROY CODE § 510-120
1:940
Figure 510-120: Classification of Plants
Classification
No. of
Landscaping
Points Common Name
Medium deciduous
trees
15 Willow
Low evergreen trees 12 Juniper (Mountbatten, Red
Cedar)
Low evergreen trees 12 Arborvitae
Tall deciduous shrubs 5 Dogwood (Gray, Pagoda)
Tall deciduous shrubs 5 Lilac (Chinese, Hyacinth)
Tall deciduous shrubs 5 Vibumum (Arrowwood,
Warfaring Tree, Nannyberry)
Medium deciduous
shrubs
3 American Filbert (Hazelnut)
Medium deciduous
shrubs
3 Cotoneaster
Medium deciduous
shrubs
3 Forsythia (Virgina, Rugosa)
Low deciduous trees 10 Serviceberry
Low deciduous trees 10 Hawthorn (Cockspur, Downy,
Washington)
Low deciduous trees 10 Crabapple
Tall evergreen trees 40 White Fir
Tall evergreen trees 40 Pine (Red, White, Scots)
Tall evergreen trees 40 Canada Hemlock
Medium evergreen
trees
20 American Arborvitae
Low deciduous shrubs 1 Japanese Barberry
Low deciduous shrubs 1 Spirea (Froebel, Snowmound)
Tall-medium
evergreen shrubs
5 Juniper (Pfitzer)
Tall-medium
evergreen shrubs
5 Yew (Japanese)
Low evergreen shrubs 2 Juniper (Sargent, Creeping,
Andorra)
§ 510-121. Installation requirements.
A. Any and all landscaping and bufferyard material required by the
provisions of this chapter shall be installed on the subject property, in
accordance with the approved site plan (see § 510-160), within 365
§ 510-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-121
1:941
days of the issuance of an occupancy permit for any building on the
subject property, unless a conditional use is approved to allow for
greater than 365 days.
B. If the subject property is to be occupied prior to the installation of all
required landscaping and bufferyard material, the property owner shall
sign an instrument agreeing to install the landscaping within the threehundred-
sixty-five-day period and shall furnish to the Village an
irrevocable letter of credit or other form of security acceptable to the
Village sufficient to guarantee completion of the work. Such security
shall be provided by the property owner at the time that the agreement
is signed. It shall be in an amount equal to 110% of the estimated actual
cost for all of the required elements of the approved site plan and shall
specifically guarantee that all such elements shall be made and
installed according to the approved site plan. The costs of the work
shall be furnished by the property owner and shall be verified by the
Village. The financial security shall remain in force until all of the work
has been completed and approved by the Village. This agreement shall
also contain a statement indicating that the property owner's failure to
comply with the requirements of the terms of the agreement will
constitute a violation of this chapter and subject the property owner to
a forfeiture upon conviction. If the required landscaping and bufferyard
materials are to be installed during different phases of a subdivision
development, the developer may furnish for each phase financial
security in an amount sufficient to guarantee completion of the
landscaping and bufferyard work performed during a particular phase,
unless Chapter 495, Subdivision of Land, of the Village Code requires
otherwise. If the property owner is a governmental unit, it may, in lieu
of signing an agreement and furnishing a guarantee, file a resolution or
letter from officers authorized to act in its behalf agreeing to comply
with the provisions of this article.355
C. If existing plant material meets the requirements of this article and will
be preserved on the subject property following the completion of
development, it may be counted as contributing to the landscaping
requirements.
D. All landscaping and bufferyard areas shall be seeded with lawn or
native ground cover unless such vegetation is already fully established.
E. The exact placement of plants and structures shall be depicted on the
required detailed landscaping plan submitted to the Village for its
approval. Such plant and structure location shall be the decision of each
property owner, provided that the following requirements are met:
(1) Evergreen shrubs shall be planted in clusters to maximize their
chance for survival.
355. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-121 EAST TROY CODE § 510-121
1:942
§ 510-122. Maintenance requirements.
The continual maintenance of all required landscaping and bufferyard
materials shall be a requirement of this chapter and shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property on which said materials and
plants are required. This requirement shall run with the property and shall
be binding upon all future property owners. Development of any or all
property following the effective date of this chapter shall constitute an
agreement by the property owner to comply with the provisions of this
section. If the property owner fails to comply with these provisions, the
Village may enter upon the property for the purpose of evaluating and
maintaining all required landscaping and bufferyard materials and may
specially assess the costs thereof against the property. A property owner's
failure to comply with this requirement shall also be considered a violation
of this chapter and shall be subject to any and all applicable enforcement
procedures and penalties.
§ 510-123. Use requirements.
(2) Where a combination of plant materials, berming, and fencing is
used in a bufferyard, the fence and/or berm shall be located toward
the interior of the subject property and the plant material shall be
located toward the exterior of the subject property.
(3) A property owner may establish through a written agreement,
recorded with the Register of Deeds, that an adjacent property
owner agrees to provide on the immediately adjacent portion of his
or her land a partial or full portion of the required bufferyard,
thereby relieving the developer of the responsibility of providing
the entire bufferyard on his property.
(4) Under no circumstance shall landscaping or bufferyard materials
be selected or located in a manner resulting in the creation of a
safety or visibility hazard.
(5) The restrictions on types of plants listed in this article shall apply.
A. Use of required bufferyard and landscaped areas. Any and all required
bufferyards or landscaped areas may be used for passive recreation
activities. Said areas may contain pedestrian, bike or equestrian trails,
provided that no required material is eliminated; the total width of the
required bufferyard, or the total area of required landscaping, is
maintained; and all other regulations of this chapter are met. However,
in such areas, no swimming pools, tennis courts, sports fields, golf
courses, or other such similar active recreational uses shall be
permitted. No parking and no outdoor display or storage of materials
shall be permitted. Paving in such areas shall be limited to that required
for necessary access to, through, or across the subject property.356
356. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-123
1:943
§ 510-124. Calculating landscaping and bufferyard requirements.
In calculating the number of required landscaping points under the
provisions of this article, all areas and distances on which required
calculations are based shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number
of square feet or linear feet. Any partial plant derived from the required
calculations of this section (for example 23.3 canopy trees) shall be rounded
up to the nearest whole plant (24 canopy trees).
§ 510-125. Depiction on required site plan.
Any and all proposed landscaping on the subject property, required to meet
the standards of this chapter, shall be clearly depicted and labeled as to its
location and makeup on the site plan required for the development of the
subject property.
B. Utility easements. Landscaping materials, fences and berms located
within a duly recorded utility or a pedestrian easement shall not count
toward meeting a landscaping requirement, unless authorized
otherwise by a conditional use permit. However, the width of such areas
may be counted as part of a landscaping requirement.
§ 510-123 EAST TROY CODE § 510-125
1:944
ARTICLE XV
Signage Regulations
[Amended 10-17-2011; 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-03; 9-7-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-08; 9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04; 7-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-08]
§ 510-126. Purpose. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
§ 510-127. Applicability.
The regulations in this article apply to all signs except for the following,
which are exempt:
A. The intent of this article is to provide for and regulate the installation,
design, and safe construction of signage within the Village of East Troy
to ensure that signs are compatible with surrounding land uses, are
well maintained, and express the identity of individual proprietors and
the Village as a whole.
B. To that end, this article regulates the location, type, size, and height of
signage to protect and to promote the public health, welfare, and safety
of persons within the community; to aid in the development and
promotion of business and industry; and to ensure the implementation
of the Comprehensive Plan for the Village of East Troy. The adoption of
this article reflects the findings of fact by the Plan Commission and
Board of Trustees of the Village of East Troy that regulation of signage
has an impact on the visual environment which affects the welfare of
the residents and that reasonable control of signage can preserve and
enhance the following interests of the community at large.
(1) Promote the public health, welfare, and safety of all persons using
the public thoroughfares, and rights of way within the Village of
East Troy.
(2) Advance the aesthetic goals of the Village of East Troy throughout
the community and ensure flexibility in the creative design of
signage without detriment to adjacent property owners or the
general public.
(3) Reduce the visual clutter caused by advertising signage which the
Village considers a significant factor in obstructing visibility and
creating unsafe traffic conditions.
(4) Limit the visual impact of strip commercial development of which
signs are a primary contributor in order to be respectful of the
rights of all advertisers and business entities who display
advertising in a particular neighborhood.
C. Nothing in this article is intended to restrict or otherwise regulate the
message displayed on a sign permitted in this article.
§ 510-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-127
1:945
§ 510-128. Definitions. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
The following definitions are applicable within this article.
AWNING — A sloped, roof-like feature that projects beyond the face of
an exterior wall. An awning is typically placed above a door or window
to provide protection from the sun and precipitation. An awning can be
constructed of various materials, including metal, fabric, or plastic. An
awning may be nonretractable or retractable so as to fold up against the
building. (Also see "marquee.")
A. A traffic control sign and other similar signage when located on public
property along a roadway or other travelway when placed by or
authorized by the federal government, the state of Wisconsin, Walworth
County, or a municipal government.
B. A sign inside of a building that does not meet the definition of a window
sign.
C. A legal notice posted on private property as may be required or
authorized by municipal, state, or federal law.
D. A scoreboard associated with an outdoor athletic field, which is to be
reviewed as part of a site plan review as described in Article XVII of this
chapter.
E. A sports league sponsor sign (banner or rigid) that is temporarily
affixed to a fence on an outdoor athletic field, which is subject to other
regulations as may be adopted by the Village Board.
F. A civic event banner that is temporarily placed above a public right-ofway,
which is subject to other regulations as may be adopted by the
Village Board.
§ 510-127 EAST TROY CODE § 510-128
1:946
An example of an awning
© Civic Webware
CANOPY — A permanent structure without walls for the purpose of
shielding driveways, sidewalks, or service areas from elements. A canopy
may be freestanding or attached to a building.
DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign designed to give any artificial
light directly through any transparent or translucent material from a source
of light originating within or on such sign.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY — A sign message that can change by
electronic means. (In contrast, see "static display.")
FLAG — A pliable material suspended from a pole with the emblem or
symbol of a nation, organization of nations, state, city, or other political
subdivision, or of a religious, fraternal, or civic organization.
INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that is illuminated from a
source outside of the actual sign.
MARQUEE — A flat, roof-like feature that projects beyond the face of an
exterior wall. A marquee is typically placed above a door or window to
provide protection from the sun and precipitation. (Also see "awning" and
"canopy.")
§ 510-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-128
1:947
An example of a marquee
© Civic Webware
MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached to and made part of a marquee.
MONUMENT SIGN — A freestanding sign that is supported by a base
extending from the ground surface to the bottom, or to nearly the bottom,
of the sign face.
MURAL — A painting or other artwork applied to and made integral with
the surface of an exterior wall or other large permanent surface that depicts
a scene or event of natural, social, cultural, or historical significance as
recognized by the Plan Commission.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign that at the time of construction or
placement conformed to the then-existing regulations including size,
location, and other dimensional standards, but is now inconsistent with this
chapter.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign advertising goods, products, facilities,
patronage to a business location, or directs persons to a different location
from where the sign is located.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building,
structure, or to the ground. Portable signs include but are not limited to Aframe
menu and sandwich board signs.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign extending more than 18 inches, but less than
four feet, from the face of a wall or building; such sign may not extend more
than three feet into the right-of-way.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon or over the roof or parapet of any
building.
SIGN — A sign shall include anything that promotes, calls attention, or
invites patronage (or anything similar to the aforementioned) to a business,
location, or product.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign erected or displayed for a limited period
of time, or displayed only during regular business hours and removed
for storage at other times. Examples include banners and decorative-type
displays. For purposes of this chapter, a portable sign is not a temporary
sign.
§ 510-128 EAST TROY CODE § 510-128
1:948
WALL SIGN — A sign attached to, erected, or painted on the wall of a
building or structure, and projecting not more than 16 inches from such
wall, including wall overhangs and canopies that are within 25% of vertical.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign affixed to a window or placed inside of a building
within 16 inches of an exterior window.
§ 510-129. General standards. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
A sign allowed by this article shall comply with the following general
requirements:
A. A sign, except those permitted in § 510-135A(5), shall not face a
residential or park district within 100 feet of such district boundary.
B. A sign shall not be placed within a road right-of-way, except those signs
specifically authorized in this chapter and subject to § 510-129B.
C. A sign shall not resemble, imitate, or approximate the shape, size, form,
or color of a railroad or traffic control sign, signal, or device.
D. A sign shall not obstruct or interfere with the effectiveness of railroad
or traffic control signs, signals, or devices.
E. A sign shall not interfere with the free ingress to or egress from a door,
window, or fire escape.
F. A sign shall not be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
G. A sign shall not be placed within the clear vision triangle except as
allowed.
H. A sign shall not oscillate or rotate, or move in any other manner.
I. A sign shall not have any moving parts or features.
J. A sign shall not emit an audible sound, odor, or any visible matter.
K. A sign shall not create a hazard or dangerous distraction to vehicular
traffic.
L. A sign shall not create a nuisance to any adjoining residential property.
M. A sign shall not be placed on a telecommunication tower, except as may
be required or specifically permitted.
N. A sign shall be constructed and mounted so as to comply with state and
local building codes as applicable.
O. A sign containing electrical wiring shall be constructed, installed, and
operated so as to comply with state and local electrical codes as
applicable.
§ 510-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-129
1:949
§ 510-129.1. Development within a public right-of-way. [Added
7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
§ 510-130. Sign illumination.
Illumination of a sign when allowed by this article shall comply with the
following requirements:
§ 510-131. Electronic message display. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-08]
P. When a sign is authorized to contain electrical power or when a sign is
illuminated by one or more external light fixtures, the electric wire
providing the electric power to the sign or the light fixture shall be
placed underground from the service disconnect.
A. Generally. When a property owner intends to install, reconstruct, or
enlarge a projecting sign, awning, canopy, marquee, or similar feature
that extends into a public right-of-way, the property owner shall obtain
written authorization of the public entity having jurisdiction over the
right-of-way. If such authorization is for a defined period of time, the
Village's approval, if granted, incorporates such time period whether
included in the Village's authorization or not.
B. Sample encroachment easement. The Zoning Administrator, in
consultation with the Village Attorney and others, is authorized to
prepare a sample encroachment easement for Village rights-of-way and
make it available and post it on the Village's website.
A. Internal or external illumination shall not flash, oscillate, change
intensity, change color, or move or give the appearance of movement,
except for electronic message displays as may be allowed in this article.
B. Lighting for an externally illuminated sign shall be shaded, shielded,
and directed away from surrounding properties and vehicular traffic.
C. Lighting shall not cause glare or otherwise impair drivers on a public
roadway.
D. Neon lighting or lighting having the same appearance of neon lighting
may be used.
E. For a sign with internal illumination, the background of the sign face
shall be made of an opaque material to allow internal light to project
only through the lettering and/or logos or a colored translucent
material (i.e., not white, cream, off-white, or other light color) with
either translucent or opaque lettering and/or logos.
F. No sign shall consist of bare reflecting-type bulbs, except those giving
public service information such as time, date, temperature, weather, or
similar information, or where allowed by conditional use permits.
§ 510-129 EAST TROY CODE § 510-131
1:950
A. Findings. The Village Board makes the following findings regarding
electronic message displays:
(1) Electronic displays are designed to produce sufficient brightness to
ensure clear legibility during daylight hours. However, daytime
brightness settings are usually inappropriate for night-time
viewing.
(2) Electronic displays that are too bright at night can be offensive and
reduce the legibility of the display copy.
(3) Technology exists to control lighting levels, with scheduled
dimming based on sunset-sunrise tables or with photocells.
(4) Appropriate standards are necessary to ensure electronic displays
do not become a nuisance to surrounding property owners or a
distraction to passing motorists.
B. General standards. When allowed by this article, an electronic message
display shall comply with the following standards:
(1) An electronic message display must be equipped with technology
the sign owner can use to program lighting levels to comply with
the lighting standards in this section.
(2) If the display is over five square feet, the message shall remain
static at least 10 seconds before the next message appears.
(3) If the display is over five square feet, no part of the message shall
give the appearance of movement, motion, or animation.
(4) If the display is over five square feet, there shall be no transition
between messages (i.e., no traveling, scrolling, dissolving, or
fading).
(5) Lighting levels shall not exceed 0.3 footcandles over ambient
lighting conditions when measured at the specified distance in the
table below, based on the size of the display. However, lighting
levels shall not exceed 0.1 footcandles over ambient lighting
conditions at the property boundary line of a residential property or
0.2 footcandles over ambient lighting conditions at the property
boundary line of a commercial, industrial, or institutional property.
Sign Area
(square feet)
Measurement Distance
(feet)
10 32
15 39
20 45
25 50
30 55
§ 510-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-131
1:951
§ 510-132. Sign area.
§ 510-133. Permit required. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-08]
Sign Area
(square feet)
Measurement Distance
(feet)
Note: The sign areas listed in this table are for illustration only.
The Village's sign regulations may not allow the sign areas listed.
For signs areas not listed, the measurement distance is calculated
with the following formula:
Measurement Distance = vArea of Sign Sq. Ft. x 100
(6) An electronic message display shall be located on no more than one
freestanding sign per road frontage on each parcel if such signage
is otherwise allowed.
A. Maximum sign area. Permissible signs shall comply with the maximum
sign area limitations as may be established for the zoning district in
which the sign is located.
B. Measuring the area of a wall sign. The area of a wall sign without a
distinctive border or background is the smallest rectangle
encompassing all words, letters, figures, emblems, logos, and other
elements of the sign message. The area of a wall sign with a distinctive
border or background is the smallest rectangle encompassing the
border or background.
Measuring the area of a wall sign
© Civic Webware
C. Measuring the area of a monument sign. The area of a monument sign
is the area contained within the outer extent of the sign surface. The
supporting structure or bracing is not included.
§ 510-131 EAST TROY CODE § 510-133
1:952
§ 510-134. Signs not requiring a permit. [Amended 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02; 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
A. Except for those signs specifically listed in § 510-134, a sign permit
shall be obtained as set forth in § 510-141 before:
(1) A new sign is erected or otherwise installed;
(2) The face of an existing sign is replaced; and
(3) An existing sign is modified or converted in any manner (including
new or different lighting, enlargement, relocation, reconstruction
in whole or in part, or structural modifications).
B. If the new signage includes an electronic message display as may be
allowed in this chapter, the property owner shall verify in writing that
he/she understands all of the standards relating to the use of an
electronic message display and that he/she agrees to cooperate with
Village officials in verifying compliance with the lighting levels
enumerated in § 510-131B.
A. Signage for a property zoned for single-family is allowed without a
permit as follows:
(1) Maximum sign area: the area of all signs shall not exceed 14 square
feet on a single-side sign or 28 feet on a double-sided sign.
(2) Number permitted: no limitation except by total sign area.
(3) Type: signage may be temporary or permanent.
(4) Placement: signage may freestanding or affixed to the house,
except no signage shall placed above the roof eaves or on a gable
end.
(5) Time limitation: none.
(6) Type of illumination permitted: none except for indirect lighting.
(7) Type of display permitted: static display.
(8) Types of signage can include the following:
(a) Signage for an authorized commercial use of the property (e.g.,
bed-and-breakfast).
(b) Building marker signage (i.e., signage with the name of the
building or date of construction or both).
(c) Construction/maintenance signage (i.e., signage that identifies
the architects, engineers, contractors and other individuals or
firms involved with construction/maintenance taking plZoning
Signage Regulations Single-family dwellings 510-134»«rtace
§ 510-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-134
1:953
on the premises).Garage sales Zoning 510-134Glass Zoning
510-134
(d) Free speech signage, including political and religious
messages.
(e) Historic marker (i.e., signage marking a historic building, site,
landmark, or similar designation by the federal government,
the state of Wisconsin, Walworth County, a local government,
or a nonprofit organization).
(f) Open house real estate signage (i.e., signage that indicates
that a particular residence that is for sale/lease is or will be
open to the public for viewing).
(g) Personal greeting and congratulatory sign (i.e., signage related
to a homecoming of a person or group of people or a personal
event or accomplishment).
(h) Private property protection signage (i.e., signage containing
wording indicating an intent to deny entry to the general
public, such as "no trespassing" or "private property").
(i) Property address.
(j) Quasipublic event signage (i.e., signage announcing a
noncommercial event or celebration in the community that is
sponsored by a civic, educational, patriotic, religious, or
nonprofit organization).
(k) Yard sale signage (i.e., signage announcing a yard, rummage,
or garage sale as may be authorized by this chapter).
B. Window sign(s) for a commercial business not located in a residential
zoning district is allowed without a permit as follows:
(1) Zoning district: Commercial and industrial zoning districts.
(2) Placement/type: no limitation.Signs Licenses and permits
510-134Signs Zoning 510-134
(3) Time limitation: none.
(4) Number permitted: no limitation.
(5) Maximum sign area: 30% of glass area located on the ground floor
level per road frontage.
(6) Type of illumination permitted: none.
(7) Type of display permitted: static display and/or one electronic
message display per road frontage not to exceed five square feet
subject to the requirements in § 510-131.
§ 510-134 EAST TROY CODE § 510-135
1:954
§ 510-135. Permitted nonresidential signs.
A. Permitted signs. The signs listed in this subsection are allowed with a
sign permit in the following zoning districts: NB Neighborhood
Business, CB Central Business, HB Highway Business, LI Light
Industrial and GI General Industrial.
(1) Wall signs. Wall signs shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) Sign area. The maximum sign area shall not exceed one square
foot for every linear foot of the building face on which the sign
is mounted.
(b) Placement. A wall sign shall only be installed on those walls
that face a public street. A wall sign shall not project above the
wall of the building on which it is placed.
(c) Display. The sign shall be static.
(2) Monument signs. Monument signs shall comply with the following
requirements: [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
(a) Sign height. If the location of a monument sign is below street
grade, the height of the sign shall not exceed eight feet above
street grade. If the location of a monument sign is at or above
street grade, the height of the sign shall not exceed eight feet
above the surrounding grade [Figure 510-135A(2)]. In both
instances described above, the surrounding grade shall not be
modified in any manner so as to increase the overall height of
the sign.
Figure 510-135A(2). Measuring the height of a
monument sign
(b) Sign area. The maximum sign area is 60 square feet on one
side or 120 square feet on all sides. No more than 60% of the
sign area (per side) may be used for an electronic message
display.
(c) Location. The location of the sign shall comply with the
minimum setback and yard requirements for the zoning district
in which it is located, except that in the NB, HB, LI and GI
Zoning Districts monument signs shall have a minimum
setback of five feet from the public right-of-way.
§ 510-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-135
1:955
(d) Construction specifications. The base of a monument sign,
including the footings, shall be covered with wood, brick,
stone, metal (not less than 0.08 inch in thickness), or other
material approved by the Plan Commission. The materials used
for the sign base shall be compatible with the materials and the
architecture of the buildings on the property. When metal is
used as a sign base material, the sign structure shall be
supported by a steel pole with a concrete foundation, with
proper frost protection not less than four feet below grade.
(3) Projecting signs. A projecting sign shall comply with each of the
following requirements: [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-08]
(a) The sign shall complement the scale, proportion, and
architectural style of the building on which it is to be attached.
(b) The sign shall not extend more than four feet from the building
on which it is attached.
(c) The top of the sign shall not be higher than the building on
which it is located.
(d) When located above a walkway, the bottom edge of the sign
shall be at least 10 feet above the surface of the walkway
beneath the sign.
(e) When located above a driveway or an alley, the bottom edge of
the sign shall be at least 15 feet above the surface of such
driveway or alley.
(f) If a projecting sign extends over public property (i.e., above a
public sidewalk), the property owner shall comply with
§ 510-129.1.
(g) The display shall be static.
(4) Marquee and canopy signs. Marquee and canopy signs affixed flat
to the surface of a marquee or canopy are permitted in lieu of a wall
sign, provided that the sign does not extend vertically or
horizontally beyond the limits of such marquee, awning, or canopy.
A marquee or canopy may extend up to 12 feet beyond the building
to which it is affixed, but shall not extend into a required front yard,
side yard or rear yard, nor shall it extend more than four feet into
the right-of-way for properties located on the downtown square
pursuant to § 510-129.1. For all other properties, it shall not extend
closer than one foot to the vertical plane formed by the curb line in
a shopping center. A name sign not exceeding two square feet in
area located immediately in front of the entrance to an
establishment may be suspended from a marquee or canopy
provided that the name sign is at least eight feet above the
sidewalk. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
§ 510-135 EAST TROY CODE § 510-135
1:956
(5) Park name signs. Park name signs shall be approved by the Village
Board, after review and recommendation by the Plan Commission.
Park name signs shall be monument signs not exceeding 48 square
feet in area if single-sided or 48 square feet per side if double-sided
and/or wall signs on park structures not exceeding the
requirements of Subsection A(1) above.
B. Number of signs. The number of signs allowed in nonresidential
districts shall be as follows: [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-08]
(1) In the CB zoning district, a maximum of two on-building signs per
business establishment shall be permitted. The owner may elect
any combination of wall, canopy, or marquee signs provided the
total does not exceed two. The maximum total area for all onbuilding
signs shall be subject to Subsection A(1) and Subsection
A(3) of this section. Monument signs [excluding directional signs
permitted in Subsection B(6) are prohibited.
(2) In all nonresidential zoning districts other than the CB district, the
maximum total number of on-building signs and monument signs
per establishment shall be two. Not more than one monument sign
per lot shall be allowed, except as allowed under Subsection B(5).
An owner may elect to have a second wall, canopy, or marquee sign
in lieu of a monument sign or space on a shared monument sign,
provided that there is not more than one wall and not more than
one marquee or canopy sign per business, and the total area for all
wall, canopy, and marquee signs does not exceed maximum
allowable sign area under Subsection A(1) and Subsection A(3) of
this section.
(3) Multitenant buildings or premises may provide a tenant directory
as one of the signs allowed under Subsection B(1) or B(2) above.
(4) Separate individual wall, canopy, or marquee signs shall be allowed
for each tenant in a multitenant building, subject to a signage plan
approved by the Plan Commission. The maximum area of individual
tenant wall signs shall be calculated using the width of that portion
of the exterior wall enclosing the tenant space. In no case shall the
maximum combined total area for all wall signs on a multitenant
structure exceed the maximum allowable area for wall signs
allowed under Subsection A(1) of this section.
(5) Properties with more than one principal building and properties
with multiple street frontages may be allowed an additional
monument sign, subject to site plan approval by the Plan
Commission.
(6) Directional signs less than six square feet in area which contain no
advertising, logo, or product display shall not be subject to
limitations on numbers of signs, but shall require Zoning
§ 510-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-135
1:957
Administrator or Building Inspector approval. Directional signs
shall include but shall not be limited to those that read "enter,"
"exit," "one-way," "shipping," and "receiving."
C. Flags. Flags shall be allowed as permanent signs subject to the
following: maximum three flags per property, maximum size 15 square
feet, and minimum height on the downtown square shall be seven feet
above the surrounding grade. In all other areas, flags shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the right-of-way. Additional flags may be
allowed by the Plan Commission.
D. Sandwich board signs. Sandwich board signs are permitted in all
zoning districts that allow industrial and commercial businesses and
institutional uses and do not count against the total number of
permitted monument signs. Sandwich board signs are subject to the
following conditions:357
(1) Shall be limited to a maximum width of two feet, a maximum height
of four feet (measured from the ground), a maximum of eight
square feet per side, and maximum of two sides. Signs shall be of a
weight and/or construction to withstand 20 pounds of wind loading
and be maintained in a good condition.
(2) Shall be constructed of durable, high-quality materials such as
steel, wood, and simulated woods. Chalkboards and white boards
are acceptable accents. Use of impermanent materials such as
cardboard or corrugated plastic is prohibited.
(3) Shall not be illuminated in any way, nor use metallic, fluorescent, or
reflective finishes.
(4) Shall not advertise off-premises goods, services, or businesses.
(5) Shall be limited to a maximum of one per business establishment or
one per ground-level customer entrance (whichever is more
restrictive) and spaced at least 25 feet from any other sandwich
board or private monument sign. No sandwich board sign may be
placed farther than 10 feet from the building entrance or entrance
to an outdoor customer area, nor in any parking areas associated
with the business.
(6) Shall not be placed in any location that interferes with vehicular,
pedestrian, or handicap access and safety or that otherwise
presents a fire or other public safety hazard. Sandwich board signs
shall not obstruct or interfere with public safety or directional
signs.
357. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-135 EAST TROY CODE § 510-135
1:958
(7) Shall be displayed only during hours of business operation.
Business owners are responsible for securing signs in the event of
hazardous weather.
(8) Shall not be placed in required landscaped areas.
(9) Except in the CB District, sandwich board signs shall not be
permitted in public street rights-of-way or public street easements,
to include streets, sidewalks, grass terraces or either private lawns
or paved encroachments within said right-of-way or easements.
(10) In the CB District, sandwich board signs may be allowed in a public
sidewalk, subject to conditions in Subsection D(1) through (9)
above and the following additional restrictions:
(a) Sandwich board signs must be placed in such a way as to retain
a minimum unobstructed sidewalk width of five feet for
pedestrian use.
(b) Sandwich board signs shall not project in any way onto or past
a curb and into a public street, nor shall they obstruct in any
way access to a marked public street crossing.
(c) For each sign placed in the public right-of-way the business
owner shall be required to submit evidence of liability
insurance in a form approved by the Village Attorney in the
amount of $1,000,000 and naming the Village as an additional
insured party. The business owner will provide guarantees in
the form acceptable to the Village Attorney that the Village will
not be held liable for damage to any sign damaged while in the
public right-of-way resulting from natural acts, routine
municipal maintenance activities such as street cleaning and
snow removal, and criminal acts by third parties.
(d) Sandwich board signs in the public right-of-way that are
erected in violation of the permit or permit requirements or
posted without permit or otherwise deemed in violation of the
Village Municipal Code requirements are subject to immediate
removal by the Village.
E. Supplemental signage. In addition to the signage allowed in this
section, an owner is granted an additional 24 square feet of signage (48
square feet if double-sided) that can be used for wall signage or
freestanding sign. Any signage used for noncommercial speech and for
indicating the property is for sale, rent, or lease must comply with the
maximum sign area limitations set forth in this section. [Added
7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
§ 510-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-136
1:959
§ 510-136. Permitted residential signs. [Amended 7-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-08]
In addition to those permitted signs not requiring a permit pursuant to
§ 510-141, the following nonflashing, nonilluminated signs are permitted
with a permit under the conditions specified in all residential and planned
development (residential) districts established by this chapter:
§ 510-137. Landscape features.
Landscape features such as plant materials, berms, boulders, fencing and
similar design elements incorporated or in conjunction with monument
signs are encouraged.
§ 510-138. Prohibited signs. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-08]
A. Permanent real estate development signs. A sign may be placed at the
entrance to a residential complex, subdivision, or development
provided the sign is at least five feet from a side or rear lot line. The
Plan Commission may permit a permanent development sign within a
street right-of-way or median after determining that the sign will not
have an adverse impact on public safety. The maximum size shall not
exceed 20 square feet if single-sided, or 20 square feet per side if
double-sided. The applicant shall include a mechanism for maintenance
of the sign as a part of the application (i.e., homeowners' association or
adjacent land owner).
B. Institutional. Those uses delineated as institutional in this chapter are
permitted to have the signs described in § 510-135, Permitted
nonresidential signs.
A. Search lights. Search lights are prohibited.
B. Inflatable signage. Inflatable signs are prohibited.
C. Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs are prohibited, except official
and Village-approved standardized institutional signs located in areas
designated by the Village Board.
D. Vehicle signage. Vehicles, including automobiles, trucks, trailers,
semitrailers, campers, and buses that contain a sign for which the
apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a
business or an activity shall not be parked on a public right-of-way or on
private property so as to be seen from a public right-of-way, except
when the vehicle is used in the daily operation of a business for service
calls, deliveries, and the like. A sign on a vehicle indicating it is for sale
is not subject to the standards in this subsection.
E. Roof signs. Roof signs are prohibited.
§ 510-136 EAST TROY CODE § 510-138
1:960
§ 510-139. Special provisions for balloons.
Balloons may be used with commercial and institutional land uses subject
to the following standards:
§ 510-140. Construction and maintenance regulations.
F. Pole or pylon signs. Pole or pylon signs are prohibited, except for those
signs allowed in § 510-134.
An example of an inflatable
sign
An example of a vehicle sign
A. Maximum height. A balloon shall not be higher than 35 feet above the
surrounding grade.
B. Message. A balloon shall not contain a message of any type (e.g., words,
letters, figures, emblems, logos, symbols, and the like).
C. Number. There is no limitation on the number of balloons.
A. Installation. All signs shall be properly secured, supported, and braced,
shall be kept in reasonable structural condition, and shall be kept clean
and well painted at all times. Bolts or screws shall not be fastened to
window frames. Every sign and its framework, braces, anchors, and
other supports shall be constructed of such material and with such
workmanship as to be safe and satisfactory to the Zoning Administrator
and/or Building Inspector.
B. General requirements.
(1) Wind pressure and dead load requirements. All signs and other
advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to
withstand wind pressure of not less than 40 pounds per square foot
of area and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required
in the Village of East Troy Building Code and other ordinances.358
§ 510-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-140
1:961
§ 510-141. Zoning permit applications for signs.
(2) Protection of the public. The temporary occupancy of a sidewalk or
street or other public property during construction, removal,
repair, alteration, or maintenance of a sign is permitted, provided
that the space occupied is roped off, fenced off, or otherwise
isolated.
(3) Maintenance. The owner of any sign shall keep it in good
maintenance and repair, which includes restoring, repainting, or
replacement of a worn or damaged legally existing sign to its
original condition, and shall maintain the premises on which the
sign is erected in a clean, sanitary, and inoffensive condition, free
and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish, weeds, and grass.
(4) Supporting members. Supporting members or braces of all signs
shall be constructed of galvanized iron, properly treated steel,
copper, brass, or other noncorrosive incombustible material. All
projecting signs, if placed at a right or other angle to the wall or
roof the building, shall be attached by such noncorrosive metal
bolts, anchors, cable or other metal attachments as shall ensure
permanent and safe construction and shall be maintained free from
rust or other defects. Every means or device used for attaching any
sign shall extend through the walls or roof of the building should
the Zoning Administrator determine that the safe and permanent
support of such sign so requires and shall be securely anchored by
wall plates and nuts to the inside of the walls or to bearings on the
underside of two or more roof or ceiling joists in accordance with
instructions given by the Zoning Administrator. Small flat signs
containing less than 10 feet of area may be attached to a building
by the use of lag bolts or other means to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Administrator.
(5) Improper anchoring. No signs or any part thereof or sign anchors,
braces, or guide rods shall be attached, fastened, or anchored to
any fire escape, fire ladder, or standpipe, and no such sign or any
part of any such sign or any anchor, brace, or guide rod shall be
erected, put up or maintained so as to hinder or prevent ingress or
egress through such door, doorway, or window or so as to hinder or
prevent the raising or placing of ladders against such building by
the Fire Department of the Village of East Troy as necessity
therefor may require.
A. Application materials. Applications for a zoning permit for a sign shall
include, in addition to the applicable information required in § 510-156,
the following:
(1) Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the sign.
358. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Building Construction.
§ 510-140 EAST TROY CODE § 510-141
1:962
(2) Written consent of the owner or lessee of the building, structure, or
land to which or upon which the sign is to be affixed.
(3) A scale drawing or sketch of such sign indicating the dimensions,
the materials to be used, the type of illumination, if any, and the
method of construction and attachment.
(4) A scale drawing indicating the location and position of such sign in
relation to nearby buildings or structures.
(5) Copies of any other permit required and issued for said sign,
including the written approval by the Building Inspector, in the
case of illuminated signs, who shall examine the plans and
specifications, reinspecting all wiring and connections to
determine if the same comply with the Village of East Troy
Electrical Code.359
B. Application procedure. Sign permit applications shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator, who shall review the application for
completeness and accuracy. Permit applications for new signs received
by the Zoning Administrator no less than 20 calendar days prior to the
next Plan Commission meeting will be forwarded to the Plan
Commission for review and approval at its next scheduled meeting. To
be placed on the agenda, the Zoning Administrator must find that the
required application, plans and supporting information are complete
and accurate. The application must contain all the information required
by ordinance.
(1) Approving agent.
(a) For an existing premises where a new sign or replacement sign
is proposed, the Zoning Administrator may review and approve
the sign application and plans or forward the permit
application and plans to the Building Inspector for review and
approval. At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator or
Building Inspector, the permit application and plans for new or
replacement signs for an existing premises may be forwarded
to the Plan Commission for review and approval. In all cases,
the Building Inspector shall release the building permit for the
sign based upon approval by any of the following: the Zoning
Administrator, the Plan Commission or the Building Inspector,
as described herein.
(b) For new construction, where new signs are proposed, the
permit application and plans shall be submitted to the Plan
Commission for review and approval and forwarded to the
Building Inspector for release of the permit.
(c) Either the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector may
deny a permit for signs which do not meet the requirements
359. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Building Construction.
§ 510-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-141
1:963
established for signs. In cases where the application is denied
and prior to submission to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
a variance, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Plan
Commission for review and approval.
(2) Multi-tenant signs. Multi-tenant buildings or properties shall have
an overall sign plan that establishes standards and guidelines for
the design of all signs on the property. Plan Commission approval is
required for overall sign plans prior to the issuance of any sign
permits for such properties. The overall sign plan may only be
amended with the approval of the Plan Commission. The overall
sign plan shall convey a uniform design for the signs for any group
of buildings. The plan shall describe sign design specifications,
including a uniform color scheme that will be used for all current
and future signs on the property. The plan shall include
enforcement measures and information describing how the sign
plan will be utilized by the tenants. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02]
(3) Criteria for sign review. For an existing premises where new signs
or replacement signs are proposed, except in the CB District, the
Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector may review and
approve proposed signs based upon the following criteria:
(a) The proposed sign conforms to the location, size, and style
requirements of this article.
(b) The proposed sign conforms to the Village's long-term plans for
this area based upon the Comprehensive Plan.
(c) The proposed sign is compatible with the principal building
and is similar in design, colors and materials to the principal
building.
(d) The proposed sign will not be so different from or similar to
other signs already constructed or under construction in the
area or so out of harmony with the environs to cause a
nuisance or have a potentially negative impact on property
values.
(4) For a new premises where new signs are proposed and all signs in
the CB District, the Plan Commission shall approve the signs based
upon the above criteria and may act to recommend approval,
conditional approval, or denial of the application based upon the
above factors.
(5) The Plan Commission may establish additional guidelines to further
define, clarify, and interpret this article. Such guidelines shall be
made available to all applicants for sign permits.
C. If any aspect of this article is in conflict with any other provisions of this
chapter, the more restrictive provisions shall be controlling as may be
§ 510-141 EAST TROY CODE § 510-141
1:964
§ 510-142. Nonconforming signs. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13; 5-20-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-04]
determined by a clarification or interpretation by the Plan Commission
and recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees for final action.
A. Generally. Signs lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or
amendment of this article may be continued, although the size or
location does not conform to this article. However, all nonconforming
signs shall be deemed nonconforming uses or structures and the
provisions of Article IX shall apply, except as provided in this section.
All portable/temporary signs shall conform to this article within 60
calendar days of original adoption of this article. Any legal
nonconforming sign hereafter relocated, moved, reconstructed,
damaged, enlarged, changed (with the exception of changing the sign
face), or modified shall be made to comply with the provisions of this
article.
B. Sign maintenance and repair. Nothing in this article shall relieve the
owner or user of a legal nonconforming sign or the owner of the
property on which the sign is located from the provisions of this article
regarding safety, maintenance, and repair of signs.
C. Changing sign face. A nonconforming sign face may be changed with a
sign permit, provided that the structural quality of the existing sign is
determined to be acceptable by the Building Inspector.
D. Change of copy. The copy of a nonconforming sign may be changed.
E. Change in lighting. A nonconforming sign that is not illuminated may
not hereafter be illuminated even though such lighting may be
permitted in the zoning district in which the sign is located. A
nonconforming sign that is illuminated may not hereafter be
illuminated in any other manner even though such lighting may be
permitted in the zoning district in which the sign is located, except to
bring the existing lighting into compliance (e.g., removal of exposed
light bulbs).
F. Addition of an electronic message display. An electronic message
display may be added to a nonconforming monument sign provided the
area of the display conforms to all other applicable sections of this
chapter.
G. Reconstruction following damage. A nonconforming sign that is
damaged by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or
infestation on or after March 2, 2006, may be restored to its condition
(e.g., size, location, and use) prior to the damage, except the sign may
be larger when necessary to comply with state or federal requirements.
[See § 62.23(7)(hc), Wis. Stats.]
§ 510-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-142
1:965
§ 510-142.1. Freestanding murals. [Added 5-1-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-07]
§ 510-143. Violations and penalties.
H. Loss of nonconforming status. If a property owner or the owner of the
sign modifies a nonconforming sign in any manner that violates one or
more limitations imposed in this chapter, such sign shall thereafter be
made to conform with all applicable standards or be removed within 60
calendar days of the date the Building Inspector makes such
determination in writing, or within a lesser time period specified by the
Building Inspector if he or she determines the sign poses an
unacceptable risk to public health or safety.
A. Upon written petition, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to
approve one or more temporary freestanding murals, provided the
murals are part of a community-wide promotional effort recognized by
the Village Board and comply with the following requirements:
(1) The freestanding mural must not be larger than 32 square feet;
(2) There is no more than one freestanding mural on a premises;
(3) The freestanding mural is securely anchored to the ground;
(4) The freestanding mural is not located in a building setback area;
(5) The freestanding mural is not illuminated except by ambient
outdoor lighting; and
(6) The mural must be removed from the premises within four months
of the approval, or sooner as specified in the written approval.
B. The approval authorizing the freestanding mural may include
conditions of approval deemed necessary to ensure public health,
safety, and welfare.
A. Construction without a permit. Any person, firm, or corporation who or
which begins, erects, or completes the erection or construction of any
sign controlled by this article prior to the granting of a sign permit and
wishes to keep the sign shall submit a sign application as required by
this article. The application fee for an after-the-fact project may be
double the regular amount established by the fee schedule adopted by
the Village Board.
B. Order to remove signs.
(1) Unlawful signs. No sign shall advertise a business which is in
violation of this chapter or for which no zoning, occupancy, and/or
building permit has been issued. If the Zoning Administrator finds
that any sign or other advertising structure regulated herein has
been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation to
this article, the sign shall be removed.
§ 510-142 EAST TROY CODE § 510-143
1:966
(2) Unsafe or hazardous signs. Any sign which is hereinafter found to
be unsafe, insecure, or a menace to the public or by reason of its
location creates a traffic hazard or is dangerous to persons and
property as determined by the Zoning Administrator, Building
Inspector, Village Police Department, or Village Administrator shall
be removed. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(3) Abandoned signs. Any sign which does not advertise a bona fide
business or product sold, or which is dilapidated or out of repair,
shall be removed within 90 days.
(4) Maintenance. If the sign owner violates the maintenance
requirements of this article, the sign shall be removed.
C. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be
subject to a penalty as follows:
(1) Any person found guilty of violating any part of this article who has
previously been notified of being in violation or been convicted of
violating the same article within one year shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a forfeiture, in addition to sign removal, as
prescribed by § 1-4 of the Village Code for each such offense,
together with costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of
such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until
such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not exceeding
six months.
(2) Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this article shall preclude
the Village from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or
remove a violation of any provisions of this article. Any cost
incurred by the Village to enforce this article shall be charged back
to the property and placed as a special charge against the property
if unpaid.
§ 510-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-143
1:967

ARTICLE XVI
Administration
§ 510-144. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish responsibilities for the
administration of this chapter and the enforcement procedures and
penalties for noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 510-145. Zoning Administrator.360
The Building Inspector and/or other designee of the Village Board is hereby
designated as the administrative and enforcement officer(s) for the
provisions of this chapter and is also herein referred to as the "Zoning
Administrator." The general duty of the Zoning Administrator is to interpret
and administer this chapter, as well as certain other Village of East Troy
ordinances as indicated within those ordinances. With respect to this
chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall have the following specific duties
and responsibilities:
A. Make available to the public, to the fullest extent possible, all reports
and documents concerning the Village's Comprehensive Plan and
ordinances. In addition, information in the form of reports, bulletins,
maps, and engineering data shall be readily available and widely
distributed. The Village Board may set fees necessary to recover the
cost of providing information to the public.
B. Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including but
not limited to all maps, amendments, conditional uses, temporary uses,
sign permits, site plans, occupancy permits, variances, appeals,
interpretations, and applications therefor.
C. Receive, file, and forward all applications for all procedures governed
by this chapter to the designated official bodies.
D. Determine that all zoning permits, building permits, occupancy
permits, sign permits, and site plans (and their constituent plans)
comply with all provisions of this chapter.
E. Make interpretations regarding the provisions of this chapter per
§ 510-151.
F. Grant minor variations from the dimensional (setback, height and area)
requirements of this chapter, up to a maximum variation of 5% for
setbacks and height limitations and up to a maximum variation of 5% or
1,000 square feet for area requirements (whichever is less), so long as
the spirit and intent of this chapter are preserved.
360. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-145
1:969
§ 510-146. Plan Commission.
The Plan Commission, together with its other statutory duties, shall make
recommendations relating to the planning and development of the Village to
the Village Board, other public officials, and other interested organizations
and citizens. The Plan Commission in the performance of its functions may
enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys. In general, the
Plan Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to
perform its functions and promote municipal planning. Under this chapter,
its functions are primarily recommendatory to the Village Board pursuant to
guidelines set forth in this chapter as to various matters, and always being
mindful of the intent and purposes of this chapter.
§ 510-147. Village Board.
The Village Board, the governing body of the Village, subject to
recommendations by the Plan Commission, has ultimate authority to make
changes and amendments to this chapter and the Official Zoning Map.
§ 510-148. Zoning Board of Appeals.
G. Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures
and the use of structures, lands, and waters. The Zoning Administrator
shall give notice of all violations of this chapter to the owner, resident,
agent, or occupant of the premises and report uncorrected violations to
the Village Attorney in a manner specified by him.
H. Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, waters, and land to
determine compliance with all provisions of this chapter. The Zoning
Administrator must be permitted access to premises and structures
during reasonable hours to make inspections as deemed necessary by
him to ensure compliance with this chapter. If the Zoning Administrator
is refused entry after presentation of his identification, he may procure
a special inspection warrant in accordance with § 66.0119(2), Wis.
Stats. Where useful, the Zoning Administrator, or his agent, may set
marks on bridges or buildings or other markers which show the depth
of the regional flood or may set marks delineating the boundaries of
wetlands.
I. Institute, in the name of the Village of East Troy, any appropriate
actions or proceedings against a violator of this chapter, as provided by
law.
J. Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land, or water until he has
inspected and approved such use or erection.
K. Request assistance and cooperation from the Police Department and
Village Attorney as deemed necessary.
A. A Zoning Board of Appeals is established to provide an appeal
procedure for persons who deem themselves aggrieved by decisions of
§ 510-145 EAST TROY CODE § 510-148
1:970
administrative officers in the enforcement of this chapter. With respect
to this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following
specific duties and responsibilities:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in
any interpretation, order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement,
administration, or interpretation of this chapter.
(2) Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter
upon which the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to pass.
(3) Authorize such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not
be contrary to the public interest, when, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement will result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice
done.
(4) Attach conditions of approval to any action described under this
section, in furtherance of the general purpose and intent of this
chapter.
(5) Permit, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this chapter, a building or structure to be erected or used for such
public utility purposes in any location which is reasonably
necessary for the public convenience and welfare.
(6) Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out
the intent and purpose of this chapter as shown on the Official
Zoning Map where the actual street layout on the ground varies
from the street layout on the aforesaid map.
(7) Have the power to call on any other Village department for
assistance in the performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty
of such other departments to render such assistance as may be
reasonably required.
B. In exercising the above-listed duties and responsibilities, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may
modify any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning
Administrator or other administrative officer from whom the appeal is
taken. A majority vote of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination
for which an appeal has been requested. Except as specifically
provided, no action of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the effect
of permitting prohibited uses in any district.361
361. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-149
1:971
§ 510-149. Fees.
A. The fees for the procedures and permits established by this chapter
shall be established by resolution of the Village Board of the Village of
East Troy.
B. There shall be no fee in the case of applications filed in the public
interest by the Village Board or the Plan Commission, other agency, or
official of the Village of East Troy.
C. Fees shall be payable at the time applications are filed with the
appropriate officer of the Village (per the requirements of this chapter)
and are not refundable.
D. Village staff may expend time in the investigation and processing of
procedures regulated by this chapter. In addition to Village staff
involvement, the Village may retain the services of professional
consultants, including but not limited to engineers, landscape
architects, architects, attorneys, environmental specialists, planners,
and recreation specialists, in the administration, investigation, and
processing of such matters. Any person, firm or corporation requesting
action by the Village on conditional use permits, permits pursuant to
the supplemental regulations and amendments of this chapter shall
reimburse the Village for staff time expended in the administration,
investigation, and processing of applications for such permits or
amendments and the cost to the Village charged by any professional
consultant retained by the Village on any such matter.
§ 510-149 EAST TROY CODE § 510-149
1:972
ARTICLE XVII
Procedures
§ 510-150. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedural requirements for
zoning text amendments, Zoning Map amendments, and various
development approvals under this chapter, including conditional use
permits, temporary use permits, variances, zoning permits, occupancy
permits, sign permits, and site plan review and approval.
§ 510-151. Interpretations.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to assign responsibility for the
official interpretation of the provisions of this chapter and to describe
the required procedure for securing such interpretation.
B. Initiation of request for an interpretation. Proceedings for an
interpretation may be initiated by any of the following four methods: an
application of the owner(s) of the subject property; a recommendation
of the Plan Commission to the Village Board; by action of the Village
Board; or by request of the Zoning Administrator.
C. Application requirements. A zoning interpretation application contains
all of the following:
(1) All requests for interpretations shall clearly indicate the part of the
text of this chapter for which the interpretation is requested and
the specific questions the applicant has regarding said text.
(2) If the requested interpretation relates to the application of this
chapter to a specific property, the additional following information
shall be required:
(a) A map of the generalized location of the subject property in
relation to the Village as a whole.
(b) A map of the subject property (at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 800 feet) showing all lands for which the interpretation
is requested and all other lands within 200 feet of the
boundaries of the subject property, together with the names
and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the
same appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds.
Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the
subject property and its environs and the jurisdiction(s) which
maintains that control. All lot dimensions of the subject
property, a graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be provided.
(c) A written description of the reason for the requested
interpretation and how the proposed interpretation relates to
type of activities, buildings, and structures currently located
on, and proposed for, the subject property.
§ 510-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-151
1:973
(d) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for
development. Said site plan shall conform to any and all the
requirements of § 510-160.
D. Application certification. All applications for interpretations, regardless
of the party of their initiation, shall be certified as complete by the
Zoning Administrator prior to the formal initiation of this procedure. If
the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not
complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, he shall
return a copy of the application to the applicant and indicate
incomplete or missing requirements. The application may not be placed
on any agenda as an item to be acted upon until said certification has
occurred.362
E. Review by Zoning Administrator. Within 30 days of filing of a complete
application, the Zoning Administrator shall review and evaluate the
application and prepare a written report to be forwarded to the
applicant. Said report should comment on the written justification for
the proposed interpretation, if provided by application, and shall
evaluate whether the requested interpretation relates to the
classification or treatment of a particular land use under the provisions
of this chapter. If so, the written report shall address the following:
(1) Whether the subject land use (in general) is in harmony with the
purposes, goals, objectives, policies, and standards of the
Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, and any other plan, program, or
ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official
notice by the Village.
(2) Whether the subject land use is in harmony with the purposes,
goals, objectives, policies, and standards of the pertinent zoning
district for which the interpretation is being sought.
(3) Whether the potential public benefits of the proposed
interpretation outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of
the proposed interpretation.
F. Standards for review. This chapter shall be interpreted in a manner
which is consistent with the purposes intended by the Village Board as
noted in this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan. The intent of the
standards and supporting definitions of this chapter is to protect both
individual property owners and the general public from adverse
impacts that may result from a proposed, modified, or existing land use.
To this end, those called upon to interpret this chapter shall proceed as
follows:
(1) Articulate certain public purpose(s) underlying the standard(s) for
which an interpretation is required.
362. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-151 EAST TROY CODE § 510-151
1:974
(2) Before any zoning interpretation is made, there must be an explicit
discussion of certain purpose(s) for which the regulation was
initially imposed. Each zoning regulation is intended to protect the
interests of both present and future neighbors and the general
public. Each standard is developed as a regulatory response to an
identifiable potential negative impact. A sound interpretation of
any standard cannot be ensured without careful analysis of the
regulation and the end toward which it is directed. It is understood
that there may be other public purposes underlying the
interpretation which are not explicitly articulated.
(3) Articulate the actual impact of various proposed interpretations,
permitting flexibility in design and prohibiting any interpretation
that lowers the protection afforded to the public. There is a critical
distinction between an interpretation which provides a greater
degree of design freedom to achieve a permitted land use and an
interpretation which permits a new or not previously permitted use
or which allows a use to be enlarged or have its intensity increased
beyond the degree specified in this chapter. Design freedom is to be
encouraged while a lowering of the standards of this chapter is to
be prohibited.
(4) Determine whether the proposed interpretation will ensure a just
balance between the rights of the landowner and all others who will
be affected by that person's land use proposal. If an interpretation
would merely allow a design solution that is slightly different from
the one expressly stated or permitted, and if it would result in the
same or greater degree of protection to any affected party (i.e., the
adjoining landowners, the public at large, and/or a future property
owner or renter), such an interpretation may be appropriately
made. Any interpretation which would result in any identifiable loss
of protection for one group to the benefit of others is contrary to
the spirit of this chapter. Similarly, any interpretation which would
either increase the nuisance potential of any use or alter the
purpose for which the regulation was adopted shall be considered
counter to the legislative intent of this chapter. Any interpretation
which will result in any loss of protection or increase in intensity
beyond that already permitted shall only be made if the party
interpreting this chapter has the power to impose additional
restrictions or requirements.
(5) This chapter has been carefully designed by the Village Board to
combine maximum achievement of public goals and the protection
of adjoining property owners while providing flexibility for property
owners to use their land for a variety of uses consistent with the
goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. Great care has
been taken to balance the rights of competing groups while
achieving maximum protection with flexibility and a range of use
options. Persons interpreting this chapter should not substitute
their own judgments for the legislative acts of the Village Board.
§ 510-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-151
1:975
(6) In addition to the applicant's response to the questions required by
Subsection C above, the following standards shall govern the
decision on the requested interpretation on land use interpretation
matters:
(a) No interpretation shall allow the establishment of any land use
which was previously considered and rejected by the Village
Board on an application for an amendment to this chapter or
the Official Zoning Map or a previously applied for appeal from
a requested interpretation.
(b) No interpretation shall permit a land use listed as a use
permitted by right, a special use, or a conditional use in
another zoning district if the use is not listed as permitted in
the zoning district of the subject property (see Articles III, IV
and V).
(c) No interpretation shall permit a land use in a zoning district
unless evidence is presented which demonstrates that the land
use will comply with any and all regulations applicable to
development in the subject property's zoning district (see
Articles III, IV and V).
(d) No interpretation shall permit a land use in a particular zoning
district unless such use is substantially similar to other uses
permitted in that same district and is more similar to such
other uses than to uses either not permitted in said district or
permitted in a more intensive district in the same zoning
district category (see Articles III, IV and V).
(e) If the proposed land use is more similar to a land use permitted
only as a conditional use in the subject property's district than
to a use permitted by right, then an interpretation permitting
such use shall be conditioned upon the approval of a
conditional use pursuant to § 510-157.
G. Review by the Plan Commission.
(1) Within 45 days after the acceptance of a complete application, the
Plan Commission shall consider the application and make its
recommendation to the Village Board.
(2) Plan Commission recommendations shall be in writing. A recording
thereof in the Plan Commission's minutes shall constitute the
required written recommendation and shall include any finding of
facts supporting its recommendation as to the whether the
potential public benefits outweigh any and all potential adverse
impacts.
H. Review and action by the Village Board. The Village Board shall
consider the recommendation of the Plan Commission regarding the
interpretation request. The Village Board may request further
§ 510-151 EAST TROY CODE § 510-151
1:976
§ 510-152. Appeals of zoning interpretations.
information and/or additional reports from the Plan Commission,
Zoning Administrator, and/or the applicant. The Village Board shall
make the final determination on the zoning interpretation.
I. Effect of a favorable land use interpretation. No interpretation finding a
particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a
specific zoning district shall authorize either the establishment of such
use or the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or
moving of any building or structure. A favorable interpretation merely
authorizes the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for
any permits and approvals which may be required by this chapter.
These permits and approvals include, but are not limited to, required
site plans, special use permits, conditional uses, and occupancy
permits.
J. Limitations on favorable land use interpretation.
(1) No interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or
conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be valid
for a period of more than 365 days from the date of issuance of the
interpretation, unless a building permit is issued and development
has begun within that period, and is thereafter diligently pursued
to completion, or an occupancy permit is obtained and a use
commenced within that period.
(2) An interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or
conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be
deemed to authorize only that particular use at that particular
location for which the interpretation was issued. The interpretation
shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for
which a separate interpretation has not been issued. A favorable
interpretation shall automatically expire and cease to be of any
force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for
any reason, be discontinued for a period of 365 consecutive days or
more.
K. Fee. A fee may be required for this procedure. Refer to § 510-149.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
enable the Village to hear and decide requests for appeals from the
interpretations of the Zoning Administrator per § 510-151 as provided
for by § 62.23(7)(e)7, Wis. Stats.
B. Initiation of request for appeal. Proceedings for the review of an appeal
may be initiated by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department,
board, or bureau of the Village affected by any decision of the Zoning
Administrator.
C. Appeals. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any
person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the Zoning
§ 510-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-152
1:977
Administrator within 30 days of filing of said decision by the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the
Zoning Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
D. Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning
Administrator from whom the appeal is taken to the Zoning Board of
Appeals determines that, by reason of facts state in the certificate, a
stay would cause immediate peril to life or property. In such case, the
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of
record on application and on notice to the Zoning Administrator and on
due cause shown.
E. Time limit for filing an appeal. Any appeal under the provisions of this
section shall be made per the requirements of Subsection F below
within a period not exceeding 30 days from the date of issuance of the
interpretation by the Zoning Administrator. Failure to initiate this
appeal procedure within this thirty-day period shall constitute a final
and binding waiver of the right to appeal said interpretation.363
F. Application requirements. An application may be considered complete
if it contains all of the following:
(1) A copy of pertinent items in the file on the matter at hand as
identified by the Zoning Administrator and/or the applicant.
(2) A written statement from the applicant indicating the reasons why
an appeal is justified based upon an analysis of the Zoning
Administrator's interpretation. This statement shall be dated and
signed by the applicant.
G. Application certification. All applications for appeal, regardless of the
party of their initiation, shall be filed in the office of the Zoning
Administrator and shall be certified as complete by the Zoning
Administrator a minimum of two weeks prior to the initiation of this
procedure. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application
is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, he
shall return a copy of the application to the applicant and indicate
incomplete or missing requirements.364
H. Review by the Zoning Administrator. Upon notifying the applicant that
the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall review and
evaluate the application and prepare a written report. Said report
should comment on the written justification for the appeal as submitted
by the applicant. The Zoning Administrator shall evaluate whether the
363. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
364. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-152 EAST TROY CODE § 510-152
1:978
request is in harmony with the recommendations of the Comprehensive
Plan.
I. Review and public hearing by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Within 45
days after the filing of the complete application, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall conduct a public hearing to consider the appeal.
(1) Notice of the public hearing to review the appeal shall conform to
§ 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats. Said notice shall contain a description of
the issue per Subsection F above.
(2) At least 10 days before said public hearing, the Village Clerk shall
mail a notice to the applicant; to the clerk of any municipality
whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the
jurisdiction of this chapter; to any property owner within 300 feet
of the subject property; and, if the appeal would make any change
within three miles of the boundaries of an airport, to the operator
of said airport. Failure to mail said notice, provided that it is
unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this section.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
J. Determination of finding by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Within 60
days after the filing of the complete application, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall determine its findings per the following: [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals may request further information and/
or additional reports from the Zoning Administrator and/or the
applicant.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals may take final action on the
application for appeal at the time of its initial meeting or may
continue the proceedings at the applicant's request. Said final
action shall be followed by a written report which shall include a
formal finding of facts developed and approved by the Zoning
Board of Appeals concerning the request.
K. Effects of denial. No application for an appeal which has been denied
(either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months
from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence
or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
L. Limited effect on a favorable ruling on an appeal.
(1) No ruling by the Zoning Board of Appeals on an appeal finding a
particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a
specified zoning district shall be valid for a period of more than 365
days from the date of issuance of the ruling on the appeal, unless a
building permit is issued and development is actually begun within
that period, and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or
an occupancy permit is obtained and a use commenced within that
period.
§ 510-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-152
1:979
§ 510-153. Violations and penalties.
(2) A ruling by the Zoning Board of Appeals on an appeal finding a
particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a
specified zoning district shall be deemed to authorize only that
particular use at that particular location for which the ruling was
issued. The ruling shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly
similar use for which a separate ruling has not been issued. A
favorable ruling shall automatically expire and cease to be of any
force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for
any reason, be discontinued for a period of 365 consecutive days or
more.
M. Fee. A fee may be required for this procedure. Refer to § 510-149.
A. Violation of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to construct or use any
land, engage in any development activity (including disruption of
protected vegetation), or construct or use any structure, land or water
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or otherwise neglect,
refuse or fail to comply with this chapter's requirements. Any person
who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in
Subsection B below and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses,
including actual reasonable attorney and other fees involved in the
case.
B. Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation who or which fails to comply
with the provisions of this chapter or any order of the Zoning
Administrator shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as
prescribed in § 1-4 of the Village Code. Each day a violation exists or
continues shall constitute a separate offense.365
C. Promulgated correction of violation. In addition to any other penalty
imposed by this section for a violation of the provisions of this chapter,
the Village reserves and maintains the continued right to abate
violations of this chapter.
(1) If the Zoning Administrator determines that a violation of this
chapter exists and further determines that the nature of such
violation poses a great and immediate danger to the public health,
safety, peace, morals or decency, the Zoning Administrator shall
cause the violation to be abated. Costs associated with said
abatement shall be charged to the owner of the property on which
said violation has occurred. The Zoning Administrator is hereby
authorized to abate a violation of this chapter.
(2) If the Zoning Administrator determines that a violation of this
chapter exists and further determines that the nature of such
365. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-152 EAST TROY CODE § 510-153
1:980
§ 510-154. Amendment of zoning regulations.
violation is not such as to pose great and immediate danger to
the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Zoning
Administrator shall serve written notice by registered mail on the
current owner of the property (as indicated by current Village
of East Troy tax records) on which said violation is occurring to
remove said violation within 10 working days. If such violation
is not removed within such 10 working days, the Zoning
Administrator shall cause the violation to be abated. Costs
associated with said abatement shall be charged to the owner of
the property on which said violation has occurred.
(3) In addition to any other penalty imposed by this section for a
violation of the provisions of this chapter, the cost of abating a
violation of this chapter shall be collected as a debt from the owner
of the property on which said violation has occurred. An account of
the expenses incurred by the Village to abate the violation shall be
kept and such expenses shall be charged to and paid by the
property owner. Notice of the bill for abatement of the violation
shall be mailed to the last known address of said property owner by
registered mail and shall be payable within 30 calendar days from
the receipt thereof. Within 60 days after such costs and expenses
are incurred and remain unpaid, the Village Clerk shall enter such
charges onto the tax roll as a special tax as provided by
§ 66.0627(4), Wis. Stats. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or
denial, of proposed amendments to the provisions of this chapter. Refer
also to the requirements of § 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats.
B. Applicability. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general
welfare, or good zoning practice requires, the Village Board may amend
the zoning regulations of this chapter.
C. Review and approval. All requests to amend the regulations of this
chapter shall be subject to the review of the Zoning Administrator. The
Plan Commission shall review, hear, and submit its recommendation to
the Village Board, which shall act on the request to amend this chapter
in accordance with the procedures in this section.
D. Initiation of request for amendment. Proceedings for amendment of this
chapter may be initiated by one of the following three methods: an
application by any member of the general public; a recommendation by
the Plan Commission to the Village Board; or by action of the Village
Board.
E. Application requirements. An application to amend the regulations of
this chapter shall contain the following:
§ 510-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-154
1:981
(1) A copy of the portion of the current provisions of this chapter which
are proposed to be amended.
(2) A copy of the text which is proposed to replace the current text.
(3) As an optional requirement, the applicant may provide written
justification for the proposed text amendment, consisting of the
reasons why the applicant believes the proposed text amendment is
in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan.
F. Application certification. All requests for proposed text amendments to
this chapter, regardless of the party of their initiation, shall be certified
as complete by the Zoning Administrator prior to the formal initiation of
this procedure. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this
chapter, he shall return a copy of the application to the applicant and
indicate incomplete or missing requirements.366
G. Review by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall
review and evaluate the application and prepare a written report to be
forwarded to the Plan Commission for review and recommendation to
the Village Board. Through the written report, the Zoning
Administrator shall evaluate whether the proposed text amendment:
(1) Advances the purposes of this chapter as outlined in § 510-3.
(2) Advances the purposes of the general article in which the
amendment is proposed to be located.
(3) Advances the purposes of the specific section in which the
amendment is proposed to be located.
(4) Is in harmony with the recommendations of the Comprehensive
Plan. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may
be in conflict with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, the
Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
(5) Maintains the desired overall consistency of land uses, land use
intensities, and land use impacts within the pertinent zoning
districts.
(6) Addresses any of the following factors that may not be addressed in
the current zoning text:
(a) A change in the land market or other factors which require a
new form of development, a new type of land use, or a new
procedure to meet said change(s).
(b) New methods of development or types of infrastructure.
366. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-154 EAST TROY CODE § 510-154
1:982
(c) Changing governmental finances to meet the needs of the
government in terms of providing and affording public
services.
H. Review and public hearing by the Plan Commission.
(1) Within 45 days after the acceptance of a complete application, the
Plan Commission shall conduct a public hearing to consider the
application. The applicant may appear in person, by agent and/or
by attorney.
(2) Notice of the proposed amendment and the public hearing shall
conform to the requirements of § 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats. Said
notice shall contain a description of the proposed text change.
(3) At least 10 days before the public hearing, the Village Clerk shall
mail a notice to the applicant; to the clerk of any municipality
whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the
jurisdiction of this chapter; and, if the proposed amendment would
make any change within three miles of the boundaries of an airport,
to the operator of said airport. Failure to mail said notice, provided
that it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this
section. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(4) Plan Commission recommendations shall be in writing. A recording
thereof in the Plan Commission's minutes shall constitute the
required written recommendation and shall include any finding of
facts supporting its recommendation as to the whether the
potential public benefits outweigh any and all potential adverse
impacts.
(5) If the Plan Commission does not provide a recommendation to the
Village Board within 60 days after the filing of a complete
application, the Village Board may then hold a public hearing
within 30 days after the expiration of said sixty-day period. Failure
to receive said recommendations from the Plan Commission shall
not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the Village Board. If
such a public hearing is necessary, the Village Board shall provide
notice per the requirements of Subsection H(2) and (3) above.
I. Review and action by the Village Board. The Village Board shall
consider the recommendation of the Plan Commission regarding the
proposed amendment. The Village Board may request further
information and/or additional reports from the Plan Commission,
Zoning Administrator, and/or the applicant.
(1) The Village Board may take final action (by ordinance) on the
application at the time of its initial meeting or may continue the
proceedings by its own decision or the applicant's request. The
Village Board may approve the amendment as originally proposed,
may approve the proposed amendment with modifications, or may
deny approval of the proposed amendment.
§ 510-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-154
1:983
§ 510-155. Amendment of Official Zoning Map.
(2) If the Village Board wishes to make significant changes in the
proposed text amendment, as recommended by the Plan
Commission, the procedure set forth in § 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats.,
shall be followed prior to Village Board action. Any action to amend
the provisions of proposed amendment requires a majority vote of
the Village Board. The Village Board's approval of the requested
amendment shall be considered the approval of a unique request
and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed
amendment.
J. Effect of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or
in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
K. Fee. A fee may be required for this procedure. Refer to § 510-149.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or
denial, of proposed amendments to provisions of the Official Zoning
Map (rezonings).
B. Applicability. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general
welfare, or good zoning practice requires, the Village Board may amend
the Official Zoning Map.
C. Review and approval. All requests to amend the Official Zoning Map
shall be subject to the review of the Zoning Administrator. The Plan
Commission shall review, hear, and submit its recommendation to the
Village Board, which shall act on the request to amend the Official
Zoning Map in accordance with the procedures in this section.
D. Initiation of request for amendment. Proceedings for amendment of the
Official Zoning Map may be initiated by an application of the owner(s)
of the subject property, a recommendation of the Plan Commission, or
by action of the Village Board.
E. Application requirements. An application to amend Official Zoning Map
shall contain the following:
(1) A map of the generalized location of the subject property in relation
to the Village as a whole.
(2) A map of the subject property (at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 800 feet) showing all lands for which the zoning is proposed
to be amended and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries
of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of
the owners of all lands on said map as they appear on the current
tax records of the Village of East Troy. Said map shall clearly
indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs
§ 510-154 EAST TROY CODE § 510-155
1:984
and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. All lot
dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a North
arrow shall be provided.
(3) As an optional requirement, the applicant may provide justification
for the proposed map amendment, consisting of the reasons why
the applicant believes the proposed map amendment is in harmony
with the Comprehensive Plan.
F. Application certification. All requests for proposed amendments to the
Official Zoning Map, regardless of the party of their initiation, shall be
certified as complete by the Zoning Administrator prior to the formal
initiation of this procedure. If the Zoning Administrator determines that
the application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of
this chapter, he shall return a copy of the application to the applicant
and indicate incomplete or missing requirements.367
G. Review by Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall review
and evaluate the application and prepare a written report to be
forwarded to the Plan Commission for review and recommendation to
the Village Board. Through the written report, the Zoning
Administrator shall evaluate whether the proposed map amendment:
(1) Advances the purposes of this chapter as outlined in § 510-3.
(2) Is consistent with applicable rules and regulations of the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(3) Is in harmony with the recommendations of the Comprehensive
Plan. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may
be in conflict with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, the
Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
(4) Maintains the desired consistency of land uses, land use intensities,
and land use impacts as related to the environs of the subject
property.
(5) Addresses any of the following factors that may not be addressed
on the current Official Zoning Map:
(a) The designations of the Official Zoning Map are not in
conformity with the Comprehensive Plan.
(b) A mistake was made in mapping on the Official Zoning Map
(i.e., an area is developing in a manner and purpose different
from that for which it is mapped). If this reason is cited, it must
be demonstrated that the discussed inconsistency between
actual land use and designated zoning is not intended, as the
367. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-155
1:985
Village may intend to stop an undesirable land use pattern
from continuing.
(c) Factors have changed (such as the availability of new data, the
presence of new roads or other infrastructure, additional
development, annexation, or other zoning changes) making the
subject property more appropriate for a different zoning
district.
(d) Growth patterns or rates have changed, thereby creating the
need for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map.
H. Review and public hearing by the Plan Commission.
(1) Within 45 days of the acceptance of a complete application, the
Plan Commission shall conduct a public hearing to consider the
application. The applicant may appear in person, by agent and/or
by attorney.
(2) Notice of the proposed amendment and the public hearing shall
conform to the requirements of § 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats. Said
notice shall contain a description of the subject property and the
proposed change in zoning.
(3) At least 10 days before said public hearing, the Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall mail a notice to the applicant; to all property
owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property; to
the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000
feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this chapter; and, if the
proposed amendment would make any change within three miles of
the boundaries of an airport, to the operator of said airport. Failure
to mail said notice, provided that it is unintentional, shall not
invalidate proceedings under this section.
(4) Plan Commission recommendations shall be in writing. A recording
thereof in the Plan Commission's minutes shall constitute the
required written recommendation and shall include any finding of
facts supporting its recommendation as to the whether the
potential public benefits outweigh any and all potential adverse
impacts.
(5) If the Plan Commission does not provide a recommendation to the
Village Board within 60 days after the filing of a complete
application, the Village Board may then hold a public hearing
within 30 days after the expiration of said sixty-day period. Failure
to receive said recommendation from the Plan Commission shall
not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the Village Board. If
such public hearing is necessary, the Village Board shall provide
notice per the requirements of Subsection H(2) and (3) above.
I. Review and action by the Village Board. The Village Board shall
consider the recommendation of the Plan Commission regarding the
§ 510-155 EAST TROY CODE § 510-155
1:986
§ 510-156. Zoning permit.
proposed amendment. The Village Board may request further
information and/or additional reports from the Plan Commission,
Zoning Administrator and/or applicant.
(1) The Village Board may take final action (by ordinance) on the
application to amend the Official Zoning Map at the time of its
initial meeting or may continue the proceedings by its own decision
or the applicant's request. The Village Board may approve the
amendment as originally proposed, may approve the proposed
amendment with modifications, or may deny approval of the
proposed amendment.368
(2) If the Village Board wishes to make significant changes in the
proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map, as recommended
by the Plan Commission, the procedure set forth in § 62.23(7)(d),
Wis. Stats., shall be followed prior to Village Board action. Any
action to amend the Official Zoning Map requires a majority vote of
the Village Board, except that in case of adverse recommendation
by the Plan Commission or of a protest against such change signed
and acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage proposed
to be changed or the frontage immediately in the rear thereof or
directly opposite thereto, such amendment shall not be passed
except by a three-fourths vote of all members of the Village Board.
The Village Board's approval of the requested amendment shall be
considered the approval of a unique request and shall not be
construed as precedent for any other proposed amendment.
J. Effect of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or
in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
K. Fee. A fee may be required for this procedure. Refer to § 510-149.
L. Floodplain districts. The Village Board shall not permit changes to the
boundary of any district established in § 510-167 except if such change
is consistent with § 510-191.369
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to specify the requirements and
procedures for the issuance of zoning permits.
B. Applicability. Zoning permits are generally issued by the Zoning
Administrator for certain projects, as specified in Subsection B(1)
through (9), below, in order to verify compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. For projects requiring a building permit, the Building
368. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
369. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-156
1:987
Inspector may instead review the project for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, in which case a zoning permit shall not be
required. A zoning permit is required from the Zoning Administrator in
the following instances:
(1) Before any structure is erected, affixed, moved, or structurally
altered to increase its floor area.
(2) Before any area of one acre or greater will be disturbed by
excavation, grading, filling, or other earthmoving activities
resulting in the loss or removal of protective ground cover or
vegetation.
(3) Before a land disturbing activity over more than 5,000 square feet
is to occur on slopes greater than 12%.
(4) Before any substantial alteration which would effect a change in
use of an existing site or structure.
(5) Before any use for which a conditional use permit has been granted
under this chapter commences operation.
(6) Before the commencement of any structural modification or
structural repair of an existing nonconforming structure or to a
structure housing a nonconforming use.
(7) Before the establishment of any specific land use described for
which a stormwater management plan, grading plan, and/or
erosion control plan is required.
(8) Before any other land disturbing activity occurs where the Zoning
Administrator determines that high levels of erosion or runoff are
likely unless an erosion control plan or stormwater management
plan, or both, is developed.
(9) Any other instances that have been indicated in other parts of this
chapter.
C. Review and approval. All zoning permit requests shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Zoning Administrator, unless as otherwise
specified in Subsection B above.
D. Application requirements. Applications for a zoning permit shall be
made to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning
Administrator and shall include the following information where
pertinent for proper review:
(1) Name and address of the applicant, owner of the site, architect,
professional engineer and contractor.
(2) Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded
subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site;
type of structure; existing and proposed operation or use of the
§ 510-156 EAST TROY CODE § 510-156
1:988
§ 510-157. Conditional use permit procedures.
structure or site; number of employees; and the zoning district
within which the subject site lies.
(3) Plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor licensed in Wisconsin
showing the location, boundaries, dimensions, uses and size of the
following: subject site; existing and proposed structures; existing
and proposed easements; streets and other public ways; off-street
parking, loading areas, and driveways; existing highway access
restrictions; high water, channel floodway, and floodplain
boundaries; and existing and proposed street, side, and rear yards.
In addition, the plat of survey shall show type, slope and
boundaries of soils shown in the Walworth County Soils Survey
prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture Natural
Resources Conservation Service.370
(4) Additional information as may be required by the Plan Commission
or Zoning Administrator.
(5) Zoning permit applications for signs shall also adhere to the
requirements of § 510-141.
E. Review by the Zoning Administrator. A zoning permit shall be granted
or denied by the Zoning Administrator in writing within 30 days of the
application, and the applicant shall post such permit in a conspicuous
place at the site. The permit shall expire within four months unless
work equal to 10% of the dollar amount of the permit has been
completed or within 18 months after the issuance of the permit if the
structure for which a permit was issued is not 75% completed as
measured by the dollar amount of the permit. The applicant shall
reapply for a zoning permit before recommencing work on the
structure. Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter shall be null and void.
F. Fees. A fee is required with the submittal of a zoning permit application
(see § 510-149). Zoning permit fees do not include and are in addition to
building permit fees established by the Building Code. A double fee may
be charged by the Zoning Administrator if work is started before a
permit is applied for and issued. Such double fee shall not release the
applicant from full compliance with this chapter nor from prosecution
for violation of this chapter.371
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or
denial, of proposed conditional uses. (Refer to the requirements of
§ 62.23, Wis. Stats.) Under this chapter, a proposed conditional use
370. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
371. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-157
1:989
shall be denied unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Village that the proposed conditional use will not create
undesirable impacts on nearby properties, the environment, or the
community as a whole.
B. Applicability. The execution of this chapter is based upon the division of
the Village into zoning districts, within which districts the use of land
and buildings and bulk and location of buildings and structures in
relation to the land are mutually compatible and substantially uniform.
However, there are certain uses which, because of their unique
characteristics, cannot be properly classified as unrestricted permitted
uses in any particular district or districts without consideration of the
impact of those uses upon neighboring land or public facilities and the
public need for a particular use in a particular location. In these
instances, the conditional use permit review and approval procedures
shall apply.
C. Review and approval. All conditional use permit requests shall be
subject to the review of the Zoning Administrator. The Plan Commission
shall review, hear, and submit its recommendation to the Village Board,
which shall act on the conditional use permit request in accordance
with the procedures in this section.
D. Limited conditional use. Limited conditional uses are those in which the
Village Board has found that any of the following should be of lesser
permanence than regular conditional uses, and the duration or term of
existence may be established until a time certain or be limited to a
future happening or event at which time the same shall terminate:
(1) Their particularly specialized nature.
(2) Their particular locations within a district.
(3) The peculiar unique relationships or needed compatibility of uses
to involved individuals.
(4) Any other reason(s) the Village Board deems specially relevant and
material to delimit the scope thereof.
E. Initiation of request for approval of a conditional use. Proceedings for
approval of a conditional use may be initiated by an application of the
owner(s) of the subject property.
F. Application requirements. An application for a conditional use permit
shall contain the following:
(1) A map of the generalized location of the subject property in relation
to the Village as a whole.
(2) A map of the subject property (at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 800 feet) showing all lands for which the conditional use is
proposed and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of
the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the
§ 510-157 EAST TROY CODE § 510-157
1:990
owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the current
records of the Register of Deeds. Said map shall clearly indicate
the current zoning of the subject property and its environs and the
jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. All lot dimensions of
the subject property, a graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be
provided.
(3) A written description of the proposed conditional use describing
the type of activities, buildings, and structures proposed for the
subject property and their general locations.
(4) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development.
Said site plan shall conform to any and all the requirements of
§ 510-160. If the proposed conditional use is a group development
(per § 510-108) or a large development (per § 510-109), a proposed
preliminary plat or conceptual plat may be substituted for the
required site plan, provided that said plat contains all information
required on said site plan.
(5) As an optional requirement, the applicant may provide written
justification for the proposed conditional use consisting of the
reasons why the applicant believes the proposed conditional use is
appropriate.
G. Application certification. All applications for proposed conditional uses
shall be certified as complete by the Zoning Administrator a minimum
of two weeks prior to the initiation of this procedure. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the application does not fulfill the
requirements of this chapter, he shall return a copy of the application to
the applicant and indicate incomplete or missing requirements.372
H. Review by Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall review
and evaluate the application and prepare a written report to be
forwarded to the Plan Commission for review and recommendation to
the Village Board. Through the written report, the Zoning
Administrator shall evaluate whether:
(1) The proposed conditional use (the use in general, independent of
its location) is in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives,
policies and standards of the Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, and
any other plan, program, or ordinance adopted or under
consideration pursuant to official notice by the Village. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed use,
independent of its location, may be in conflict with the provisions of
the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall note this
determination in the report.
(2) The proposed conditional use (in its specific location) is in harmony
with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the
372. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-157
1:991
Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, and any other plan, program,
or ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official
notice by the Village. If the Zoning Administrator determines that
the proposed use, in its specific location, may be in conflict with the
provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Administrator
shall note this determination in the report.
(3) The proposed conditional use, in its proposed location and as
depicted on the required site plan, results in a substantial or undue
adverse impact on nearby property, the character of the
neighborhood, environmental factors, traffic factors, parking,
public improvements, public property or rights-of-way, or other
matters affecting the public health, safety, or general welfare,
either as they now exist or as they may in the future be developed
as a result of the implementation of the provisions of this chapter,
the Comprehensive Plan, or any other plan, program, map, or
ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official
notice by the Village or other governmental agency having
jurisdiction to guide development.
(4) The proposed conditional use would maintain the desired
consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and land use impacts
as related to the environs of the subject property.
(5) The proposed conditional use is located in an area that will be
adequately served by, and will not impose an undue burden on, any
of the improvements, facilities, utilities or services provided by
public agencies serving the subject property.
(6) The potential public benefits of the proposed conditional use
outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the proposed
conditional use after taking into consideration the applicant's
proposal and any requirements recommended by the applicant to
ameliorate such impacts.
I. Review and public hearing by the Plan Commission.
(1) Within 45 days after acceptance of a complete application, the Plan
Commission shall conduct a public hearing to consider the
application. The applicant may appear in person or by agent and/or
by attorney.
(2) Notice of the requested conditional use permit and the public
hearing shall conform to the requirements of § 62.23(7)(d), Wis.
Stats. Said notice shall contain a description of the subject property
and the proposed conditional use. At least 10 days before said
public hearing, the Village Clerk shall mail a notice to the
applicant; to the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are
within 1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this chapter;
and, if the requested conditional use permit would make any
change within three miles of the boundaries of an airport, to the
operator of said airport. Failure to mail said notice or failure to
§ 510-157 EAST TROY CODE § 510-157
1:992
meet the time requirements herein, provided that it is
unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this section.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(3) Plan Commission recommendations shall be in writing. A recording
thereof in the Plan Commission's minutes shall constitute the
required written recommendation and shall include any finding of
facts supporting its recommendation as to the whether the
potential public benefits outweigh any and all potential adverse
impacts.
(4) If the Plan Commission does not provide a recommendation to the
Village Board within 60 days after the filing of a complete
application, the Village Board may then hold a public hearing
within 30 days after the expiration of said sixty-day period. Failure
to receive said recommendations from the Plan Commission shall
not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the Village Board. If
such a public hearing is necessary, the Village Board shall provide
notice per the requirements of Subsection I(2) above.
J. Review and action by Village Board. The Village Board shall consider
the recommendation of the Plan Commission regarding the proposed
conditional use. The Village Board may request further information and/
or additional reports from the Plan Commission, Zoning Administrator,
applicant, and/or from any other source.
(1) The Village Board may take final action (by resolution) on the
application at the time of its initial meeting or may continue the
proceedings at the applicant's request. The Village Board may
approve the conditional use as originally proposed, may approve
the proposed conditional use with modifications, or may deny
approval of the proposed conditional use.
(2) If the Village Board wishes to make significant changes in the
proposed conditional use, as recommended by the Plan
Commission, then the procedure set forth in § 62.23(7)(d), Wis.
Stats., shall be followed prior to Village Board action. Any action to
amend the provisions of a proposed conditional use requires a
majority vote of the Village Board. Village Board approval of the
conditional use shall be considered the approval of a unique
request and shall not be construed as precedent for any other
proposed conditional use.
K. Effect of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or
in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
L. Termination of an approved conditional use. Upon approval by the
Village Board, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed
conditional use meets all general and specific conditional use
§ 510-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-157
1:993
requirements in the site plan required for initiation of development
activity on the subject property per § 510-160. Once a conditional use
is granted, no erosion control permit, site plan, occupancy permit,
or building permit shall be issued for any development which does
not comply with all requirements of this chapter. Any conditional use
found not to be in compliance with the terms of this chapter shall
be considered in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to all
applicable procedures and penalties. A conditional use may be revoked
for such a violation by majority vote of the Village Board, following the
procedures outlined in Subsection J above.
M. Time limits on the development of conditional use. The start of
construction of any and all conditional uses shall be initiated within 365
days of their approval by the Village Board and they shall be operational
within 730 days of said approval. Failure to initiate development within
this period shall automatically constitute a revocation of the conditional
use. For the purposes of this section, "operational" shall be defined as
the granting of an occupancy permit for the conditional use. Prior to
such a revocation, the applicant may request an extension of this
period. Said request shall require formal approval by the Village Board
and shall be based upon a showing of acceptable justification (as
determined by the Village Board).
N. Discontinuing an approved conditional use. Any and all conditional uses
which have been discontinued for a period exceeding 365 days shall
have their conditional use invalidated automatically. The burden of
proof shall be on the property owner to conclusively demonstrate that
the subject conditional use was operational during this period.
O. Change of ownership. All requirements of the approved conditional use
shall be continued regardless of ownership of the subject property;
however, submittal of a plan of operation shall be required prior to the
change in ownership. For bed-and-breakfast establishments, the
granting of a conditional use permit shall be valid while said property is
owned by the owner at time of conditional use approval.
P. Modification, alteration or expansion. Modification, alteration, or
expansion of any conditional use without approval by the Village Board
shall be considered in violation of this chapter and shall be grounds for
revocation of said conditional use approval per Subsection J above.
Q. Recording of conditional use requirements. Except for conditional use
approvals for temporary uses, a certified copy of the authorizing
resolution, containing identifiable description and any specific
requirements of approval, shall be recorded by the Village with the
Register of Deeds.
R. Notice to the WisDNR. The Plan Commission shall transmit a copy of
each application for a conditional use for conservancy regulations in the
Floodplain or Shoreland-Wetland Overlay Zoning Districts to the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WisDNR) for review and
§ 510-157 EAST TROY CODE § 510-157
1:994
§ 510-158. Temporary use permit procedures.
comment at least 10 days prior to any public hearings. Final action
on the application shall not be taken for 30 days or until the WisDNR
has made its recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all
decisions relating to conditional uses for shoreland-wetland
conservancy regulations or to floodland regulations shall be
transmitted to the WisDNR within 10 days of the date of such decision.
S. Formerly approved conditional uses. A use now regulated as a
conditional use which was approved as a legal land use, either
permitted by right or as a conditional use, prior to the effective date of
this chapter shall be considered as a legal, conforming land use so long
as the previously approved conditions of use and site plan are followed.
Any modification of the previously approved conditions of use or site
plan shall require application and Village consideration under this
section.
T. Fees. One or more fees are required for this procedure. Refer to
§ 510-149.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations that
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or
denial, of proposed temporary use permits.
B. Applicability. Temporary uses are those uses that have the potential to
create undesirable impacts on nearby properties if allowed to develop
simply under the general requirements of this chapter. Temporary uses
also have the potential to create undesirable impacts on nearby
properties that potentially cannot be determined except on a case-bycase
basis. In order to prevent this from occurring, all temporary uses
are required to meet certain procedural requirements applicable only
to temporary uses, in addition to the general requirements of this
chapter and the requirements of the zoning district in which the subject
property is located.
C. Review and approval. All temporary use permit requests shall be
subject to the review of and issued by the Zoning Administrator.
D. Application requirements. Applications for proposed temporary uses
shall contain all of the following:
(1) A map of the generalized location of the subject property in relation
to the Village as a whole.
(2) A map of the subject property (at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 800 feet) showing all lands for which the temporary use is
proposed and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of
the subject property. Said map shall clearly indicate the current
zoning of the subject property and its environs and the
jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. All lot dimensions of
§ 510-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-158
1:995
§ 510-159. Sign permit procedures.
Refer to § 510-141 for applicable requirements for sign permits.
§ 510-160. Site plan review and approval procedures.
the subject property, a graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be
provided.
(3) A written description of the proposed temporary use describing the
type of activities, buildings, and structures proposed for the subject
property and their general locations.
(4) Demonstration that the proposed temporary use meets all
temporary use requirements of this chapter (see Article VI).
(5) The Zoning Administrator may also require a site plan of the
subject property. Said site plan shall conform to any and all the
requirements of § 510-160.
E. Violation. Any temporary use found not to be in compliance with the
terms of this chapter shall be considered in violation of this chapter and
shall be subject to all applicable procedures and penalties.
F. Fee. A fee may be required for this procedure. Refer to § 510-149.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to specify the requirements and
procedures for the review and approval of site plan applications. The
provisions of this section are designed to ensure that proposed land
uses and development activity comply with the requirements of this
chapter. Specifically, this section requires all development activity (i.e.,
building permits, zoning permits, and occupancy permits) to first obtain
the approval of site, building, and operational plans by the Plan
Commission before the building, occupancy, and zoning permits can be
issued, except that development activity associated with an approved
final plat of subdivision or certified survey map, and development
activity associated with an approved final development plan of a
planned development, is exempt from this requirement.373
B. Applicability. All land uses listed in Article VI are subject to site plan
review and approval except for the following:
(1) Single-family and two-family residential uses on individual lots in
any zoning district.
(2) Agricultural land uses which are permitted by right in any
agricultural zoning district.
(3) Uses within a final development plan in a planned development in
accordance with the procedures of Article XII, provided that the
373. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-158 EAST TROY CODE § 510-160
1:996
final development plan provides a similar level of detail and range
of plans as a typical site plan submittal required under this chapter.
C. Review and approval. All site plans shall be subject to the review of the
Zoning Administrator. The Plan Commission shall review and act on the
site plan in accordance with the procedures in this section.
D. Initiation of request for site plan approval. Proceedings for approval of
a site plan shall be initiated by the owner(s) of the subject property or
his legally authorized representative(s). The applicant shall meet with
the Zoning Administrator and other applicable Village staff for a
preapplication meeting to discuss preliminary concepts and plans for
the development. Guidance will be provided to the applicant on
technical requirements and procedures, and a timetable for project
review may be discussed.
E. Application for site plan review. A site plan application may be
considered complete if it contains all of the following, unless specific
application requirements are waived in writing by the Village Clerk,
Village Engineer, Village Planner, or the Zoning Administrator:
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
(1) Written description of the intended use describing in reasonable
detail the:
(a) Existing zoning district(s) and proposed zoning district(s), if
different.
(b) Current land uses present on the subject property.
(c) Future land use designation(s) as depicted on the Future Land
Use Map in the Comprehensive Plan.
(d) Proposed land uses for the subject property (per Article VI).
(e) Projected number of residents, employees, and daily
customers.
(f) Proposed amount of dwelling units, floor area, impervious
surface area, and landscape surface area and resulting site
density, floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio, and
landscape surface ratio.374
(g) Operational considerations relating to hours of operation,
projected normal and peak water usage, sanitary sewer or
septic loadings, and traffic generation.
(h) Operational considerations relating to potential nuisance
creation pertaining to noncompliance with the performance
standards addressed in Article XIII, including: street access,
374. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-160
1:997
traffic visibility, parking, loading, exterior storage, exterior
lighting, vibration, noise, air pollution, odor, electromagnetic
radiation, glare and heat, fire and explosion, toxic or noxious
materials, waste materials, drainage, and hazardous materials.
(i) Exterior building and fencing materials (§§ 510-90 and
510-97).
(j) Possible future expansion and related implications for
Subsection E(1)(a) through (i) above.
(k) Any other information pertinent to adequate understanding by
the Plan Commission of the intended use and its relation to
nearby properties.
(2) Natural Resources Site Evaluation Worksheet (§ 510-51).
(3) A small location map showing the subject property and illustrating
its relationship to the nearest street intersection.
(4) A property site plan map which includes:
(a) Title block which indicates the name, address, and phone/fax
number(s) of the current property owner and/or agent(s) (i.e.,
developer, architect, engineer, or planner) for the project.
(b) The date of the original plan and the latest date of revision to
the plan.
(c) A North arrow and a graphic scale (at a minimum scale of one
inch equals 100 feet).
(d) A legal description of the subject property.
(e) All property lines and existing and proposed right-of-way lines
with bearings and dimensions clearly labeled.
(f) All existing and proposed easement lines and dimensions with
a key provided and explained on the margins of the plan as to
ownership and purpose.
(g) All required building setback lines.
(h) All existing and proposed buildings, structures, and paved
areas, including building entrances, walks, drives, decks,
patios, fences, utility poles, drainage facilities, and walls.
(i) The location and dimension (cross section and entry throat) of
all access points onto public streets.
(j) The location and dimension of all on-site parking (and off-site
parking provisions if they are to be employed), including a
summary of the number of parking stalls provided versus
required by this chapter.
§ 510-160 EAST TROY CODE § 510-160
1:998
(k) The location and dimension of all loading and service areas on
the subject property and labels indicating the dimension of
such areas.
(l) The location of all outdoor storage areas and the design of all
screening devices.
(m) The location, type, height, size, and lighting of all signage on
the subject property.
(n) The location, height, design/type, illumination power and
orientation of all exterior lighting on the subject property,
including the clear demonstration of compliance with § 510-95.
(o) The location and type of any permanently protected green
space areas.
(p) The location of existing and proposed drainage facilities.
(q) In the legend, the following data for the subject property: lot
area, floor area, floor area ratio, impervious surface area,
impervious surface ratio, and building height.
(5) A detailed landscaping plan of the subject property, at the same
scale as the main plan, showing the location of all required
bufferyard and landscaping areas and existing and proposed
landscape point fencing and berm options for meeting said
requirements. The landscaping plan shall demonstrate complete
compliance with the requirements of Article XIV. (Note: The
individual plant locations and species, fencing types and heights,
and berm heights must be provided.)
(6) A grading and erosion control plan, at the same scale as the main
plan, showing existing and proposed grades, including retention
walls and related devices, and erosion control measures per the
approval of the Village Engineer.
(7) Elevation drawings of proposed buildings or proposed remodeling
of existing buildings showing finished exterior treatment shall also
be submitted, with adequate labels provided to clearly depict
exterior materials, texture, color, and overall appearance.
Perspective renderings of the proposed project and/or photos of
similar structures may be submitted, but not in lieu of adequate
drawings showing the actual intended appearance of the buildings.
(Refer to § 510-90.)
(8) A certified survey may be required by the Zoning Administrator in
instances where he determines compliance with setback
requirements may be difficult. The survey shall be prepared by a
professional land surveyor and shall depict property lines and
proposed buildings, structures, and paved areas.375
§ 510-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-160
1:999
(9) A detailed photometric plan that shows the impact of all exterior
light fixtures based on the proposed fixtures' pole heights and light
bulb needs, depicting resulting lighting levels across the entire
property to the property lines rounding to the nearest 0.10
footcandle, and depicting an illumination limit of 0.50 footcandle.
The 0.50 footcandle line cannot extend beyond the property line.
The plan must be in compliance with lighting performance
standards in § 510-95.
(10) A development impact study is required for all forms of
development that require site plan approval. This requirement
shall apply for any development requiring a site plan, including
instances where no land division is proposed.376
(11) A detailed site analysis shall be required for any lot or parcel
containing a protected natural resource as determined by Village
staff (see Subsection G below). These protected natural areas
include floodplains, shoreland-wetlands, lakeshores, woodlands,
and steep slopes.
(12) Any additional information as requested by the Plan Commission or
Village Board.
F. Application certification. The Zoning Administer shall review the
application within 10 working days of receipt of the complete
application. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application
is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, he
shall return a copy of the application to the applicant and indicate
incomplete or missing requirements.377
G. Detailed site analysis. The detailed site analysis required by this article
is designed to provide the clear identification of permanently protected
green space areas on a site which is proposed for development. The
detailed survey work required to identify these areas accurately on a
map is not required prior to the initiation of development concept plans
for an area. A detailed site analysis shall be performed in conjunction
with required land division documents or development site plans for
any and all properties containing permanently protected natural
resource areas.
(1) The detailed site analysis shall be shown on a map with a minimum
scale of one inch equals 200 feet which depicts the subject property
and the location of all protected natural resource areas, as defined
by the provisions of this article. The detailed site analysis shall
meet the following requirements:
375. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
376. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
377. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-160 EAST TROY CODE § 510-160
1:1000
(a) Topographic information is not required for any property which
does not contain steep slopes. For such properties, topographic
information with a minimum contour interval of two feet is
required.
(b) All natural resource areas which require protection under the
provisions of this chapter shall be accurately outlined and
clearly labeled. Particular care as to clarity shall be taken in
areas where different resource types overlap with one another.
(c) All site disruption (including selective cutting) proposed to
occur within permanently protected natural resource areas
shall be limited to development pads. Development pads shall
be depicted on the detailed site analysis map, site plans
required for development permits, and the recorded plat of
subdivision or certified survey map.
(d) Beyond visible damage to natural resources, vegetation, soil,
and drainage patterns, site disruption activities shall not
compact soil covering tree roots or otherwise damage trees
beyond the area from which trees are to be removed. All trees
with calipers exceeding three inches, whose canopies are
located adjacent to disturbed areas, which are removed within
a period of five years following site disruption shall be replaced
by the owner with a three-inch caliper tree of the same type
(canopy or understory).378
(e) All mitigation areas related to the provisions of this chapter
shall be depicted on the detailed site map with notations
provided which describe the mitigation techniques employed.
(2) The detailed site analysis map shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for initial review prior to, or concurrently with, the
submission of the preliminary plat of subdivision or the certified
survey map, or if the proposed development does not involve a land
division, then submittal is required as an attachment to a required
site plan. A concept plan of the proposed development may be
submitted prior to the submission of the detailed site analysis map;
however, in no way does the acceptance and/or general approval of
a concept plan indicate the approval of natural resource feature
locations. A detailed site analysis map prepared for the subject
property which has been previously approved by Village staff may
be submitted for any subsequent development activity on the site.
However, modifications to such a previously approved map will be
required if the analysis is no longer accurate for the subject
property.
(3) Village staff shall review the submitted detailed site analysis map
for general compliance with the data sources listed under
378. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-160
1:1001
Subsection G(3)(a) through (h) below. The Zoning Administrator
may provide the petitioner with a written evaluation of the
submitted detailed site analysis map which shall indicate the
acceptance by Village staff or the need for further analysis work,
discussion with the petitioner and/or staff-recognized experts, or a
joint site visit.
(a) Official Zoning Map.
(b) Applicable 1982 United States Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5
minute topographic maps for the Village of East Troy and its
environs.
(c) Air photos of the subject property.
(d) United States Geological Survey (USGS) Quads and other
sources of topographic information.
(e) Applicable FEMA and related floodplain maps.
(f) Applicable federal and state wetland inventory maps.
(g) The Village of East Troy Comprehensive Plan.
(h) Site visits.
(4) If necessary, as determined by Village staff, revised detailed site
analysis maps shall be prepared and submitted for review by
Village staff until a version is deemed acceptable. Staff review of
the detailed site analysis may be appealed as a matter of
interpretation (see § 510-152).
(5) Upon notification of acceptance by Village staff (or, in case of
appeal, by determination of the Zoning Board of Appeals), the
petitioner may proceed with the submittal of necessary
development documents.
(6) Information contained on the detailed site analysis map relating to
the boundaries of permanently protected green space areas
(including natural resource protection areas, other permanently
protected green space areas, and required mitigation areas) shall
be clearly depicted on any and all site plans required as a
precondition for application for any development permit (such as a
building permit) and on any proposed plat of subdivision or
certified survey map.
H. Site plan review by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission, in its
consideration of a site plan, shall take into account the basic intent of
this chapter to ensure attractive, efficient, and appropriate
development of land in the community and to ensure that every
reasonable step has been taken to avoid depreciating effects on
surrounding property and the natural environment. The Plan
Commission may require such additional measures and/or
§ 510-160 EAST TROY CODE § 510-160
1:1002
modifications as it deems necessary to accomplish this objective and
may withhold approval of the site plan until revisions depicting such
additional measures and/or modifications are submitted to the
satisfaction of the Plan Commission. Amended plans and conditions
applicable to the proposed use shall be made a part of the official
record, and development activity on the subject property may not
proceed until the revised application has been approved by the Plan
Commission. In its review of the site plan application, the Plan
Commission may make findings on each of the following criteria to
determine whether the submitted site plan shall be approved, approved
with modification, or denied:
(1) All standards of this chapter and other applicable Village, state,
and federal regulations are met.
(2) The public health and safety are not endangered.
(3) Adequate public facilities and utilities are provided.
(4) Adequate control of stormwater and erosion is provided and the
disruption of existing topography, drainage patterns, and
vegetative cover is minimized insofar as is practical.379
(5) Appropriate traffic control and parking are provided.
(6) Appropriate landscaping and open space areas are provided.
(7) The appearance of structures maintains a consistency of design,
materials, colors, and arrangement with nearby properties of
similar use which complies with the general architectural
guidelines provided in Subsection H(7)(a) through (e) below:
(a) Exterior construction materials shall be consistent with
§ 510-90.
(b) Exterior building design or appearance shall not be of such
unorthodox or abnormal character in relation to its
surroundings as to be unsightly or offensive to generally
accepted taste and community standards.
(c) Exterior building design or appearance shall not be so identical
with nearby buildings so as to create excessive monotony or
drabness. A minimum of five basic home styles shall be
provided in each residential subdivision.
(d) Exterior building design or appearance shall not be
constructed or faced with an exterior material which is
aesthetically incompatible with other nearby buildings or
which presents an unattractive appearance to the public and to
surrounding properties.
379. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-160
1:1003
§ 510-161. Variance review and approval procedures.
(e) Exterior building, sign, and lighting design or appearance shall
not be sited on the property in a manner which would
unnecessarily destroy or substantially damage the natural
beauty of the area.
I. Initiation of land use or development activity. Except with the written
permission of the Zoning Administrator, absolutely no land use or
development activity, including site clearing, grubbing, or grading,
shall occur on the subject property prior to the approval of the required
site plan. Any such activity prior to such approval shall be a violation of
this chapter and shall be subject to all applicable enforcement
mechanisms and penalties.
J. Modification of an approved site plan. Any and all variation between
development and/or land use activity on the subject property and the
approved site plan is a violation of this chapter. An approved site plan
shall be revised and approved via the procedures of this section so as to
clearly and completely depict any and all proposed modifications to the
previously approved site plan, prior to the initiation of said
modifications.
K. Sunset clause. If all buildings on an approved site plan are not fully
developed within two years of final Plan Commission approval, then the
approval shall expire, and no additional site plan development shall be
permitted on undeveloped portions of the subject property. The Plan
Commission may extend this period, as requested by the applicant,
through the site review process.380
L. Fee. A fee may be required for this procedure. Refer to § 510-149.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
enable the Village to hear and decide requests for permitted variation
from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where, owing to special factors, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice
done, as provided for by § 62.23(7)(e)7, Wis. Stats.
B. Applicability. In special circumstances where the provisions of this
chapter deprive a particular property, because of special circumstances
applicable to the property, of privileges commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the vicinity or the same zoning district, a variance may be
requested.
C. Review and approval. All variance requests shall be subject to the
review of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
380. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-160 EAST TROY CODE § 510-161
1:1004
review and act on all variance requests in accordance with the
procedures in this section.
D. Initiation of request for approval of a variance. Proceedings for
approval of a requested variance shall be initiated by an application of
the owner(s) or his authorized agent of the subject property.
E. Application requirements. Variance applications shall contain the
following:
(1) A map of the generalized location of the subject property in relation
to the Village as a whole.
(2) A map of the subject property (at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 800 feet) showing all lands for which the variance is
proposed and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of
the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the
owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the current
records of the Register of Deeds. Said map shall clearly indicate the
current zoning of the subject property and its environs and the
jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. All lot dimensions of
the subject property, a graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be
provided.
(3) A written description of the proposed variance describing the type
of specific requirements of the variance proposed for the subject
property.
(4) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development.
Said site plan shall conform to any and all the requirements of
§ 510-160.
(5) Written justification for the requested variance consisting of the
reasons why the applicant believes the proposed variance is
appropriate.
F. Application certification. All applications for requested variances shall
be certified as complete by the Zoning Administrator a minimum of two
weeks prior to the initiation of this procedure. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the application is not complete or does
not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, he shall return a copy of the
application to the applicant and indicate incomplete or missing
requirements.381
G. Review by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall
review and evaluate the application and prepare a written report to be
forwarded to the Zoning Board of Appeals for review and action. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter or the Comprehensive Plan, the
381. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-161
1:1005
Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
Through the written report, the Zoning Administrator shall evaluate to
following:
(1) Whether exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or special
factors are present that apply only to the subject property. The
report shall clearly indicate how the subject property contains
factors which are not present on other properties in the same
zoning district. Specifically:
(a) The hardship or difficulty shall be peculiar to the subject
property and different from that of other properties and not
one which affects all properties similarly. Such a hardship or
difficulty shall have arisen because of the unusual shape of the
original acreage parcel; unusual topography or elevation; or
because the property was created before the passage of the
current, applicable zoning regulations, and is not economically
suitable for a permitted use or will not accommodate a
structure of reasonable design for a permitted use if all area,
yard, green space, and setback requirements are observed.
(b) Loss of profit or pecuniary hardship shall not, in and of itself,
be grounds for a variance.
(c) Self-imposed hardship shall not be grounds for a variance.
Reductions resulting from the sale of portions of a property
reducing the remainder of said property below buildable size
or cutting off existing access to a public right-of-way or deed
restrictions imposed by the owner's predecessor in title are
considered to be such self-imposed hardships.
(d) Violations by, or variances granted to, neighboring properties
shall not justify a variance.
(e) The alleged hardship shall not be one that would have existed
in the absence of a zoning ordinance; for example, if a lot were
unbuildable because of topography in the absence of any or all
setback requirements.
(2) In what manner the factors identified above prohibit the
development of the subject property in a manner similar to that of
other properties under the same zoning district. The report shall
clearly indicate how the requested variance is essential to make the
subject property developable so that property rights enjoyed by the
owners of similar properties can be enjoyed by the owners of the
subject property.
(3) Whether the granting of the proposed variance would be of
substantial detriment to adjacent properties. The report shall
clearly indicate how the proposed variance will have no substantial
impact on adjacent properties.
§ 510-161 EAST TROY CODE § 510-161
1:1006
(4) Whether the granting of the proposed variance as depicted on the
required site plan would result in a substantial or undue adverse
impact on the character of the neighborhood, environmental
factors, traffic factors, parking, public improvements, public
property or rights-of-way, or other matters affecting the public
health, safety, or general welfare, either as they now exist or as
they may in the future be developed as a result of the
implementation of the intent, provisions, and policies of this
chapter, the Comprehensive Plan, or any other plan, program, map,
or ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official
notice by the Village or other governmental agency having
jurisdiction to guide growth and development. The report shall
clearly indicate how the proposed variance will have no substantial
impact on such long-range planning matters.
(5) Whether the factors which present the reason for the proposed
variance have been created by the act of the applicant or previous
property owner or his agent (for example: previous development
decisions such as building placement, floor plan or orientation, lot
pattern, or grading) after the effective date of this chapter. The
report shall clearly indicate that such factors existed prior to the
effective date of this chapter and were not created by action of the
applicant, a previous property owner, or his agent.
(6) Whether the proposed variance involves the regulations of Article
VI. The report shall clearly indicate that the requested variance
does not involve the provisions of this article.
H. Review, public hearing and determination by Zoning Board of
Appeals.382
(1) Within 30 days after filing of the complete application, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing.
(2) Notice of the requested variance and the public hearing shall
conform to the requirements of § 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats. Said
notice shall contain a description of the subject property and the
proposed variance. At least 10 days before said public hearing, the
Village shall mail a notice of the proposed variance to the applicant;
to the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000
feet of any portion of the subject property; to all property owners
within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property; and, if the
proposed variance would make any change within three miles of
the boundaries of an airport, to the operator of said airport. Failure
to mail said notice, provided that it is unintentional, shall not
invalidate proceedings under this section.
(3) Within 30 days after the holding of the public hearing, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall make its findings per Subsection G above
382. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-161
1:1007
§ 510-162. Occupancy permits.
and its determination regarding the application as a whole. The
Zoning Board of Appeals may request further information and/
or additional reports from the Zoning Administrator and/or the
applicant. The Zoning Board of Appeals may take final action on
said request for approval of the requested variance at the time
of its initial meeting or said proceedings may be continued from
time to time for further consideration. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall make a written report of its findings and determinations
following its determination.
I. Effect of denial. No application for a variance which has been denied
(either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months
from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence
or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
J. Limited effect of a variance. Where the Zoning Board of Appeals has
granted a variance, such approval shall neither change the use
classification of the building or premises nor give it any status as a
nonconforming use other than that which it has as a result of the
variance. Granting of a variance shall be considered as unique to the
variance granted and shall not be construed as precedent for any other
proposed variance.
K. Stay of proceedings. An application for a variance shall stay all legal
proceedings furthering enforcement of any provisions of this chapter
from which the applicant is requesting a variance, unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the request
for the variance has been filed that, by reason of the facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning
Administrator, and on due cause shown. State law reference:
§ 62.23(7)(e)5, Wis. Stats.
L. Notice to the WisDNR. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall transmit a
copy of each application for a variance in the Floodplain or Shoreland-
Wetland Overlay Zoning District and a copy of all floodplain or
shoreland-wetland appeals to the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (WisDNR) for review and comment at least 10 days prior to
any public hearing. Final action on the application shall not be taken for
30 days or until the WisDNR has made its recommendation, whichever
comes first. A copy of all decisions relating to variances to floodplain or
shoreland-wetland regulations, and a copy of all decisions on floodplain
or shoreland-wetland appeals, shall be transmitted to the WisDNR
within 10 days of the date of such decision.
M. Fee. A fee may be required for this procedure. Refer to § 510-149.
§ 510-161 EAST TROY CODE § 510-162
1:1008
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations governing
the review and approval of occupancy permits. This procedure is
required to ensure completed development complies with the approved
site plan (per the requirements of § 510-160) and the requirements of
this chapter.
B. Applicability. Occupancy permits shall be required for any of the
following:
(1) Occupancy and use of a building or structure hereafter erected or
structurally altered.
(2) New occupancy and use of an existing building when the new use is
of a different land use classification.
(3) Occupancy and use of vacant land.
(4) New use of vacant land when the new use is of a different land use
classification.
(5) Any change in the tenant or use of a nonconforming use. No change
of tenant or use shall take place until an occupancy permit has
been issued by the Building Inspector. [Amended 10-17-2011]
C. Review and approval. All occupancy permits shall be subject to the
review of and issued by the Building Inspector. [Amended 6-15-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-02]
D. Issuance of occupancy permit.
(1) Every application for a building permit shall also be deemed to be
an application for an occupancy permit for a new building or for an
existing building which is to be substantially altered or enlarged as
determined by the Building Inspector. Such occupancy permit shall
be issued within 10 working days after a written request for the
same has been made to the Building Inspector after the erection or
alteration of such building or part thereof has been completed in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
(2) Written application for an occupancy permit for the use of vacant
land or for a change in the use of land or of a building, or for a
change in a nonconforming use, as herein provided, shall be made
to the Building Inspector; if the proposed use is in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter, the occupancy permit shall be issued
within 10 working days after the application has been made.
(3) Every occupancy permit shall state that both the building and the
proposed use of a building or land substantially comply with all
provisions of this chapter. A record of all occupancy permits shall
be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector and copies
shall be furnished on request to any person having proprietary or
tenancy interest in the building or land affected.
§ 510-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-162
1:1009
§ 510-162.1. Registration of a legal nonconforming use. [Added
5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-04]
E. Termination of occupancy permit. It shall constitute a violation of this
chapter for any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association,
either owner or agent, to do any of the things mentioned in Subsection
B above without having first obtained an occupancy permit. Any permit
issued upon a false statement of any fact which is material to the
issuance thereof shall be void. Whenever the fact of such false
statement shall be established to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector, he shall forthwith revoke the occupancy permit by written
notice to be delivered by him to the holder of the void permit upon the
premises where the violation has occurred or, if such holder is not found
there, by mailing said notice of revocation by certified letter to his last
known address. Any person who shall proceed thereafter with such
work or use without having obtained a new occupancy permit shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter.
F. Fee. A fee may be required for this procedure. Refer to § 510-149.
A. Generally. There may be now or in the future certain uses of land that
are not in compliance with this chapter, but which were legally
established. These uses are referred to as "legal nonconforming uses,"
and consistent with the provisions of Article IX are allowed to continue
to operate. For this reason, it is necessary to document those uses that
are considered legal nonconforming. Registration of a use as a legal
nonconforming use establishes (1) when the use was first established;
(2) that the use at the time of establishment complied with the Village's
zoning regulations in effect at the time, if any; (3) that the use has
continued continuously, without cessation of more than 12 continuous
months; and (4) the nature of the use when the use became
nonconforming. The procedures and requirements in this section are
intended to comply with § 60.61(5)(d), Wis. Stats.
B. Initiation. Any of the following may submit an application to register a
specific land use as a legal nonconforming use:
(1) A person having a financial interest in the subject property or in the
use occurring on the property;
(2) The Zoning Administrator;
(3) The Plan Commission; or
(4) The Village Board, or any member thereof.
C. Review procedure. The general steps outlined below shall be used in
the review of an application for the registration of a legal
nonconforming use.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a
completed application and other required materials to the Zoning
§ 510-162 EAST TROY CODE § 510-162.1
1:1010
Administrator along with the application fee as may be established
by the Village Board.
(2) Determination of completeness. The Zoning Administrator will
review the submittal within 10 days of receiving the application and
other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for
further review. If it is not complete, the Zoning Administrator will
notify the applicant in writing of such deficiencies and that the
applicant has three months from the date of the notice to resubmit
the application or forfeit the application fee. The Zoning
Administrator may not take any further steps to process the
application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete
application must be retained as a public record.
(3) Review date. When the Zoning Administrator determines the
application is complete, he or she will schedule the review with the
Plan Commission consistent with its meeting calendar allowing for
proper notice.
(4) Public hearing notice. The Zoning Administrator will publish a class
II public hearing notice.
(5) Notice to property owner. If the applicant is not the property owner,
the Zoning Administrator will send a notice to the property owner
at least two weeks in advance of the public hearing.
(6) Plan Commission meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Plan
Commission will consider the application at a regular or special
meeting.
(7) Recommendation. The Plan Commission will make a
recommendation to the Village Board as set forth in this section.
The Plan Commission may render its decision at the same meeting
the matter was initially considered or at a subsequent meeting, but
no later than 40 days after the date of the initial meeting unless the
applicant agrees to an extension of a specified duration.
(8) Village Board meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Village
Board will consider the application at a regular or special meeting.
(9) Decision. After considering the Plan Commission's
recommendation, the Village Board will make a final decision as set
forth in this section.
(10) Preparation of decision notice. Based on the action of the Village
Board, the Zoning Administrator will prepare a written decision
notice consistent with this section.
(11) Applicant/property owner notification. Within a reasonable time
following the Village Board's decision, the Zoning Administrator
will provide a copy of the decision notice to the Village Board, Plan
§ 510-162.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-162.1
1:1011
Commission, and others as may be appropriate. The original will be
mailed to the property owner by regular mail.
(12) Public record copy. A copy of the decision notice will be retained as
a public record.
(13) Inclusion in registry. If the application is approved, the Zoning
Administrator will include the legal nonconforming use in the
registry authorized in § 510-64A.
D. Basis of decision.
(1) A legal nonconforming use must meet each of the following:
(a) The use was legally established;
(b) The use as it existed when it became nonconforming is not
allowed in the zoning district in which it is now located either
by right or as a conditional use; and
(c) The use has continued from the date when it became
nonconforming to the current date without an interruption of
more than 12 continuous months.
(2) If it is not possible to clearly establish the exact date when the use
was legally established, the Village Board may prescribe a date that
will be deemed to be the date of establishment if it determines it is
reasonable to do so based on the information it has reviewed.
Similarly, if it is not possible to clearly establish the precise nature
of the use on the date it became nonconforming, the Village Board
may establish the nature of the use in its decision notice, if it
determines it is reasonable to do so based on the information it has
reviewed.
E. Application form and content.
(1) The application submittal must include an application form as used
by the Village and a scaled drawing of the subject property and the
location of the land use on the property. At a minimum, the
application form should request the following information:
(a) The date, or approximate date, the use was first established or
believed to be first established;
(b) Evidence showing that the use at the time of establishment was
legally established;
(c) The date, or approximate date, when the use became
nonconforming;
(d) The section of the zoning regulation causing the use to be
nonconforming;
§ 510-162.1 EAST TROY CODE § 510-162.1
1:1012
(e) Evidence showing that the use has continued from the date, or
approximate date, of establishment to the current date without
an interruption of more than 12 continuous months; and
(f) The nature of the use and location on the subject property.
(2) Sources of such information may be derived from any of the
following:
(a) Written document (e.g., business license, meeting minutes,
reports, planning documents, or a permit or other
authorization) maintained by a local, state, or federal
governmental body;
(b) A newspaper article;
(c) A dated photograph;
(d) An aerial photograph;
(e) A sworn affidavit supplied by the applicant or any other person;
or
(f) Any other authoritative source deemed acceptable by the
Village Board.
F. Content of decision notice for approval. If the application for
registering a legal nonconforming use is approved, the decision notice
should include the following:
(1) The date the use was first established;
(2) The date the use became nonconforming;
(3) A description of the use, including the scope of the use, its location,
and any operating characteristics, when the use became
nonconforming;
(4) If the Village Board determines the use has been illegally expanded
over time (i.e., location, area, extent, mode of operation, or other
parameter), a statement describing those aspects of the existing
use that must be removed consistent with an established timeline;
(5) A statement that the applicant or other party may appeal the
decision to a court of competent jurisdiction;
(6) Other information the Village Board or Zoning Administrator
deems appropriate;
(7) The signature of the Zoning Administrator on behalf of the Village
Board; and
(8) The date of the decision.
§ 510-162.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-162.1
1:1013
§ 510-162.2. Registry of legal nonconforming lots, structures,
signs, and uses. [Added 5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-04]
G. Content of decision notice for denial. If the application for registering a
nonconforming use is denied, the decision notice should include the
following:
(1) A statement that the use cannot be classified as a legal
nonconforming use based on the information that was reviewed;
(2) A description of the use;
(3) A reason for the decision;
(4) A statement indicating that the denial does not limit the applicant's
ability to resubmit a revised application for consideration;
(5) A statement that the applicant may appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction;
(6) Other information the Village Board or Zoning Administrator
deems appropriate;
(7) The signature of the Zoning Administrator on behalf of the Village
Board; and
(8) The date of the decision notice.
H. Effect of decision.
(1) Generally. If the Village Board determines that a land use meets the
criteria for a legal nonconforming use, such decision constitutes
documentary evidence establishing the legitimacy of the use as a
legal nonconforming use.
(2) Expansion not authorized. If a land use was legally established, but
has been illegally expanded over time (i.e., area, extent, mode of
operation, or other parameter) after the date the use became
nonconforming, such expansion must be removed in keeping with a
timeline established by the Village Board.
I. Revocation or modification of a prior approval. The Village Board may
revoke or modify a final decision made pursuant to this section if it is
determined that (i) information the Board relied upon in making its
decision was false, misleading, or inaccurate; (ii) new or additional
information shows the use does not qualify as a legal nonconforming
use; or (iii) the section of the zoning code creating the nonconforming
use no longer exists.
J. Appeal. An aggrieved person may file an appeal with a court of
competent jurisdiction within 30 days of the date of the Village's final
decision notice.
§ 510-162.1 EAST TROY CODE § 510-162.2
1:1014
A. Content of registry. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to develop
and maintain a registry of:
(1) Lots known by him or her to be considered legal nonconforming;
(2) Structures known by him or her to be considered legal
nonconforming;
(3) Signs known by him or her to be considered legal nonconforming;
and
(4) Land uses registered as a legal nonconforming use consistent with
the requirements in § 510-162A of this chapter.
B. Form of registry. At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, the
registry may consist of either a written list or digital records.
C. Disclaimer. Given the nature of the registry, the Village does not
warrant that such information is complete and/or accurate in all
respects.
§ 510-162.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-162.2
1:1015

ARTICLE XVIII
Floodplain Overlay District
[Added 8-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
§ 510-163. Statutory authorization.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in §§ 61.35 and 62.23,
Wis. Stats., and the requirements in § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 510-164. Finding of fact.
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this
municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general
welfare, and tax base.
§ 510-165. Statement of purpose.
This article is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
§ 510-166. Areas to be regulated.
This article regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood
or base flood as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other
maps approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. Base
flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH Zones on the FIRM. Other
regulatory zones are displayed as A and AO Zones. Regional flood elevations
(RFE) may be derived from other studies. If more than one map or revision
is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
A. Protect life, health and property;
B. Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood-control projects;
C. Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers;
D. Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
F. Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
G. Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers;
H. Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and
result in conflicts between property owners; and
I. Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the
floodplain.
§ 510-163 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-167
1:1017
§ 510-167. Official maps and revisions. [Amended 12-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO
or A1-30 on the maps based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) listed
below. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to
the boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in the FIS or on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and FEMA through the letter
of map change process (see § 510-191) before it is effective. No changes
to regional flood elevations on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until
approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. These maps
and revisions are on file in the office of the Village Clerk. If more than one
map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
§ 510-168. Establishment of floodplain zoning districts.
The regional floodplain areas are divided into three districts as follows:
§ 510-169. Locating floodplain boundaries.
A. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) panel numbers 55127C0091D,
55127C0092D, 55127C0093D, 55127C0094D, and 55127C0111D dated
October 2, 2009, with corresponding profiles that are based on the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS), 55127CV000B, dated September 3, 2014.
A. The floodway district (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those
portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the
regional floodwaters and is contained within AE Zones as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map.
B. The flood-fringe district (FF) is that portion between the regional flood
limits and the floodway and displayed as AE Zones on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
C. The general floodplain district (GFP) is those areas that may be covered
by floodwater during the regional flood and does not have a BFE or
floodway boundary determined, including A, AH and AO Zones on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map.
A. Generally. Discrepancies between boundaries on the Official Floodplain
Zoning Map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the
criteria in this section. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be
amended according to § 510-191. The Zoning Administrator can rely on
a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use
permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual
predevelopment field conditions and the basis upon which the district
boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments
required under this section. Disputes between the Zoning
Administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be
§ 510-167 EAST TROY CODE § 510-169
1:1018
§ 510-170. Removal of lands from floodplain.
Compliance with the provisions of this article shall not be grounds for
removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above
the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the
floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to § 510-191.
§ 510-171. Compliance required.
Any development or use within the areas regulated by this article shall be
in compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable local, state,
and federal regulations.
§ 510-172. Municipalities and state agencies regulated.
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties
are required to comply with this article and obtain all necessary permits.
State agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies.
The construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and repair of state
highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are
exempt when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
§ 510-173. Greater restrictions.
This article supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
regulations enacted under § 61.35, Wis. Stats., which relate to floodplains. A
more restrictive provision shall continue in full force and effect to the extent
of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
§ 510-174. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article are the
minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the Village and are
not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes. If a provision of this article, required by Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm.
Code, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards
in effect on the date of the adoption of this article or in effect on the date of
the most recent text amendment to this article.
settled according to § 510-187C(3) and the review criteria in this
section. Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood
elevations from a Flood Insurance Rate Map, FEMA must approve any
map amendment or revision pursuant to § 510-191.
B. Review criteria. If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile
elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base
flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies. Where flood
profiles do not exist for projects, the location of the boundary shall be
determined by the map scale.
§ 510-169 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-175
1:1019
§ 510-175. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The flood protection standards in this article are based on engineering
experience and research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may
be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply or
guarantee that nonfloodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free
from flooding and flood damages. This article does not create liability on
the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this
article.
§ 510-176. Annexed areas.
The Walworth County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of
annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality
for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an
ordinance which meets the requirements of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code,
and 44 CFR 59 to 72, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These
annexed lands are described on the municipality's Official Zoning Map.
County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the
purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the
Municipal Zoning Administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show
the regional flood elevation and the floodway location.
§ 510-177. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-1-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-07]
Any violation of the provisions of this article by any person shall be unlawful
and may be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of the Municipal Code,
but not more than $50 for each offense. Each day of continued violation
shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this article is a public
nuisance, and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be
abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof
pursuant to § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 510-178. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this article shall have
their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their
common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future, the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and is not
discretionary. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A facility, structure, building or use
which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure
or building.
AH ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
§ 510-175 EAST TROY CODE § 510-178
1:1020
ALTERATION — An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or
modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other systems within a
structure.
AO ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or
VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a onepercent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
A ZONES — Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map
which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be
numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be
reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given
area.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and
depicted on a FIRM.
BASEMENT — Any enclosed area of a building having its floor subgrade,
i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that
has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and
which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original
ordinary high-water mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the
floodway provisions of this article.
CAMPGROUND — Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent
overnight use by four or more camping units or which is advertised or
represented as a camping area.
CAMPING UNIT — Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in
area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping
trailer, motor home, bus, van, pickup truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if
required, and ready for highway use.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification that the construction and
the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a
structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this article.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks
to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
CRAWLWAY or CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area below the first usable
floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to
plumbing and electrical utilities.
§ 510-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-178
1:1021
DECK — An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides but has
a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings, structures
or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to
buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged
structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless
of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or
structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage,
deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation,
repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water
supply facilities.
DRY LAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the regional
flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land
outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood
elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in
the floodway.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The probability of a flood occurrence which is
determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood
event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified
number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year.
FLOOD-FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway
which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated
with standing water rather than flowing water.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map designating approximate flood
hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A Zones
and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map
forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood
Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of a community on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be
amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — A technical engineering examination,
evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides
maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides
both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide
floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and
unnumbered A Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps that accompany the
§ 510-178 EAST TROY CODE § 510-178
1:1022
Flood Insurance Study form the basis for both the regulatory and the
insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by:
FLOODPLAIN — Land which has been or may be covered by floodwater
during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the flood-fringe and
may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
FLOODPLAIN ISLAND — A natural geologic land formation within the
floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the
regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — Policy and procedures to ensure wise use
of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education,
and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of
land surface elevations along a stream or river.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and
contents of buildings subject to flooding for the purpose of reducing or
eliminating flood damage.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation of two feet of freeboard
above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood.
(Also see "freeboard.")
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters
has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood
discharge.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FREEBOARD — A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number
of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any
factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice
jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and
A. The overflow or rise of inland waters;
B. The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake
Superior; or
C.
The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
D.
§ 510-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-178
1:1023
floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas
due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE — Any structure or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
HEARING NOTICE — Publication or posting meeting the requirements
of Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at
least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning
ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each
week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing,
is required.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Damage that could result from
flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant
economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward rise in
the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison of
existing conditions and proposed conditions, which is directly attributable
to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of
mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and
contraction coefficients and discharge.
LAND USE — Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real
estate. (Also see "development.")
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE — Elevation of the lowest ground surface that
touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing in the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by
an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
D.
§ 510-178 EAST TROY CODE § 510-178
1:1024
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MAINTENANCE — The act or process of restoring to original soundness,
including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the
replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent
fixtures, systems or structures.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does
not include a mobile recreational vehicle.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO EXISTING —
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This
includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING — A
parcel of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed
before the effective date of this article. At a minimum, this would include
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by
a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is
required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land
but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model
homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicle."
MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE — A hydraulic engineering model that
corrects any errors that occur in the duplicate effective model, adds any
additional cross sections to the duplicate effective model, or incorporates
more detailed topographic information than that used in the current
effective model.
MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE — A copy of the hydraulic analysis used
in the effective FIS and referred to as the "effective model."
§ 510-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-178
1:1025
MODEL, EFFECTIVE — The hydraulic engineering model that was used to
produce the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT) — A modification of the duplicate
effective model or corrected effective model to reflect any man-made
modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the
effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which the
revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date
of the effective model, then this model would be identical to the corrected
effective model or duplicate effective model.
MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) — A modification of the existing or preproject
conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected effective
model to reflect revised or post-project conditions.
MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL — The Village of East Troy, Walworth
County, Wisconsin.383
NAVD or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations referenced
to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, "new
construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations
adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it
includes any structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — An existing lawful structure or
building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural
requirements of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies.
(For example, an existing residential structure in the flood-fringe district
is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood
protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing lawful use or accessory use of a
structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies (such as a residence
in the floodway).
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development which blocks the conveyance
of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future
development will cause an increase in regional flood height.
383. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-178 EAST TROY CODE § 510-178
1:1026
OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP — That map, adopted and made
part of this article, as described in § 510-167, which has been approved by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and FEMA.
OPEN SPACE USE — Those uses having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water are so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristic.
PERSON — An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality or state agency.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located
on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage
system approved by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional
Services, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a
holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located
on a different parcel than the structure.
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines, such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and
distribution and collection systems, such as water, sanitary sewer and storm
sewer.
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Base flood waters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain
and any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing
or proposed buildings.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with
a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if
depicted on the FIRM the regional flood elevation is equivalent to the base
flood elevation.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement
of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
§ 510-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-178
1:1027
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground,
streambed or lake bed, including but not limited to roofed and walled
buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
SUBDIVISION — Has the meaning given in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the equalized assessed value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure
has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial
improvement regardless of the work performed. The term does not,
however, include either any project for the improvement of a building
required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations
identified by the Building Inspector and that are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a historic structure,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.384
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — Where special conditions affecting a
particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict
conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or
density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes
of this article.
VARIANCE — An authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the
construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which
is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in this
article.385
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this article. A structure or other development without
required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing
certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATERSHED — The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a
384. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
385. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-178 EAST TROY CODE § 510-178
1:1028
reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of
the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
WELL — An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater, regardless of its
intended use.
§ 510-179. General standards applicable to all floodplain districts.
A. Generally.
(1) The community shall review all permit applications to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall be designed and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be
constructed with flood-resistant materials; and be constructed to
minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and mechanical
equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions
of flooding.
(2) Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above
standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home
parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for
any development that meets the "subdivision" definition of this
article and all other requirements in § 510-185B. Adequate
drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards,
and all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damages.
B. Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses.
(1) No floodplain development shall:
(a) Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development,
causing any increase in the regional flood height; or
(b) Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to
floodplain storage area lost.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the
proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in
the regional flood height, based on the officially adopted FIRM or
other adopted map, unless the provisions of § 510-191 are met.
C. Watercourse alterations.
(1) No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped
floodplain shall be issued until the Zoning Administrator has
§ 510-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-179
1:1029
notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources and FEMA regional offices and
required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal
permits. The standards of Subsection B must be met, and the floodcarrying
capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be
maintained.386
(2) As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the
date of the watercourse alteration or relocation and pursuant to
§ 510-191, the community shall apply for a letter of map revision
(LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and
approved by FEMA and the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources through the LOMC process.
D. Development requiring state permit. Development which requires a
permit from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under
Chs. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges,
culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary
permits are obtained and amendments are made according to
§ 510-191.
E. Public or private campgrounds. Public or private campgrounds shall
have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following
provisions:
(1) The campground is approved by the Wisconsin Department of
Health Services;
(2) A land use permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning
Administrator;
(3) The character of the river system and the campground elevation
are such that a seventy-two-hour warning of an impending flood
can be given to all campground occupants;
(4) There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground
that offers the minimum notice required under this Subsection E to
all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a
written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal
emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement
official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall
occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types
of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying atrisk
parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for
conducting the evacuation;
(5) This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at
which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated, by the
officials identified in Subsection E(4), to remain in compliance with
386. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-179 EAST TROY CODE § 510-179
1:1030
§ 510-180. Floodway district.
all applicable regulations, including those of the Wisconsin
Department of Health Services and all other applicable regulations;
(6) Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready
for highway use are allowed;
(7) The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground for
more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit
must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours;
(8) All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be
issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a
written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such
authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period
not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the
provisions of this Subsection E;
(9) The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by
the campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of
this Subsection E;
(10) All camping units that remain in place for more than 180
consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either
§ 510-180, 510-181 or 510-182 for the floodplain district in which
the structure is located;
(11) The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances
warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation
when a flood warning is issued; and
(12) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection,
electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and
wells, shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to
the flood protection elevation.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all floodway areas on the
Floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified pursuant to § 510-182D.
B. Permitted uses in the floodway district. The following open space uses
are allowed in the floodway district and the floodway areas of the
general floodplain district if they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance, they meet the standards in Subsections C and D, and all
permits or certificates have been issued according to § 510-185:
(1) Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture, and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading
areas, parking areas, and airport landing strips.
§ 510-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-180
1:1031
(3) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis
courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming
areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing
areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill
limitations of Subsection C(4).
(4) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses or classified as
historic structures that comply with Subsections C and D.
(5) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that complies with
Subsection C(4).
(6) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or
wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river
crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Chs.
30 and 31, Wis. Stats.
(7) Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with Subsection
C(3).
C. Standards for development in the floodway district.
(1) General.
(a) Any development in the floodway shall comply with § 510-179A
and have a low flood damage potential. Applicants shall
provide the following data to determine the effects of the
proposal according to Subsection B and § 510-185B(3):
[1] A cross-section elevation view of the proposal,
perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed
development will obstruct flow; or
[2] An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on
regional flood height.
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if
the project will cause any increase in the flood elevations
upstream or downstream, based on the data submitted as
required by this subsection.
(2) Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or
functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by
permit if the structures comply with the following criteria:
(a) Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood
damage potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage;
(b) Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls
having a total net area not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such
openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The
§ 510-180 EAST TROY CODE § 510-180
1:1032
openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters;
(c) Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement;
(d) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
(e) It must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase
in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
(3) Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and
bridges may be allowed by permit if:
(a) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood
protection elevation; and
(b) Construction meets the development standards of § 510-179B.
(4) Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may
be allowed by permit if:
(a) The requirements of § 510-179B are met;
(b) No material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is
issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
pursuant to Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and a permit pursuant to
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, has been issued, if
applicable, and all other requirements have been met;
(c) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
(d) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
D. Prohibited uses in the floodway district. All uses not listed as permitted
uses in Subsection B are prohibited, including the following uses:
(1) Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential,
or those not associated with permanent open space uses;
(2) Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or
injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or
other aquatic life;
(3) Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the
adjoining districts;
(4) Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that
are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with
recreational areas and campgrounds approved by the Department
§ 510-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-180
1:1033
§ 510-181. Flood-fringe district.
of Natural Resources that meet the applicable provisions of local
ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code;387
(5) Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water,
except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of
local ordinances and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
(6) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(7) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those
permitted under § NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code; and
(8) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service
existing or proposed development located outside the floodway
which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area
occupied.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all flood-fringe areas shown on the
Floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified pursuant to § 510-182D.
B. Permitted use in the flood-fringe district. Any structure, land use, or
development is allowed in the flood-fringe district if the standards in
Subsection C are met, the use is not prohibited by this article or any
other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in
§ 510-185 have been issued.
C. Standards for development in the flood-fringe district. Section
510-179B shall apply in addition to the following requirements
according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the floodfringe
must meet the requirements of § 510-183.
(1) Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home,
which is to be newly constructed or moved into the flood-fringe
shall meet or exceed the following standards. Any existing
structure in the flood-fringe must meet the requirements of
§ 510-183.
(a) The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation on fill unless the requirements of
Subsection C(1)(b) can be met. The fill shall be one foot or
more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15
feet beyond the limits of the structure.
(b) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional
flood elevation if it is dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the
regional flood elevation.
387. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-180 EAST TROY CODE § 510-181
1:1034
(c) Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a structure
to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in
Subsection C(1)(d).
(d) In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations
make compliance with Subsection C(1)(c) impractical, the
municipality may permit new development and substantial
improvements where roads are below the regional flood
elevation if:
[1] The municipality has written assurance from police, fire
and emergency services that rescue and relief will be
provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a
regional flood event; or
[2] The municipality has an emergency evacuation plan that
has been approved by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources.
(2) Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be
constructed on fill with the lowest floor at or above the regional
flood elevation.
(3) Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected,
altered or moved into the flood-fringe shall meet the requirements
of Subsection C(1). Subject to the requirements of Subsection C(5),
storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be
placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to
protect life and property.
(4) Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or
industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the
flood-fringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in
§ 510-189. Subject to the requirements of Subsection C(5), storage
yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at
lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect
life and property.
(5) Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal,
plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood
protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with § 510-189.
Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials
will not enter the water body during flooding.
(6) Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges
shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans and:
(a) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would
endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are
§ 510-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-181
1:1035
deemed essential, construction or repair of such facilities shall
only be permitted if they are designed to comply with
§ 510-189.
(b) Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at
lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces
to the regional flood elevation.
(7) Sewage systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system,
pursuant to § 510-189C, to the flood protection elevation and meet
the provisions of all local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(8) Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system, pursuant to § 510-189C,
to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of
Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(9) Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is
prohibited in flood-fringe areas.
(10) Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this article.
(11) Manufactured homes.
(a) Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to
minimize flood damage and prepare, secure approval and file
an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape
routes, with local emergency management authorities.
(b) In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes,
replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially
improved homes shall:
[1] Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection
elevation; and
[2] Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally
during a flood.
(c) Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new
manufactured home parks and all single units outside of
existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially
improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential
development standards for the flood-fringe in Subsection C(1).
(12) Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that
are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully
licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and
anchoring requirements in Subsection C(11)(b) and (c). A mobile
§ 510-181 EAST TROY CODE § 510-181
1:1036
§ 510-182. General floodplain district.
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
A. Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains
mapped as A, AO or AH Zones.
B. Permitted uses in the general floodplain district. Pursuant to
Subsection D, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is
located within the floodway or flood-fringe. Those uses permitted in the
floodway (§ 510-180B) and flood-fringe (§ 510-181B) districts are
allowed within the general floodplain district, according to the
standards of Subsection C, provided that all permits or certificates
required under § 510-185 have been issued.
C. Standards for development in the general floodplain district. Section
510-180 applies to floodway areas and § 510-181 applies to flood-fringe
areas. The rest of this article applies to either district.
(1) In AO/AH Zones the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the
conditions listed below whichever is higher:
(a) At or above the flood protection elevation;
(b) Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the
structure; or
(c) The depth as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(2) In AO/AH zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to
guide floodwaters around structures.
D. Determining floodway and flood-fringe limits in the general floodplain
district. Upon receiving an application for development within the
general floodplain district, the Zoning Administrator shall:
(1) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph
or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to
the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing
floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the
property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and
floodproofing measures, and the flood zone as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
(2) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height
and flood flows and regional flood elevation and to determine
floodway boundaries:
§ 510-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-182
1:1037
§ 510-183. Nonconforming uses.
(a) A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in § 510-185B(3).
(b) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on
the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and
sanitary facilities; soil types; and other pertinent information.
(c) Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage,
water supply and sanitary facilities.
A. Generally.
(1) Applicability. If these standards conform with § 62.23(7)(h), Wis.
Stats., they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any
nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or
premises which was lawful before the passage of this article or any
amendment thereto.
(2) The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this article may continue
subject to the following conditions:
(a) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or
structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this
article. The words "modification" and "addition" include, but
are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification,
structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such
existing use, structure or accessory structure or use.
Maintenance is not considered a modification; this includes
painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural
components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of
existing private sewage or water supply systems or
connections to public utilities. Any costs associated with the
repair of a damaged structure are not considered maintenance.
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square
feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal
structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof
of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order
to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure.
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure
is discontinued for 12 consecutive months it is no longer
permitted, and any future use of the property, and any
structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable
requirements of this article.
(c) The municipality shall keep a record which lists all
nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their
§ 510-182 EAST TROY CODE § 510-183
1:1038
present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications
or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage
of the structure's total current value those modifications
represent.
(d) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or
any structure with a nonconforming use which over the life of
the structure would equal or exceed 50% of its present
equalized assessed value shall be allowed unless the entire
structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure
with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must
be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance
with § 510-181C(1). The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a
nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming
use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50%
provisions of this subsection.
(e) No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would
equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value,
shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently
changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements of this article.
Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential
and commercial uses in compliance with § 510-181C(1).
(f) If on a per-event basis the total value of the work being done
under Subsection A(2)(d) and (e) equals or exceeds 50% of the
present equalized assessed value, the work shall not be
permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed
to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance
with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous
dry land access must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with § 510-181C(1).
(g) Except as provided in Subsection A(2)(h), if any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is
destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced,
reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet
the current requirements. A structure is considered
substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure
to its predamaged condition equals or exceeds 50% of the
structure's present equalized assessed value.
(h) For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or
destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction
of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order
to restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage
event, provided that the minimum federal code requirements
§ 510-183 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-183
1:1039
below are met and all required permits have been granted
prior to the start of construction.
[1] Residential structures.
[a] Shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill,
pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter
walls must meet the requirements of § 510-189B.
[b] Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy, and shall be constructed with
methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
[c] Shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or
elevated so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
[d] In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data
available from a federal, state or other source.
[e] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, meet the
standards in § 510-182C(1).
[f] In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from the structure.
[2] Nonresidential structures.
[a] Shall meet the requirements of Subsection A(2)(h)[1].
[b] Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the regional flood elevation or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall meet the standards in § 510-189A or B.
[c] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, meet the
standards in § 510-182C(1).
(3) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure, the alteration will comply with § 510-180C(1), floodresistant
materials are used, and construction practices and
floodproofing methods that comply with § 510-189 are used. Repair
or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the
§ 510-183 EAST TROY CODE § 510-183
1:1040
development standards of Subsection A(2)(h)[1] if it is determined
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
B. Floodway district.
(1) Modifications or additions.
(a) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any
nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use in the floodway district unless such
modification or addition:
[1] Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all
requirements;
[2] Meets the requirements of Subsection A; and
[3] Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or
regional flood height.
(b) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed,
pursuant to § 510-189, by means other than the use of fill, to
the flood protection elevation.
(c) If any part of the foundation below the flood protection
elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
[1] The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered
architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and
exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A
minimum of two openings must be provided with a
minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one
square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the
opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent
grade;
[2] The parts of the foundation located below the flood
protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant
materials;
[3] Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation;
and
[4] The use must be limited to parking, building access or
limited storage.
(2) No new on-site sewage disposal system or addition to an existing
on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been
ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public
§ 510-183 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-183
1:1041
health, shall be allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement,
repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal
system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements
of all municipal ordinances, § 510-189C and Ch. SPS 383, Wis.
Adm. Code.
(3) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain
potable water shall be allowed in the floodway district. Any
replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in the
floodway district shall meet the applicable requirements of all
municipal ordinances, § 510-189C and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812,
Wis. Adm. Code.
C. Flood-fringe district.
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such
modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by
the municipality and meets the requirements of § 510-181C, except
where Subsection C(2) is applicable.
(2) Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection C(1) would
result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will
not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood
damage potential, the Zoning Board of Appeals, using the
procedures established in § 510-187, may grant a variance from
those provisions of Subsection C(1) for modifications or additions
using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are
protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation
may be permitted if:
(a) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for
residential or commercial structures;
(b) Human lives are not endangered;
(c) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed;
(d) Flood depths shall not exceed two feet;
(e) Flood velocities shall not exceed two feet per second; and
(f) The structure shall not be used for storage of materials as
described in § 510-181C(5).
(3) All new private sewage disposal systems or addition to,
replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal
system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local
ordinances, § 510-189C and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
(4) All new wells or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of
a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this article,
§ 510-189C and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 510-183 EAST TROY CODE § 510-184
1:1042
§ 510-184. General administration.
Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/
appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance
adopted under § 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7), Wis. Stats., these officials shall
also administer this article.
§ 510-185. Zoning Administrator.
A. Duties and powers. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to
administer this article and shall have the following duties and powers:
(1) Advise applicants of the provisions of this article, assist in
preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the
regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on
all permit applications.
(2) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with this
article and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate.
(3) Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine
if substantial damage to the structures has occurred.
(4) Keep records of all official actions such as:
(a) All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
(b) Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations;
(c) Floodproofing certificates.
(d) Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances,
and nonconforming uses and structures, including changes,
appeals, variances and amendments.
(e) All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures.
(f) List of nonconforming structures and uses.
(5) Submit copies of the following items to the regional office of the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources:
(a) Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or
text amendments.
(b) Copies of case-by-case analyses and other required
information, including an annual summary of floodplain zoning
actions taken.
(c) Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all
related correspondence concerning the assessments.
§ 510-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-185
1:1043
(6) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this article to
the Plan Commission and Attorney for prosecution. Copies of the
reports shall also be sent to the regional office of the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.388
(7) Submit copies of amendments to the FEMA regional office.
B. Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any new
development, repair, modification or addition to an existing structure or
change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water
facilities, may be initiated. Application to the Zoning Administrator
shall include:
(1) General information.
(a) Name and address of the applicant, property owner and
contractor.
(b) Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification.
(2) Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be
submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
(a) Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
(b) Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
(c) Location of any structures with distances measured from the
lot lines and street center lines;
(d) Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems;
(e) Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
(f) Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from
the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps;
(g) The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any
fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study, either
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD);
(h) Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in
NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to
determine whether or not the requirements in § 510-180 or
§ 510-181 are met; and
388. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-185 EAST TROY CODE § 510-185
1:1044
(i) Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or
discharge according to § 510-179B. This may include any of the
information noted in § 510-180C(1).
(3) Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All
hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the
state. The study contractor shall be responsible for the technical
adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and approved
by the Department of Natural Resources.389
(a) Zone A floodplains.
[1] Hydrology.
[a] The appropriate method shall be based on the
standards in § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Discharge.
[2] Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Elevation, and the following:
[a] Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic
model shall be based on detailed study information for
downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to
determine adequate starting WSEL for the study.
[b] Channel sections must be surveyed.
[c] Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall
be used for the development of cross-section overbank
and floodplain mapping.
[d] A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross
sections is allowed in developed areas with additional
intermediate cross sections required at transitions in
channel bottom slope, including a survey of the
channel at each location.
[e] The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used.
[f] A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of
road is required at each structure.
[g] Additional cross sections are required at the
downstream and upstream limits of the proposed
389. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-185 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-185
1:1045
development and any necessary intermediate
locations based on the length of the reach if greater
than 500 feet.
[h] Standard accepted engineering practices shall be
used when assigning parameters for the base model,
such as flow, Manning's N values, expansion and
contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The
base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data
such as high-water marks to determine the
reasonableness of the model results. If no historical
data is available, adequate justification shall be
provided for any parameters outside standard
accepted engineering practices.
[i] The model must extend past the upstream limit of the
difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles
in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The
height difference between the proposed flood profile
and the existing study profiles shall be no more than
0.00 foot.
[3] Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be
provided, showing all cross section locations, floodway/
floodplain limits based on best available topographic data,
geographic limits of the proposed development and
whether the proposed development is located in the
floodway.
[a] If the proposed development is located outside of the
floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on
the regional flood elevation.
[b] If any part of the proposed development is in the
floodway, it must be added to the base model to show
the difference between existing and proposed
conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients
remain the same as in the existing model, unless
adequate justification based on standard accepted
engineering practices is provided.
(b) Zone AE floodplains.
[1] Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the
existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be
based on § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code, Hydrologic
Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
[2] Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Elevation, and the following:
§ 510-185 EAST TROY CODE § 510-185
1:1046
[a] Duplicate effective model. The effective model shall be
reproduced to ensure correct transference of the
model data and to allow integration of the revised data
to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and
downstream of the revised reach. If data from the
effective model is available, models shall be generated
that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations
shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS report to
within 0.1 foot.
[b] Corrected effective model. The corrected effective
model shall not include any man-made physical
changes since the effective model date but shall
import the model into the most current version of
HEC-RAS for Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources review.
[c] Existing (pre-project conditions) model. The existing
model shall be required to support conclusions about
the actual impacts of the project associated with the
revised (post-project) model or to establish more upto-
date models on which to base the revised (postproject)
model.
[d] Revised (post-project conditions) model. The revised
(post-project conditions) model shall incorporate the
existing model and any proposed changes to the
topography caused by the proposed development. This
model shall reflect proposed conditions.
[e] All changes to the duplicate effective model and
subsequent models must be supported by certified
topographic information, bridge plans, construction
plans and survey notes.
[f] Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to
the stream reach for which the revision is being
requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream
of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the
effective model and result in water surface elevations
and top widths computed by the revised models
matching those in the effective models upstream and
downstream of the revised reach as required. The
effective model shall not be truncated.
[3] Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be
submitted to the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources for review which meet the following conditions:
[a] Consistency between the revised hydraulic models,
the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the
revised flood profiles, topographic work map,
§ 510-185 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-185
1:1047
annotated FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary Floodway
Maps (FBFMs), construction plans, and bridge plans.
[b] Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour
interval, and a planimetric map showing the
applicable items. If a digital version of the map is
available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM
may be more easily revised.
[c] Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised onepercent
and two-tenths-percent annual chance
floodplains and floodway boundaries.
[d] If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital
mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used, then all
supporting documentation or metadata must be
included with the data submission along with the
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and
State Plane Coordinate System in accordance with
FEMA mapping specifications.
[e] The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the
effective floodplain boundaries.
[f] All cross sections from the effective model shall be
labeled in accordance with the effective map and a
cross section lookup table shall be included to relate
to the model input numbering scheme.
[g] Both the current and proposed floodways shall be
shown on the map.
[h] The stream center line or profile baseline used to
measure stream distances in the model shall be visible
on the map.
(4) Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this article
shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The permit may
be extended for a maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient
cause.
C. Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used and no
building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified,
repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of
compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator, except where no
permit is required, subject to the following provisions:
(1) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof and the proposed use conform to the
provisions of this article.
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit.
§ 510-185 EAST TROY CODE § 510-185
1:1048
§ 510-186. Plan Commission.
The Plan Commission shall oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning
Administrator and review and advise the Village Board on all proposed
amendments to this article, maps and text. The Plan Commission shall not
grant variances in place of action by the Zoning Board of Appeals or amend
the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the Village Board.
§ 510-187. Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) If all requirements are met, the certificate of compliance shall be
issued within 10 days after written notification that the permitted
work is completed.
(4) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered
professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill,
lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with
the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the requirements of § 510-189 are met.
D. Other permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit, the
applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and
local agencies, including but not limited to those required by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
A. Generally. The Zoning Board of Appeals created under § 510-148 shall
exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules
for the conduct of business. The Zoning Administrator shall not be the
Secretary of the Board.
B. Powers and duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall:
(1) Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of
this article;
(2) Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the
district boundaries shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map;
and
(3) Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the
standards of this article.
C. Appeals to the Board.
(1) Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by
any officer or department of the municipality affected by any
decision of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative
officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days, unless otherwise
§ 510-185 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-187
1:1049
provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the official whose
decision is in question, and with the Board, a notice of appeal
specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision
is in question shall transmit to the Board all records regarding the
matter appealed.
(2) Notice and hearing for appeals including variances.
(a) Notice. The Board shall:
[1] Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
[2] Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes,
specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing;
and
[3] Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest
and the regional office of the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources at least 10 days in advance of the
hearing.
(b) Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The
Board shall:
[1] Resolve boundary disputes according to Subsection C(3);
[2] Decide variance applications according to Subsection
C(4); and
[3] Decide appeals of permit denials according to § 510-188.
(c) Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
[1] Be made within a reasonable time;
[2] Be sent to the regional office of the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources within 10 days of the decision;
[3] Be a written determination signed by the Chairperson or
Secretary of the Board;
[4] State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board's
decision;
[5] Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole
or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or
grant or deny the variance application; and
[6] Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a
variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the
Board proceedings.
§ 510-187 EAST TROY CODE § 510-187
1:1050
(3) Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the
Board in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district
boundaries:
(a) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate
or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles
shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other
evidence may be examined;
(b) The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical
evidence to the Board; and
(c) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform
the Plan Commission or the person contesting the boundary
location to petition the Village Board for a map amendment
according to § 510-191.
(4) Variance.
(a) The Board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the
standards of this article if an applicant convincingly
demonstrates that:
[1] Literal enforcement will cause unnecessary hardship;
[2] The hardship is due to adoption of this article and unique
property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or
premises. In such case this article or the map must be
amended;
[3] The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
[4] The variance is consistent with the purposes of this article
set forth in § 510-165.
(b) In addition to the criteria in Subsection C(4)(a), to qualify for a
variance under FEMA regulations the following criteria must
be met:
[1] The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional
flood elevation;
[2] Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than 1/
2 acre and are contiguous to existing structures
constructed below the RFE; and
[3] Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good
and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief
necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety
or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief
efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of this
article.
§ 510-187 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-187
1:1051
§ 510-188. Appeals of permit denials.
(c) A variance shall not:
[1] Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district;
[2] Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic
gain or loss;
[3] Be granted for a hardship which is self-created;
[4] Damage the rights or property values of other persons in
the area;
[5] Allow actions without the amendments to this article or
map(s) required in § 510-191; or
[6] Allow any alteration of a historic structure, including its
use, which would preclude its continued designation as a
historic structure.
(d) When a floodplain variance is granted the Board shall notify
the applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life and
property and flood insurance premiums could increase up to
$25 per $100 of coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the
variance record.
A. The Board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include:
(1) Permit application data listed in § 510-185B;
(2) Floodway/flood-fringe determination data in § 510-182D;
(3) Data listed in § 510-180C(1) where the applicant has not submitted
this information to the Zoning Administrator; and
(4) Other data submitted with the application or submitted to the
Board with the appeal.
B. For appeals of all denied permits the Board shall:
(1) Follow the procedures of § 510-187;
(2) Consider Plan Commission recommendations; and390
(3) Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
C. For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the Board
shall:
390. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-187 EAST TROY CODE § 510-188
1:1052
§ 510-189. Floodproofing standards for nonconforming structures
or uses.
§ 510-190. Public information.
(1) Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data showing
an increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after
amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal
arrangements are made with all adversely affected property
owners as per the requirements of § 510-191; or
(2) Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly
demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase, provided
that no other reasons for denial exist.
A. No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure
designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the
applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure
or development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA
floodproofing certificate.
B. For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or
variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either:
(1) Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
(2) That meets or exceeds the following standards:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
(1) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces and other regional flood factors;
(2) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
(3) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement;
(4) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters; and
(5) Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters.
§ 510-188 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-190
1:1053
§ 510-191. Amendments and revisions.
A. Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the
regional flood.
B. All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and
widely distributed.
C. Real estate transfers should show what floodplain district any real
property is in.
A. Amendments. Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if
amendments are made to this article, the Official Floodplain Zoning
Maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with
Subsection B.
(1) In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases
shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a conditional letter
of map revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this
article, the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines and
water surface profiles, in accordance with Subsection B. Any such
alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(2) In A Zones increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be
permitted if the applicant receives a conditional letter of map
revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this article, the
Official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines, and water surface
profiles, in accordance with Subsection B.
B. General. The Village Board shall change or supplement the floodplain
zoning district boundaries and this article in the manner outlined in
Subsection C. Actions which require an amendment to this article and/
or submittal of a letter of map change (LOMC) include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(1) Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any
increase in the regional flood height;
(2) Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse
alterations on the adopted Flood Insurance Rate Map;
(3) Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed
in § 510-167;
(4) Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a
height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous
to land lying outside the floodplain;
(5) Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and
floodplain maps;
§ 510-190 EAST TROY CODE § 510-191
1:1054
(6) Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by § NR
116.05, Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for
changes by the municipality; and
(7) All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway
lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the flood-fringe
that is based on a base flood elevation from a Flood Insurance Rate
Map requires prior approval by FEMA.
C. Procedures. Amendments to this article may be made upon petition of
any party according to the provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats. The
petitions shall include all data required by §§ 510-182D and 510-185B.
The land use permit shall not be issued until a letter of map revision is
issued by FEMA for the proposed changes.
(1) The proposed amendment shall be referred to the Plan Commission
for a public hearing and recommendation to the Village Board. The
amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the
regional office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall
comply with the provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats.391
(2) No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and
approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(3) All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow
causing any increase in the regional flood height shall obtain
flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from
all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of
government before the amendment can be approved by the Village
Board.
391. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 510-191 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-191
1:1055

ARTICLE XIX
Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
[Added 5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
§ 510-192. Legislative findings.
The Village Board makes the following legislative findings with regard to
telecommunication towers providing mobile telecommunication services:
§ 510-193. Review procedure for telecommunication tower and
Class 1 co-location.
A. The State Legislature passed 2013 Wisconsin Act 20 [Section 1269(I)]
that imposed limits on local municipalities with respect to regulating
telecommunication facilities within their jurisdictions.
B. The federal government adopted the Telecommunications Act of 1996
which established various requirements relating to telecommunication
facilities.
C. The regulations in this article are intended to promote the public
health, safety, and welfare, while at the same time not unduly
restricting the development of needed telecommunication facilities.
D. The regulations in this article are intended to accomplish the following
purposes, to the fullest extent permitted by law:
(1) Protect the visual character of the Village from the potential
adverse effects of telecommunication facilities;
(2) Ensure that a competitive and broad range of telecommunications
services and high-quality telecommunications infrastructure is
provided;
(3) Create and preserve telecommunication facilities that will serve as
an important and effective part of the Village's emergency response
network;
(4) Minimize the number of towers by requiring co-location; and
(5) Avoid damage to adjoining properties by establishing setback
standards.
A. The general steps outlined below shall be used to review an application
for a new telecommunication tower and a Class 1 co-location as
designated in the Table of Land Uses referenced in § 510-38.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a
completed application to the Zoning Administrator along with the
application fee as may be established by the Village Board.
(2) Determination of completeness. The Zoning Administrator reviews
the application and determines whether the application is
§ 510-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-193
1:1057
complete. If the application includes all of the required
information, the application shall be found to be complete. The
Zoning Administrator notifies the applicant, in writing, within 10
days of receiving the application if it is found not to be complete,
and such notice shall specify in detail the required information
that was incomplete. Applicants are allowed to resubmit their
application as often as necessary until it is complete.
(3) Review date. When the Zoning Administrator determines the
application is complete, he or she schedules the review with the
Plan Commission consistent with its adopted calendar.
(4) General notice. The Zoning Administrator provides for a Class 2
public notice, property owner notice, and meeting agenda notice.
(5) Staff report preparation and distribution. The Zoning Administrator
prepares a written staff report and provides a copy of it to each
member of the Plan Commission and Village Board, the applicant,
and any other interested person upon request.
(6) Public hearing. Allowing for proper notice, the Plan Commission
conducts a public hearing to review the application. Prior to the
close of the public hearing, the applicant or the Plan Commission
may request a continuance.
(7) Staff follow-up. If the Plan Commission does not render a decision
immediately following the public hearing, the Plan Commission
may direct the Zoning Administrator to prepare a preliminary
decision document.
(8) Recommendation. After considering all of the information
submitted by the applicant, public comments received at the public
hearing, and the staff report, the Plan Commission, no more than
40 calendar days after the public hearing, makes a
recommendation to the Village Board to:
(a) Approve the application;
(b) Approve the application with conditions; or
(c) Deny the application.
(9) Transmittal of recommendation. If the Plan Commission action is
favorable, the Zoning Administrator prepares a draft decision
document effectuating its determination. If the Plan Commission
action is not favorable, the Plan Commission reports its
determination to the Village Board, including its reasons for denial.
(10) General notice. The Zoning Administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Village Board.
(11) Village Board meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Village
Board considers the application at a regular or special meeting.
§ 510-193 EAST TROY CODE § 510-193
1:1058
(12) Decision. After considering all of the information submitted by the
applicant, public comments received at the public hearing, the staff
report, and the Plan Commission's recommendation, the Village
Board makes a decision to:
(a) Approve the application;
(b) Approve the application with conditions; or
(c) Deny the application.
(13) Preparation of final decision document. Based on the action of the
Village Board, the Zoning Administrator prepares a final decision
document.
(14) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the
Village Board's decision, the Zoning Administrator mails the
decision document to the applicant by regular mail. Final action,
including written notification, must be taken within 90 days of the
date the application is deemed complete, unless the time is
extended by the applicant in writing.
(15) Acceptance by property owner. If the application is approved, the
property owner must sign the decision document to acknowledge
the terms of the approval and return the same to the Zoning
Administrator within six months of the decision. Prior to the
expiration of the previously specified time period, the property
owner may submit a petition to the Village Clerk requesting an
extension, and the Village Board may, with cause, extend the period
within which the decision document must be signed. If the signed
decision document is not returned within the initial or extended
time period, if any, the decision is null and void without any further
action by the Village. The applicant shall not proceed until all
required signatures have been obtained and the original signature
copy is returned to the Zoning Administrator.
(16) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is
retained as a public record.
(17) Recording of decision document. If the property owner returns the
decision document within the required time period with the
required signatures, the Zoning Administrator records the decision
document against the subject property in the Waukesha County
Register of Deeds' office.
B. In the event an applicant believes the Village has exceeded its authority
as set forth in § 66.0404, Wis. Stats., and other such laws as may apply,
which may include 47 U.S.C.A. § 1455, the applicant shall notify the
Zoning Administrator, in writing, and the reviewing authority reserves
the right to reconsider the matter, to ensure that applicable laws are
followed.
§ 510-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-194
1:1059
§ 510-194. Review procedure for Class 2 co-location.
§ 510-195. Application form.
A. The general steps outlined below shall be used to review an application
for a Class 2 co-location, which is allowed in all zoning districts. (See
the Table of Land Uses referenced in § 510-38.)
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a
completed application to the Zoning Administrator along with the
application fee as may be established by the Village Board.
(2) Determination of completeness. The Zoning Administrator reviews
the application and determines whether the application is
complete. If the application includes all of the required
information, the application shall be found to be complete. The
Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant, in writing, within
five days of receiving the application if it is found not to be
complete, and such notice shall specify in detail the required
information that was incomplete. Applicants are allowed to
resubmit their application as often as necessary until it is complete.
(3) Decision. The Zoning Administrator makes a decision on the
application and notifies the applicant within 45 days of the date the
application is deemed complete, unless the time is extended by the
applicant. The decision shall be stated in writing. If approval is not
granted, the reasons therefor must be stated.
(4) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is
retained as a public record.
B. In the event an applicant believes the Village has exceeded its authority
as set forth in § 66.0404, Wis. Stats., and other such laws as may apply,
which may include 47 U.S.C.A. § 1455, the applicant shall notify the
Zoning Administrator, in writing, and the reviewing authority reserves
the right to reconsider the matter, to ensure that applicable laws are
followed.
A. New telecommunication tower and Class 1 co-location. An application
form for a new telecommunication tower or a Class 1 co-location shall
include all of the following information as appropriate:
(1) The name and business address of, and the contact individual for,
the applicant.
(2) The location of the proposed tower or affected tower.
(3) The location of the proposed mobile service facility.
(4) If an application is to substantially modify an existing
telecommunication tower, a construction plan which describes the
proposed modifications to the tower, and equipment and network
components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base
§ 510-194 EAST TROY CODE § 510-195
1:1060
§ 510-196. Imposition of conditions.
§ 510-197. Establishment of use.
If the Zoning Administrator determines that substantial work as authorized
by the approval did not commence within 12 months of the date of approval
or if substantial work did commence within 12 months of the date of
approval but has not continued in good faith to completion, he or she shall
initiate the process to terminate the approval, which must include a public
hearing with written notice given to the property owner, and operator if
different. Upon written petition and with cause, the Zoning Administrator
may grant a one-time extension not to exceed six months, provided:
stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment
associated with the proposed modifications.
(5) If an application is to construct a new telecommunication tower, a
construction plan which describes the proposed tower and
equipment and network components, including antennas,
transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and
related equipment to be placed on or around the new tower.
(6) If an application is to construct a new telecommunication tower, an
explanation as to why the applicant chose the proposed location,
and why the applicant did not choose co-location, including a sworn
statement from the responsible party attesting that co-location
within the applicant's service area would not result in the same
mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity; is technically
infeasible; or is economically burdensome.
B. Class 2 co-location. An application form for a Class 2 co-location shall
include the following information:
(1) The name and business address of, and the contact individual for,
the applicant.
(2) The location of the proposed tower or affected tower.
(3) The location of the proposed mobile service facility.
A. Generally. The reviewing authority may impose one or more conditions
of approval as may be necessary to grant approval. Such conditions may
relate to any aspect of the use that impacts the public health, safety, or
general welfare, subject to Subsection B below.
B. Limitations. The reviewing authority may not impose conditions
prohibited by § 66.0404(4), Wis. Stats.
A. The permit holder requests the extension prior to the expiration of the
approval;
§ 510-195 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-197
1:1061
§ 510-198. Amendment of approval.
Following approval, the Plan Commission shall review all proposed changes
to the approval. If, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, the proposed
change constitutes a minor alteration, the Plan Commission may approve
the requested change, in writing, at a regular or special meeting of the Plan
Commission without following the review procedure in this article. If the
proposed change constitutes a major alteration, the review procedure in
effect at the time of submittal shall be followed.
B. The permit holder clearly demonstrates that circumstances beyond his
or her control prevented the start of construction and the continuation
of the same; and
C. The project complies with this chapter in effect at the time the
extension is granted.
§ 510-197 EAST TROY CODE § 510-198
1:1062
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 2000 Code to 2015 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Title/Chapter From 2000 Code Location in 2015 Code
Title 1, General Provisions
Ch. 1, Use and Construction
§§ 1-1-1 and 1-1-4 NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. II
§§ 1-1-2, 1-1-3, 1-1-5, 1-1-6 and 1-1-7 Ch. 1, Art. I
Ch. 2, Use of Citation Ch. 24
Title 2, Government and Administration
Ch. 1, Village Government and Elections
§ 2-1-1 (Village Government) Ch. 148
§§ 2-1-2 and 2-1-4 to 2-1-7 Ch. 41
§ 2-1-3 (Official Newspaper) Ch. 90
§ 2-1-8 (Municipal Board of Absentee
Canvassers)
REP
Ch. 2, Village Board Ch. 148
Ch. 3, Municipal Officers and Employees
§§ 2-3-1 to 2-3-10 and 2-3-13 to 2-3-19 Ch. 97
§§ 2-3-11 and 2-3-12 Ch. 30
Ch. 4, Boards, Commissions and Committees Ch. 15
Title 3, Finance and Public Records
Ch. 1, Finance Ch. 52, Art. I
Ch. 2, Special Assessments Ch. 52, Art. II
Ch. 3, Public Records Ch. 122
Ch. 4, Disposal of Lost, Abandoned and
Surplus Property
Ch. 109
Ch. 5, Hotel-Motel Room Tax Ch. 52, Art. III
Title 4, Administrative Review Procedures
§ 510-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1063
Title/Chapter From 2000 Code Location in 2015 Code
Ch. 1, Review of Administrative
Determinations
Ch. 6
Title 5, Public Safety
Ch. 1, Law Enforcement Ch. 105
Ch. 2, Fire Protection Ch. 270
Ch. 3, Fire Prevention Code; Hazardous
Materials
§ 5-3-1 Ch. 270
§§ 5-3-2 and 5-3-3 Ch. 285
Ch. 4, Police Alarm Systems Ch. 181
Ch. 5, Emergency Government Ch. 44
Title 6, Public Works
Ch. 1, Grades Ch. 423, Art. I
Ch. 2, Streets and Sidewalks Ch. 423, Art. II
Ch. 3, Driveways Ch. 244
Ch. 4, Forestry Code Ch. 443
Title 7, Licensing and Regulation
Ch. 1, Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of
Animals
Ch. 189
Ch. 2, Fermented Malt Beverages and
Intoxicating Liquor
Ch. 305, Art. I
Ch. 3, Cigarette Licenses Ch. 230
Ch. 4, Transient Merchants Ch. 440
Ch. 5, Mobile Homes Ch. 340
Ch. 6, Regulation and Licensing of Fireworks Ch. 273
Ch. 7, Street Use Permits Ch. 423, Art. III
Ch. 8, Adult-Oriented Establishments Ch. 170
Ch. 9, Games of Amusement Ch. 185
Ch. 10, Processions, Parades, Runs, Walks,
Bicycle Races and Marathons
Ch. 423, Art. IV
Ch. 11, Special Community Events Ch. 416
Ch. 12, Taxis Ch. 432
Ch. 13, Licensees to Pay Local Claims,
Appellate Procedures
Ch. 52, Art. IV
Ch. 14, Horse-Drawn Carriages Ch. 423, Art. V
Ch. 15, Mandating of Employee Benefits for
Private Business
REP
§ DT-1 EAST TROY CODE § DT-1
1:1064
Title/Chapter From 2000 Code Location in 2015 Code
Title 8, Health and Sanitation
Ch. 1, Health and Sanitation Ch. 289
Ch. 2, Pollution Abatement Ch. 285
Ch. 3, Refuse Disposal and Collection Ch. 470, Art. I
Ch. 4, Recycling Ch. 470, Art. II
Ch. 5, Regulation of Offensive Industry Ch. 217, Art. I
Ch. 6, Dumping and Waste Disposal Ch. 470, Art. III
Title 9, Public Utilities
Ch. 1, Water Utility Regulations and Rates Ch. 475
Ch. 2, Sewer Use Ordinance Ch. 400
Ch. 3, Miscellaneous Utilities Regulations
§ 9-3-1, 9-3-2 and 9-3-4 Ch. 475
§ 9-3-3 Ch. 289
§ 9-3-5 (water conservation) Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-04
Ch. 4, Cable Television REP
Title 10, Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Ch. 1, Traffic and Parking Ch. 458
Ch. 2, Bicycles and Play Vehicles Ch. 200
Ch. 3, Snowmobiles and All-Terrain Vehicles Ch. 410
Ch. 4, All-Terrain Vehicles and Off-Road
Motor Vehicle Operations
Ch. 458
Ch. 5, Junked, Stored or Abandoned Vehicles Ch. 461
Ch. 6, Airport Aeronautical Services Ch. 176, Art. I
Title 11, Offenses and Nuisances
Ch. 1, State Statutes Adopted Ch. 366, Art. I
Ch. 2, Offenses Against Public Safety and
Peace
Ch. 366, Art. II
Ch. 3, Offenses Against Property Ch. 366, Art. III
Ch. 4, Offenses Involving Alcoholic
Beverages
§ 11-4-1 Ch. 305, Art. II
§§ 11-4-2 to 11-4-9 REP
Ch. 5, Offenses by Juveniles Ch. 318
Ch. 6, Public Nuisances Ch. 354
Title 12, Parks and Navigable Waters
Ch. 1, Parks and Recreation Ch. 362
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1065
Title/Chapter From 2000 Code Location in 2015 Code
Title 13, Zoning
Ch. 1, Zoning Code Ch. 510
Ch. 2, Floodplain Zoning (Reserved) –
Ch. 3, Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Repealed 4-18-2011; see
Ch. 510
Ch. 4, Wellhead Protection Repealed 4-18-2011; see
Ch. 510
Title 14, Subdivision Regulations
Ch. 1, Subdivision Regulations Ch. 495
Title 15, Building Code
Ch. 1, Building Code Ch. 210
Ch. 2, Construction Site Erosion Control NLP; see Ch. 483, Art. I
Ch. 3, Fair Housing Ch. 263
Ch. 4, Minimum Property Maintenance
Standards
Ch. 375, Art. I
Ch. 5, Commercial Property Exterior
Maintenance Code
Ch. 375, Art. II
Ch. 6, Grievances Regarding Access to
Public Buildings
Ch. 113
Ch. 7, Historic Preservation Ch. 486
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-01 2-6-2012 Village Board amendment Ch. 148
2012-02 Budget amendment NCM
2012-03 7-16-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2012-04 6-19-2012 Repeal of § 9-3-5, Water
conservation
Repealer only
2012-05 7-2-2012 Fires and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 270
2012-06 8-20-2012 Sewers amendment Ch. 400
2012-07 9-17-2012 Animals amendment Ch. 189
§ DT-1 EAST TROY CODE § DL-1
1:1066
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-08 9-17-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2013-01 4-1-2013 Intoxication liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 305, Art. I
2013-02 4-1-2013 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 362
2013-03 6-13-2013 Fireworks amendment Ch. 273
2013-04 9-16-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2013-05 10-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2013-06 10-7-2013 Animals amendment Ch. 189
2013-07 10-7-2013 Village Board amendment Ch. 148
2013-08 10-28-2013 Budget NCM
2013-09 12-2-2013 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 97
2013-10 12-16-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 458
2013-11 12-16-2013 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 30
2013-12 12-16-2013 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 97
2013-13 12-16-2013 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 15
2014-01 9-22-2014 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 366
2014-02 2-3-2014 Special assessments and
charges amendment
Ch. 52, Art. II
2014-03 4-7-2014 Water amendment Ch. 475
2014-04 4-21-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2014-05 6-23-2014 Fires and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 270
2014-06 7-21-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2014-07 7-21-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2014-08 7-21-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2014-09 8-18-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2014-10 Budget NCM
2014-11 11-3-2014 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 495
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1067
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-12 11-3-2014 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 495
2014-13 12-15-2014 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 495
2014-14 12-1-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 458
2014-15 12-15-2014 Sewers amendment Ch. 400
2015-01 5-18-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2015-02 6-15-2015 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
2015-03 7-6-2015 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
NCM
2015-04 7-20-2015 Juveniles amendment Ch. 318
2015-05 7-20-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2015-06 9-28-2015 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 495
2015-07 11-2-2015 Budget NCM
2015-08 11-16-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2015-09 12-7-2015 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 495
2015-10 12-21-2015 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 366
2016-01 2-15-2016 Official Map Ch. 490
2016-02 2-15-2016 Citations amendment Ch. 24
2016-03 3-7-2016 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages:
alcohol beverages in public
areas amendment
Ch. 305, Art. II
2016-04 3-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2016-05 Not adopted
2016-06 6-20-2016 Annexation of property NCM
2016-07 7-18-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-08 7-18-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2016-09 7-18-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2016-10 7-18-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-11 9-19-2016 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 15
§ DL-1 EAST TROY CODE § DL-1
1:1068
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-12 10-3-2016 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages:
licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 305, Art. I
2016-13 10-17-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2016-14 11-7-2016 Budget NCM
2016-15 12-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2017-01 2-6-2017 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 105
2017-02 Tabled
2017-03 2-6-2017 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 210
2017-04 2-6-2017 Amusement devices and
arcades amendment
Ch. 185
2017-05 2-6-2017 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 495
2017-06 2-6-2017 Village Board amendment Ch. 148
2017-07 5-1-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2017-08 5-15-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2017-09 8-7-2017 Village Board amendment Ch. 148
2017-10 9-18-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2017-11 9-18-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2017-12 10-16-2017 Village Board amendment Ch. 148
2017-13 10-16-2017 Annexation NCM
2017-14 10-16-2017 Detachment of territory NCM
2017-15 11-20-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2017-16 11-6-2017 Budget and tax levy NCM
2017-17 12-4-2017 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 362
2017-18 12-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 458
2017-19 12-18-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 510
2018-01 1-15-2018 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2018-02 3-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 510
2018-03 3-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 510
2018-04 4-2-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 458
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1069
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-05 6-4-2018 Erosion Control and
Stormwater Management
Amendment
Ch. 483
2018-06 Not adopted
2018-07 10-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 458
2018-08 11-5-2018 Budget and Tax Levy NCM
2018-09 12-17-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 510
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-01 1-7-2019 Amusement Devices
and Arcades
Amendment
Ch. 185 6
2019-02 3-18-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 510 6
2019-03 8-5-2019 Waste Management:
Recycling
Amendment
Ch. 470, Art.
II
6
2019-04 5-20-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 510 6
2019-05 5-20-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 510 6
2019-06 8-19-2019 Subdivision of Land
Amendment
Ch. 495 6
2019-07 8-19-2019 Subdivision of Land
Amendment
Ch. 495 6
2019-08 8-19-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 510 6
2019-09 8-19-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 510 6
2019-10 8-19-2019 Finance and
Taxation
Amendment
Ch. 52 6
2019-11 8-19-2019 Building
Construction
Amendment
Ch. 210 6
2019-12 8-19-2019 Building
Construction
Amendment
Ch. 210 6
2019-13 11-4-2019 Fireworks
Amendment
Ch. 273 6
§ DL-1 EAST TROY CODE § DL-1
1:1070
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-14 9-16-2019 Intoxicating Liquor
and Fermented Malt
Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 305 6
2019-15 11-4-2019 Appropriation NCM 6
2019-16 11-4-2019 Officers and
Employees
Amendment
Ch. 97 6
2019-17 12-16-2019 Officers and
Employees
Amendment
Ch. 97 6
2019-18 12-16-2019 Duties of Village
Clerk, Village
Treasurer and
Administrator
Ch. 1; Ch. 15;
Ch. 24; Ch.
30; Ch. 41;
Ch. 44; Ch.
52; Ch. 97;
Ch. 109; Ch.
122; Ch. 148;
Ch. 170; Ch.
185; Ch. 189;
Ch. 210; Ch.
217; Ch. 230;
Ch. 263; Ch.
273; Ch. 289;
Ch. 305; Ch.
340; Ch. 400;
Ch. 416; Ch.
423; Ch. 432;
Ch. 440; Ch.
443; Ch. 461;
Ch. 470; Ch.
475; Ch. 495;
Ch. 510
6
2019-19 12-16-2019 Public Facilities and
Services, Access to
Amendment
Ch. 113 6
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1071

