Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Code Construction and Penalties
[Adopted as §§ 1.02, 1.05, 1.06 and 1.07 of the 1961 Code]
§ 1-1. Definitions.
§ 1-2. Jurisdiction.
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, this Code applies to acts performed
within the corporate limits of the Village of Fox Point. Provisions of this
Code also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits and up to
the limits prescribed by law, where the law confers power on the Village to
regulate such particular acts outside the corporate limits.
A. Terms used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined in this
Code, have the meaning prescribed by the Wisconsin Statutes for the
same terms.
B. Terms used in this Code have the following meanings:
COUNTY — Milwaukee County.
ORDINANCES — The ordinances of the Village of Fox Point and all
amendments thereto, including this article.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, club, joint venture, estate, trust or any group or
combination acting as a unit and the individuals constituting such
group or unit; and the plural as well as the singular number; and the
masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders, unless the
intention to give more limited meaning is disclosed by the context. As
applied to partnerships, the word "person" includes the members of the
partnership; as applied to corporations, it includes the officers, agents
or employees responsible for the act referred to.
STATE — State of Wisconsin.
THIS CODE — The Fox Point Village Code.
VILLAGE — Village of Fox Point, Wisconsin
VILLAGE BOARD — The Village Board of the Village of Fox Point.
WISCONSIN STATUTES — The Wisconsin Statutes as of the adoption
of this Code, as amended or renumbered from time to time.[Amended
11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
C. Unless the context of an ordinance required a specific gender, this Code
is intended to be gender neutral. Every word in these ordinances
referring to the masculine gender shall also be construed to apply to
females, and vice versa; the masculine gender is used solely in the
interest of brevity. [Added 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-3. Responsibility for acts.
Every person concerned in the commission of an act prohibited by this
Code, whether he directly commits the act, or prosecutes, counsels, aids or
abets in its commission, may be prosecuted and on conviction is punishable
as if he had directly committed such act.
§ 1-4. Violations and penalties.
A. General penalty. Except where a penalty is provided elsewhere in this
Code, any adult person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
Code shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty,
which shall be as follows:
(1) First offense. Any adult person who shall violate any provision of
this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $25
nor more than $1,500, together with all costs, surcharges, penalty
assessments, and any other taxable item of cost as provided for by
the laws of the State of Wisconsin as applicable to forfeiture actions
that are in effect at the time of the offense, and any other taxable
costs as imposed by any other provision of this Code, and in default
or payment of the same shall be imprisoned in the House of
Correction for one day for each $25 owed, or fraction thereof, but
not to exceed 90 days. Any imprisonment imposed in lieu of
payment shall comply with any then-applicable state law requiring
a lesser alternate period of imprisonment.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses. Any adult person who is found
guilty of violating any ordinance or part of an ordinance of this
Code who has previously been convicted of a violation of the same
ordinance or part of an ordinance within three years from the date
of the last offense to the date of the current offense shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50 nor more than $2,500
for each such offense, together with all costs, surcharges, penalty
assessments, and any other taxable item of cost as provided for by
the laws of the State of Wisconsin as applicable to forfeiture actions
that are in effect at the time of the offense, and any other taxable
costs as imposed by any other provision of this Code and, in default
of payment of the same, shall be imprisoned in the House of
Correction for one day for each $25 owed, or fraction thereof, but
not to exceed 90 days. Any imprisonment imposed in lieu of
payment shall comply with any then-applicable state law requiring
a lesser alternate period of imprisonment.
B. Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues
or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall
preclude the Village from maintaining any appropriate action to
prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code.
C. Other remedies.
§ 1-3 FOX POINT CODE § 1-4
1:4
(1) The Village shall have any and all remedies afforded by the
Wisconsin Statutes in addition to the forfeitures and costs of
prosecution above.
(2) Execution or assessment against defendant's property. Whenever
any person fails to pay a forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon
the order of any court for violation of any ordinance of the Village,
the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, of
after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an
execution against the property of the defendant for said forfeiture
and costs. In the alternative, upon authorization of the court
imposing any such forfeiture and costs, such sum as remains
unpaid shall be added to the Village's portion of the property tax
liability.
(3) In addition to any forfeiture imposed under this section or any
other penalty section of the Code of the Village of Fox Point, the
Village may institute an action or proceeding to enjoin any
violation, and such violation or any nonpayment of any forfeiture
and costs shall constitute the basis for revocation or denial of any
and all licenses and permits wherein the Village is the issuing
authority.
(4) Upon stipulation of the parties, and subject to the approval of the
court upon a finding that such stipulation is in the public interest
and serves the interests of justice, the court may impose terms not
to exceed $250 against a defendant upon dismissal of the action.
The Clerk of Municipal Court shall, within 30 days of receipt
thereof, transfer such sum to the Village Clerk/Treasurer for
deposit in the General Fund. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08]
D. Time to pay. Any forfeiture and costs imposed as a penalty pursuant to
this section or any penalty provisions of this Code shall be payable
forthwith if so ordered by the court; however, the court may, in its
discretion, allow reasonable time for payment, or reasonable payment
plans, considering the defendant's ability to pay, and the court shall
allow any time for payment or payment plan as provided for by any state
law applicable at the time of imposition of the forfeiture.
E. Disposition of juveniles adjudged to have violated an ordinance.
(1) If the court finds that a juvenile violated an ordinance adopted by
this Code, other than § 670-25 of the Code of the Village of Fox
Point or an ordinance adopted in strict conformity with Ch. 125,
Wis. Stats., it shall enter an order making one or any combination
of the dispositional orders permitted under § 938.343, Wis. Stats.
(2) If the court finds that a juvenile violated an ordinance adopted in
strict conformity with Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., it shall order one or any
combination of the penalties specified in § 938.344, Wis. Stats.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:5
§ 1-5. (Reserved)
(3) Upon stipulation of the parties, and subject to the approval of the
court upon a finding that such stipulation is in the public interest
and serves the interests of justice, the court may impose terms not
to exceed $100 against the defendant upon dismissal of the action.
The Clerk of Municipal Court shall, within 30 days of receipt
thereof, transfer such sum to the Village Clerk/Treasurer for
deposit in the General Fund. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08]
F. Definitions and interpretation.
(1) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms are
defined as follows:
ADULT — A person who constitutes an "adult" as defined in
§ 938.02(1), Wis. Stats.
JUVENILE — A person who constitutes an "juvenile" as defined in
§ 938.02(10m), Wis. Stats.
(2) Interpretation. All future amendments, revisions, renumbering or
other modifications of the current or future state statutes
referenced in this section are incorporated herein in order to
secure uniform statewide regulation of peace and good order.
§ 1-4 FOX POINT CODE § 1-5
1:6
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
§ 1-6. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., the ordinances of the Village of Fox Point
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Village Board of the
Village of Fox Point, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 870, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Village
of Fox Point," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-7. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-8. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-9. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer
and shall remain there for use and examination by the public for at least
two weeks, in accordance with § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., and until final action
is taken on this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy
shall be certified to by the Village Clerk/Treasurer, and such certified copy
shall remain on file in the office of said Village Clerk/Treasurer to be made
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Village Board
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the "Code of the Village of Fox Point" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be inserted
in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:7
§ 1-11. Publication; filing.
The Clerk/Treasurer of the Village of Fox Point, pursuant to law, shall cause
to be published, in the manner required by law, a notice of the adoption
of this ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the
office of the Clerk/Treasurer for inspection by the public at all times during
regular office hours. The publication of notice of the enactment of this
ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-12. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk/Treasurer, or someone authorized
and directed by the Clerk/Treasurer, to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the Code required to be filed in the Clerk/Treasurer's office for use by
the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent
to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are included as
supplements to said Code book.
§ 1-13. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk/Treasurer or an authorized agent of the Clerk/Treasurer upon the
payment of a fee to be set by the Village Board. The Clerk/Treasurer may
also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village of
Fox Point to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a penalty as
provided in § 1-4 of the Code.
§ 1-15. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 1-11 FOX POINT CODE § 1-16
1:8
§ 1-16. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-17. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Village of Fox Point which is
not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in
full force and effect.
§ 1-18. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-17 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to May 13, 2014.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Village's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9
§ 1-19. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances adopting or amending the Zoning Map or otherwise
rezoning property.
O. Any charter ordinances.
P. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
specific fee amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the
Village.
Q. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
deposit or bond schedule.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending
rates or charges for water or sewer service.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Village of Fox Point, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B
hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the Village Board that all such changes be adopted as part
of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally amended
to read as such.
B. The amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A1 attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number
references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and
appear in the Code.)
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-19B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Village offices.
§ 1-18 FOX POINT CODE § 1-20
1:10
§ 1-20. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:11
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
§ 7-1. Election not to be governed by statute. [Amended by Ord. No.
433]
The Village of Fox Point elects not to be governed by Ch. 68, Wis. Stats.,
in respect to any administrative determination by the Village Board or
any commission, committee, agency, officer or employee of the Village or
any agent acting on behalf of the Village where, pursuant to an existing
ordinance or an ordinance adopted after the effective date of this chapter,
a procedure is provided by said ordinance for administrative review of the
determination.
§ 7-2. Board of Appeals. [Added by Ord. No. 433]
Pursuant to the provisions of § 68.11(2), Wis. Stats., the Board of Appeals
of the Village of Fox Point is herewith designated and appointed "impartial
decision maker" to act as such in all proceedings brought pursuant to Ch.
68, Wis. Stats.
§ 7-3. Handicap grievance procedure. [Added 10-9-1984 by Ord. No.
519]
For the purpose of this section, "handicap" has the meaning as defined in
federal guidelines for revenue sharing compliance.
A. Step A. A grievant shall first advise a Village department head that he
believes he has been aggrieved. Upon such advice, the grievant and the
department head shall discuss the grievance. The department head
shall fill out a citizen complaint form for immediate filing with the
Village Manager. Within five days, the department head shall advise the
grievant of his position in respect to such grievance.
B. Step B. If the grievant is dissatisfied with the outcome of Step A, he
shall reduce the grievance to writing, supplying such details and dates
as shall reveal the basis for his dissatisfaction, and shall file said
grievance with the Village Manager. Upon receipt of this grievance, the
Village Manager shall, within five working days, fix a mutually
convenient time and place for consideration of the grievance. Within
five working days of such meeting, the Village Manager shall make a
decision in writing and deliver it to the grievant by certified mail.
C. Step C. If the grievant is dissatisfied with the outcome of Step B, he
may, within 10 days of date of delivery of such decision, make further
appeal by filing a written complaint with the Village Clerk/Treasurer.
The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall arrange a meeting of the
Administration Committee of the Fox Point Village Board within 15
working days of receipt of the written complaint. The Administration
Committee shall review the written complaint and hear testimony of the
§ 1-20 FOX POINT CODE § 7-3
1:12
Chapter 19
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 112. Fair housing — See Ch. 612.
grievant and/or his agent. The decision of the Administration
Committee will be presented as a recommendation to the Fox Point
Village Board for action at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
§ 7-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:13

ARTICLE I
Board of Review
[Adopted as § 2.08 of the 1961 Code]
§ 19-1. Membership. [Amended 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
The Board of Review shall consist of the Village President, the Village Clerk/
Treasurer, the Village Manager, one Village Trustee, and three other adult
residents of the Village to be appointed by the President and confirmed by
the Village Board at an April meeting of the Village Board held after the
annual municipal election, or as soon thereafter as the President deems
appropriate.
§ 19-2. Term of members.
The term of all members shall expire at the April meeting of the Village
Board held after the annual municipal election.
§ 19-3. Alternates.
Alternate members to the Village of Fox Point Board of Review may be
appointed and may serve as follows. Alternate members shall be Village
residents, and may include public officers and public employees. One
alternate member shall be appointed annually by the Village President,
subject to the confirmation of the Village Board, for a term of three years,
provided that initially three alternate members shall be appointed for terms
of one, two and three years, respectively. At the time of their appointment,
each alternate member shall be designated as either first, second, or third
alternate, to establish the priority of all alternate members, and this priority
may be revised annually by the Village President subject to the confirmation
of the Village Board. The first alternate member shall act with full power
when one member is absent, refuses, or is otherwise unavailable to hear
an objection. The second alternate member shall act with full power when
two members (or one member and the first alternate member) are absent,
refuse, or are otherwise unavailable to hear an objection. The third
alternate member shall act with full power when three members (or two
members and the first or second alternate member; or one member and the
first and second alternate members) are absent, refuse, or are otherwise
unavailable to hear an objection. Additionally, the Village of Fox Point
Village President, subject to confirmation of the Village Board, may appoint
as many alternates as are necessary to establish a quorum in individual
cases.
§ 19-4. Place of meeting.
The Board of Review shall meet at the Fox Point Village Hall, or some other
place designated by the Village Board.
§ 19-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-5
1:15
§ 19-5. Time of meetings.
The meeting times of the Board of Review shall be as follows:
§ 19-6. Procedure.
The Board of Review shall proceed in compliance with §§ 70.46 and 70.47,
Wis. Stats.
§ 19-7. Limitations on right to access.
Whenever the Assessor, in the performance of the Assessor's duties,
requests or obtains income and expense information pursuant to
§ 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., or any successor statute thereto, then such
income and expense information that is provided to the Assessor shall be
held by the Assessor on a confidential basis, except, however, that the
information may be revealed to and used by persons: in the discharging
of duties imposed by law; in the discharge of duties imposed by office
(including, but not limited to, use by the Assessor in performance of official
A. The Board of Review of the Village of Fox Point shall meet annually at
any time during the forty-five-day period beginning on the fourth
Monday of April, but no sooner than seven days after the last day on
which the assessment roll is open for examination. [Amended
6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-05]
B. The Board of Review shall be in session at least one time for a minimum
of two hours, or as otherwise required by state statute, as amended
from time to time. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
C. The Board of Review of the Village of Fox Point may adjourn from time
to time until business is complete. If the meeting is adjourned for more
than one day, a written notice shall be posted on the outer door of the
place of the meeting stating the new adjourned date.
A. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum.
B. All meetings of the Board of Review of the Village of Fox Point are to be
opened to all citizens at all times. No formal action of any kind shall be
introduced, deliberated upon, or adopted in any closed session or
closed meeting of the Board of Review.
C. The Clerk/Treasurer of the Village of Fox Point shall keep a record in
the minute book of the proceedings.
D. Objections to valuations must be submitted in writing on forms
approved by the Department of Revenue.
E. The objection form shall answer all questions, including, but not limited
to, insurance and appraisal valuations.
F. The Board of Review of the Village of Fox Point shall not raise or lower
an assessment except after a hearing.
§ 19-5 FOX POINT CODE § 19-7
1:16
duties of the Assessor's office and use by the Board of Review in
performance of its official duties); or pursuant to order of a court. Income
and expense information provided to the Assessor under § 70.47(7)(af),
unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is, per § 70.47(7)(af), not
subject to the right of inspection and copying under § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 19-8. Filing and electronic transmission. [Added 7-9-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-06]
Filing documents with the Clerk of the Board of Review may be
accomplished in person, by mail, by facsimile transmission or by e-mail
transmission. In each case, the document is not deemed to be filed until,
and it is only deemed to be filed, if it is complete, and: it is actually received
by the Clerk in hand, in the case of in-person delivery, mail or facsimile; or
it is opened by the Clerk, in the case of e-mail. No document transmitted by
facsimile transmission or by e-mail transmission while the Board of Review
is in session shall be deemed filed with the Clerk during the session. Any
message left orally by telephone voice recording or other electronic means,
similarly, is not deemed to be received until such message is actually heard
by the Clerk. The party transmitting the document or message is solely
responsible for ensuring its timely and complete receipt and filing.
§ 19-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-8
1:17

ARTICLE II
Building Board
[Adopted as § 2.09 of the 1961 Code]
§ 19-9. Building permit approval.
A. Except as described in Subsection C below, no building permit for any
structure for which a building permit is required shall be issued unless
it has been found as a fact by the Building Board by at least a majority
vote, after an examination of the application papers for a building
permit, which shall include exterior elevations of the proposed
structure, that the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of
the proposed structure will, when erected, not be so at variance with
nor so similar to either the exterior architectural appeal and functional
plan of the structures already constructed or in the course of
construction in the immediate neighborhood or the character of the
applicable district established by the Village zoning regulations as to
cause a substantial depreciation in the property values of the
neighborhood within the applicable district.
B. When plans are filed with the Village of Fox Point for a building permit
for any structure which requires a finding by the Building Board as set
forth in Subsection A above, a filing fee as described in Chapter 63,
Fees, of this Code shall be paid to the Village at the time of filing the
plans. This is in addition to all other fees required in connection with
the application for the issuance of a building permit. Unless such filing
fee is paid, the Building Board shall not consider the plans or take any
action in respect to such plans.
C. Exceptions. Building Board approval is not required for building
permits related solely to:
(1) Interior work.
(2) Repair work, such as re-roofing, re-siding, repair of existing
retaining walls, repair of existing fences, and similar repair work,
unless Building Board review is required by express language
within this Village Code, and provided that the following
requirements shall be satisfied:
(a) The repair work must be made to a quality that is substantially
similar or superior to the quality of the original construction.
(b) The repair work must be incorporated into the structure in a
manner that is aesthetically compatible with the original
construction.
(3) Fences, except in circumstances under which Building Board
approval of a fence is expressly required by this Code or by lawful
order made pursuant to this Code. [Added 5-14-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-03]
§ 19-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-9
1:19
§ 19-10. Membership. [Added 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-02;
amended 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01; 12-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-10]
§ 19-11. Hearings and notices. [Added 1-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-01]
(4) Accessory structures that are 100 square feet in footprint area or
smaller, which have only one floor, except in circumstances where
Building Board approval of such an accessory structure is
specifically required by this Code or by lawful order made pursuant
to this Code. [Added 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
(5) Replacement of doors with doors that fit in the same door frame
area, and replacement of windows that fit in the same window
frame area. [Added 12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10]
A. Composition. The Building Board shall consist of five residents of the
Village, two of whom shall be architects, including within the term
landscape architects.
B. Selection. The members of the Building Board shall be appointed by the
Village President, subject to confirmation of the Village Board. The
Village President shall choose the presiding officer. The members of the
Building Board shall be appointed to hold office for a period of three
years, provided that initial appointments shall be two members for
three years, two members for two years and one member for one year.
Appointments shall be made during the month of April or as soon
thereafter as reasonably practicable, for terms that expire in April or at
any other time if a vacancy occurs during the middle of a term. The
Building Board shall remain as constituted at the time of adoption of
this section until appointments are made under this provision.
C. Quorum. A quorum shall consist of three members, except that in the
event of a meeting of three members in which one member recuses
himself/herself due to a conflict, then the two remaining members shall
have authority to act, and in the instance such two members cannot act
in unison, such tie vote shall cause the matter in question to be laid over
to the next meeting.
D. Meeting date. The Building Board shall hold monthly meetings on a
regular schedule selected by the Building Board. The Building Board
may call special meetings from time to time upon the written request of
two members, or at the call of the chair.
A. The Village Building Board may, if it desires, hear the applicant for the
building permit in question and/or the owner of the lot on which it is
proposed to erect the structure in question, together with any other
persons, whether residents or property owners, desiring to be heard.
Such hearing may be adjourned from time to time, but for not more
than 48 hours. Within 48 hours after the close of the hearing the
§ 19-9 FOX POINT CODE § 19-11
1:20
§ 19-12. Findings, orders and recommendations. [Amended
12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10]
§ 19-13. Appeals.
Any person entitled to appeal from the grant of, or refusal of the Building
Inspector to grant, the building permit may appeal to the Board of Appeals
of the Village in the same manner and with the same force and effect as if
this article had not been adopted and the Building Inspector had taken such
action independently of the Building Board.
Building Board shall, in writing, make or refuse to make the finding
required by § 19-9, and file it in the office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer,
who shall send a copy of it to the Building Inspector.
B. In Building Board actions involving special exceptions, variances, and
modification of open areas, in addition to any notice requirements
under any applicable state or federal law, or as otherwise provided in
the Village of Fox Point Code, the Village Clerk/Treasurer, or his or her
designee, shall provide notice by first class mailing to the owners or
occupants of all properties within 500 feet of the subject property at
least 21 days prior to any hearing or proceeding.
A. Permit denial. The Building Board may order the building permit to be
denied only after providing the applicant an opportunity to be heard,
and finding sufficient cause to deny the application based upon the
standards of § 19-9A. Such finding shall be made in writing, and the
basis for such decision shall be expressly stated. Notice and a copy of
the written decision shall be provided to the applicant.
B. Advisory recommendation. The Building Board, as a service to the
applicant, may offer recommended plan revisions, without need of a
finding per § 19-9A. Such recommendations may be written or oral, and
are advisory only. Nothing the Building Board may recommend in its
advisory capacity shall be interpreted to expand, reduce or modify
applicable laws or requirements related to the applicant's project. The
applicant may amend the applicant's plans to incorporate the Building
Board's recommendations, at the applicant's option, and such revised
plans do not require further Building Board review. Nothing in this
subsection shall be interpreted to prohibit the applicant from seeking
further review from the Building Board, at the applicant's option.
§ 19-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-13
1:21

ARTICLE III
Board of Police Commissioners and Joint Fire Commission
[Adopted as § 3.17 of the 1961 Code]
§ 19-14. Board of Police Commissioners.
The Board of Police Commissioners shall consist of five citizens who are
residents of the Village, three of whom shall constitute a quorum. The
President shall annually, between the last Monday of April and the first
Monday of May, appoint in writing, to be filed with the Secretary of the
Commission, one member for a term of five years, subject to confirmation
by the Board. No appointment shall be made which will result in more than
three members of the Commission belonging to the same political party.
The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings. The Board of Police
Commissioners shall have the power and authority prescribed by this Code
and by § 62.13, Wis. Stats., excepting the optional powers prescribed in
§ 62.13(6), Wis. Stats.
§ 19-15. Joint Fire Commission. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08]
Pursuant to §§ 66.0301, 62.13(2) and 61.35, Wis. Stats., the Village has
entered into an agreement with neighboring communities to establish a
jointly operated fire and emergency services department called the "North
Shore Fire Department." Pursuant to § 61.65, Wis. Stats., and the terms
and conditions of the North Shore Fire Services Agreement (and any
subsequently executed agreements), the Village designates and vests in the
Joint Fire Commission all jurisdiction, power, and authority, as provided
by § 62.13(2) to (12), Wis. Stats., exclusive of § 62.13(6), Wis. Stats. The
Village President shall appoint in writing such member(s) for such term(s)
to the Joint Fire Commission as provided in the North Shore Fire Services
Agreement subject to confirmation by the Village Board.
§ 19-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-15
1:23

ARTICLE IV
Fair Housing Commission
[Adopted by Ord. No. 349 {§ 29.08(3), (5) and (6) of the 1961
Code}]
§ 19-16. Membership; residency requirement.2
There is hereby created the Fox Point Fair Housing Commission. This
Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Village
President and confirmed by the Village Board. Each of said members shall
be a resident of the Village. No person shall be a member of the Commission
until he has filed with the Village Clerk/Treasurer a written acceptance of
his appointment.
§ 19-17. Terms of office; removal.
§ 19-18. Officers.
A. The original members shall be appointed for a term expiring April 30,
1968. For the terms beginning May 1, 1968, in appointing the five
members, the President shall designate one of said members for a term
expiring April 30, 1969, another for a term expiring April 30, 1970,
another for a term expiring April 30, 1971, another for a term expiring
April 30, 1972, and the fifth and final member for a term expiring April
30, 1973. After this original appointment, all terms shall be for a fiveyear
period commencing May 1 and expiring April 30.
B. Even though the term of a member has expired pursuant to the above
provisions, he shall continue as a member until his successor is
appointed and accepts his appointment.
C. Any member may be removed from the Commission at any time with or
without cause by a two-thirds vote of the members elect of the Village
Board.
A. Chairperson. The members of the initial Commission shall elect a
chairperson and vice-chairperson for a term expiring April 30, 1968.
Thereafter, each May members of the Commission shall elect a
chairperson and vice-chairperson. It shall be the chairperson's duty,
and in his absence the vice-chairperson's duty, to conduct meetings of
the Commission. The chairperson and vice-chairperson shall continue
to vote as members of the Commission.
B. The Village Clerk/Treasurer, or such other Village employee as the
Clerk/Treasurer may designate, shall act as Secretary of the
Commission, keeping such minutes and other records and typing such
correspondence as may be reasonably required by the Commission or
any member thereof in the performance of its duties. Except for the
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 19-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-18
1:25
§ 19-19. Vacancies.
In the event of a vacancy caused in any manner, a person shall be appointed
for the unexpired term.
§ 19-20. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
expense so incurred in connection with the Secretary of the
Commission performing his duties, the Commission shall incur no
expense which is the obligation of the Village without express prior
approval by the Village Board. The Secretary has no vote.
A. To receive complaints alleging violation of Chapter 612, Fair Housing,
of this Code arising from bona fide transactions.
B. To investigate such complaints in the same manner as a Police
Department or District Attorney investigates complaints.
C. To attempt to eliminate or remedy any violation by means of
conciliation, persuasion, education or other means.
(1) In those cases where the Commission obtains compliance with
Chapter 612, Fair Housing, of this Code or the Commission finds
that the complaint is without foundation, no public disclosure shall
be made by the Commission of the names of the person or persons
named in the complaint.
(2) Nothing herein shall prohibit confidential communications and
exchange of information, including but not limited to the names of
the people involved and the results of any investigations, between
the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Equal Rights Division
of the Department of Workforce Development, the Governor's
Commission on Human Rights, the University of Wisconsin Human
Rights Committee, and any other organizations which are ruled
appropriate by the Village Attorney and the Fox Point Fair Housing
Commission.3
D. To render from time to time, but not less than once a year, a written
report of its activities and recommendations to the President and to the
Village Board.
E. To adopt such rules and regulations as may be desirable to carry out its
duties in furtherance of the purposes and provisions of Chapter 612,
Fair Housing, of this Code.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 19-18 FOX POINT CODE § 19-20
1:26
ARTICLE V
Tree Commission
[Adopted 10-22-1991 by Ord. No. 91-585 (§ 2.075 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 19-21. Membership.
A Village Tree Commission is hereby created for the Village of Fox Point.
The members of the Commission shall be one Village Trustee, who shall be
the presiding officer of the Tree Commission, and four Fox Point citizens.
Appointment to the Tree Commission shall be by the Village President.
The Village Manager, Director of Public Works/Village Engineer and Village
Forester are members ex officio.
§ 19-22. Terms of office.
§ 19-23. Tree management program.
The Village Tree Commission is charged to develop and administer a
comprehensive Village tree management program.
A. The Trustee member shall be appointed during each April for a oneyear
term.
B. Terms of the citizen members shall be for three years. In 1992, one
citizen member shall be appointed for a one-year term and one citizen
member shall be appointed for a two-year term. Two citizen members
shall be appointed for three-year terms. Thereafter, all citizen member
appointments shall be for a three-year term; however, no citizen
member shall be appointed for more than three consecutive terms.
Appointment of citizen members shall be made during April of each
year by the President, subject to confirmation by the Board.
§ 19-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-23
1:27

ARTICLE VI
Plan Commission
[Adopted 5-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-05 (§ 2.07 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 19-24. Authority.
A Village Plan Commission is hereby created as authorized by §§ 61.35 and
62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 19-25. Membership.
The members of the Plan Commission shall be appointed by the Village
President, who shall also choose the presiding officer. The Village President
may appoint himself or herself to the Commission and may appoint other
Village elected or appointed officials, except that the Commission shall
have at least three citizen members who are not Village officials. Citizen
members shall be persons of recognized experience and qualifications.
§ 19-26. Terms of office; vacancies.
The members of the Plan Commission shall be appointed to hold office for a
period of three years. Appointment shall be made by the Village President
during the month of April, or as soon thereafter as reasonably practicable,
for terms that expire in April or at any other time if a vacancy occurs
during the middle of a term. The Village Plan Commission shall remain as
constituted at the time of adoption of this article until appointments are
made under this provision.
§ 19-27. Powers and duties; qualifications.
The organization (except for the membership as above provided for),
powers, duties and qualifications of the Village Plan Commission shall be as
set forth in the provisions of §§ 61.35 and 62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes,
which are hereby adopted by reference, and as may be provided by Fox
Point ordinance. Except where otherwise expressly provided by Wisconsin
Statute or Fox Point ordinance, all decisions and recommendations of the
Plan Commission are advisory only and subject to approval, rejection, or
modification by the Village Board.
§ 19-28. Hearings and notices. [Added 1-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-01]
In Village Plan Commission actions involving special exceptions and
variances, in addition to any notice requirements under any applicable state
or federal law, or as otherwise provided in the Village of Fox Point Code, the
Village Clerk/Treasurer, or his or her designee, shall provide notice by first
class mailing to the owners or occupants of all properties within 500 feet of
the subject property at least 21 days prior to any hearing or proceeding.
§ 19-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-28
1:29

ARTICLE VII
Village Board Committees
[Adopted 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-07 (§ 2.01 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 19-29. Establishment of committees.
For the efficient administration of the governmental affairs of the Village of
Fox Point, the following committees are hereby established:
§ 19-30. Matters assigned to committees.
All matters, unless otherwise ordered by a vote of the majority of the
Village Board, may be assigned by the Village President to one of the above
committees, and each committee shall thereafter report on all such matters
so assigned to it to the Board at a regular or special meeting of the Board.
Any matter may be taken up prior to the report of a committee upon the
affirmative vote so to do of a majority of the Board of Trustees.
§ 19-31. Committee assignments.
The Village President shall, at the first meeting of the Board after the
regular annual election, assign to the Finance Committee and
Administration Committee such members of the Board as he shall deem
advisable, but in no event fewer than three. The Village President shall,
at the first meeting of the Board after the regular annual election, assign
to the Audit Committee, whose duties shall be to make recommendations
to the Village Board to assist the Board in the management and control
of the Village finances, at least three members of the Board of Trustees
and at least two adult residents of the Village of Fox Point whose training,
occupation, or experience will facilitate review of the Village's external
audits and financial statements, consultation with the external auditor, and
review of any other issues regarding accounting principles and practices.
A. Finance Committee.
B. Administration Committee.
C. Audit Committee.
§ 19-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-31
1:31

ARTICLE VIII
Meetings
[Adopted 8-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-08 (§ 1.12 of the 1961 Code);
amended in its entirety 9-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-13]
§ 19-32. Conduct of meetings.
The presiding officer of all Village boards, committees and commissions of
the Village shall conduct the proceedings of all meetings in accordance with
the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, as from time
to time revised, unless otherwise provided by statute or ordinance, subject
to the following additional and/or differing requirements which shall apply
in the Village of Fox Point:
A. Motions for reconsideration may be made at the same or the next
regular meeting of such board, committee or commission by a member
having voted in favor of the outcome of the motion for which
reconsideration is sought.
B. The presiding officer of any Village board, committee or commission
shall set the agenda for meetings of such Village board, committee or
commission, provided that the agenda shall comply with the following:
(1) Two members of the Village board, committee or commission that
will hold such meeting may place an item on the upcoming meeting
agenda, provided that such requests are made in writing and filed
with the Village Clerk/Treasurer at least one week prior to such
meeting.
(2) The board, committee or commission that will hold such future
meeting may place an item on the future meeting agenda by duly
adopted motion acted upon at a meeting.
(3) Notice of the subject of all meetings of all governing bodies of the
Village shall be provided as required by applicable laws, including
Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 19, Subchapter V (Open Meetings
Law).
C. The Village President may include a Consent Agenda as part of the
agenda for any meeting of the Village Board subject to all of the
following provisions:
(1) Only items that may be adopted by a majority vote of the Trustees
present may be included in a Consent Agenda.
(2) The Consent Agenda will be placed on the meeting agenda prior to
new business items.
(3) Each item included for action as part of the Consent Agenda will
include a statement of the action proposed to be taken by the
Village Board (e.g., approval, adoption, etc.).
§ 19-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-32
1:33
(4) When the Consent Agenda is called, the Village President will ask if
any Trustee wishes to have any item(s) removed from the Consent
Agenda, whereupon any Trustee may request the removal of any
item(s) from the Consent Agenda without discussion or
explanation. A request for removal by a Trustee shall cause the
requested item(s) to be removed from the Consent Agenda without
second, discussion or vote concerning said removal. Any item(s) so
removed shall be considered individually prior to consideration of
any new business agenda items in the same order in which they
were originally listed in the Consent Agenda.
(5) After inquiring as to whether any Trustee wishes to have any
item(s) removed from the Consent Agenda, the Village President
shall entertain a motion to adopt the Consent Agenda, subject to
the following:
(a) Any motion to adopt a Consent Agenda shall be deemed to
exclude any item(s) for which removal has been requested by
any Trustee, as provided in Subsection C(4).
(b) No presentation shall be made and no question or discussion
shall be entertained with regard to any remaining item(s) on
the Consent Agenda.
(c) A motion concerning the adoption of the Consent Agenda is not
debatable.
(6) A motion to approve a Consent Agenda that is properly seconded
and approved by a majority of the Village Board of Trustees then in
attendance shall have the effect of approving the action proposed
for each and every Consent Agenda item not previously removed
pursuant to the request of a Trustee.
(7) If a motion to approve a Consent Agenda fails for want of a second
or due to insufficient votes in favor of its adoption, the items in the
Consent Agenda shall automatically be moved to the Agenda
immediately preceding "new business" and taken up in the order
originally set forth in the Consent Agenda.
§ 19-32 FOX POINT CODE § 19-32
1:34
Chapter 31
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 31-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the authority granted by the Wisconsin Statutes, there is hereby
established the Municipal Court for the Village of Fox Point, Wisconsin.
§ 31-2. Office of Municipal Judge created.
Pursuant to the authority granted by the Wisconsin Statutes, there is hereby
created the office of Judge of the Municipal Court for the Village of Fox
Point, Wisconsin.
§ 31-3. Election; term. [Amended 8-14-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
The Municipal Judge shall be elected at large at the spring election for a
term of four years commencing on May 1 succeeding election.
§ 31-4. Salary.
The Municipal Judge shall receive a salary in such amount as may be fixed
from time to time by the Village Board, which shall be in lieu of fees and
costs. No salary shall be paid to the Judge for any time during his term for
which he has not executed and filed his official bond and oath as required
by § 31-5 of this chapter.
§ 31-5. Bond; oath.
The Municipal Judge shall execute and file with the Clerk of the Circuit
Court for Milwaukee County the oath prescribed by § 755.03, Wis. Stats.,
and a bond in the penal sum of $1,000.
§ 31-6. Jurisdiction.
The Municipal Court and the Municipal Judge shall each have such
jurisdiction as provided in Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 31-7. Procedure.
A. The Municipal Court for the Village of Fox Point, Wisconsin, shall be
open as determined by order of the Municipal Judge.
B. The Municipal Judge shall hold Court in Padway Hall in the Fox Point
Police Department Building, 7300 North Santa Monica Boulevard, and
shall be separated from the Police Department by design and signage.
[Amended 8-14-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
C. The procedure in Municipal Court for the Village of Fox Point shall be as
provided by this chapter and state law, including, but not excluding
§ 19-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-7
1:35
§ 31-8. Contempt. [Amended 8-14-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-095]
The Municipal Judge may impose a forfeiture for contempt under § 800.12,
Wis. Stats., not to exceed $200 or upon default in payment of the forfeiture
a jail sentence of not to exceed seven days. The Municipal Judge also may
impose such additional penalties and remedies as are allowed by § 800.12,
Wis. Stats.
Chapter 46
ELECTIONS
because of enumeration, Chapters 66, 800 and 755 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
D. The Municipal Judge shall collect all forfeitures and taxable costs in any
action or proceeding before him and shall pay over such money to the
Village Clerk/Treasurer within 30 days after his receipt thereof.4
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 31-7 FOX POINT CODE § 31-8
1:36
ARTICLE I
Poll Hours
[Adopted 2-27-1968 by Ord. No. 354 (§ 2.14 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 46-1. Opening and closing hours.
The polls in the Village of Fox Point for all elections shall be opened at 7:00
a.m. and close at 8:00 p.m., provided that any voter awaiting his turn to
vote, whether within the polling booth or in the line outside of the booth, at
the time of the closing of the polls shall be permitted to vote.
§ 46-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-1
1:37

ARTICLE II
Nominations
[Adopted 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-584 (§ 2.145 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 46-2. Nonpartisan election.
All nominations for elective Village offices shall be made by a nonpartisan
election preceded by filing nomination papers with the Village Clerk/
Treasurer in accordance with Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 46-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-2
1:39
Chapter 50
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 50-1. Emergency Management Coordinator; delegation of
emergency powers.
The Chief of Police is designated the Fox Point Emergency Management
Coordinator, and the Village Board herein delegates its emergency powers
under §§ 323.11 and 323.14(4), Wis. Stats., to the Chief of Police.
§ 50-2. Declaration of emergency.
The Fox Point Emergency Management Coordinator, or the Village Manager,
in his absence, is empowered to declare an emergency existing within
the Village whenever conditions arise, either within the Village or within
other municipalities or areas, by reason of war, conflagration, flood, heavy
snow storm, blizzard, catastrophe, disaster, riot or civil commotion, acts of
God, and including conditions, without limitation or restriction because of
enumeration, which impair transportation, food or fuel supplies, medical
care, fire, health or police protection or other vital facilities of the Village,
or endanger the health, welfare or safety of persons or property in the
Village. The period of such emergency shall be limited to the time during
which such emergency conditions exist or are likely to exist. Even though
none of the conditions exist which authorize a declaration of an emergency
under this provision, an emergency may be declared if there are reasonable
grounds for belief that any one or more of said conditions is impending or
threatened.
§ 50-3. Powers and duties.
The emergency power herewith conferred shall include such general
authority to order whatever is necessary and expedient for the health,
safety, welfare and good order of the Village in such emergency, and shall
include such authority as is necessary and expedient without limitation
or restriction because of enumeration and shall include the power to bar,
restrict or remove all unnecessary traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian,
from the streets and highways in the Village, notwithstanding any
provisions of Chs. 341 to 349, Wis. Stats., or any other provisions of law, or
ordinances of this Village.
§ 50-4. Emergency Operations Plan.
The Emergency Management Coordinator shall exercise all powers and
authority as provided by the Fox Point Municipal Emergency Operations
Plan as adopted by the Village Board. The Emergency Management
Coordinator shall have the authority to reasonably modify the Plan
consistent with its intent without authority of the Village Board, and so
as to best protect the citizens of the Village of Fox Point. The Emergency
Management Coordinator shall also conduct a yearly review and update of
§ 46-2 FOX POINT CODE § 50-4
1:40
the Plan and provide notification to the Village Board of any modifications
or updates.
Chapter 55
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 55-1. Declaration of policy.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial, and responsible to the
people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels
of the governmental structure; that public service not be used for personal
gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government.
In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a Code of Ethics
for all Village of Fox Point officials and employees (including all fire and
police employees), whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including
members of boards, committees, and commissions of the Village, as well
as any individuals who are candidates for elective office as soon as such
individuals file nomination papers with the Village. The purpose of this
Code of Ethics is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct
for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions
that are incompatible with the best interest of the Village of Fox Point. The
provisions and purpose of this Code of Ethics and such rules and regulations
as may be established are hereby declared to be in the best interests of the
Village of Fox Point, and are promulgated under the authority granted to the
Village of Fox Point pursuant to § 19.59(1m), Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 55-2. Criminal conduct.
There are certain provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes which should be
considered by public officials and employees. Although not part of this Code
of Ethics, they are listed below:
§ 946.10, Bribery of public officers and employees
§ 946.11, Special privileges from public utilities
§ 946.12, Misconduct in public office
§ 946.13, Private interest in public contract prohibited
§ 55-3. Responsibilities of public office.
Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office
for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of
the United States and the constitution of this state, to carry out impartially
the laws of the nation, state, and municipality, to observe in their official
acts the highest standards of morality, and to discharge faithfully the duties
of their office, regardless of personal considerations.
§ 55-4. Dedicated service.
§ 50-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-4
1:41
§ 55-5. Standards of conduct.
Certain provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, while not set forth herein,
should be considered an integral part of this Code of Ethics. The provisions
of the following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are incorporated herein
by reference and are made a part of this Code and shall apply to all officials
and employees whenever applicable:
Wisconsin Code of Ethics for Local Government Employees
§ 19.42(7u)
§ 19.42(7w)
§ 19.59
§ 19.85(1)(h)
§ 55-6. Use of public property.
No public official or employee shall request, use, or permit the use of
Village-owned vehicles, equipment, materials, or property for personal
convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public
generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such official or
employee in the conduct of official business.
§ 55-7. Disclosure of interest in legislation.
Any member of the Fox Point Village Board who has a financial interest or a
personal interest in any proposed legislation before the Village Board shall
publicly disclose on the record of the Village Board the nature and extent of
such interest.
§ 55-8. Advisory opinion.
Any question as to the interpretation or application of any provision of the
Code of Ethics shall be referred to the Ethics Board. The Ethics Board
may issue advisory opinions in accordance with § 19.59, Wis. Stats., or may
authorize the Village Attorney to act in its place where delay would be of
substantial inconvenience or detrimental to the requesting party.
§ 55-9. Creation of Ethics Board.
A. All officials and employees of the Village of Fox Point should be loyal to
the objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed
to attain these objectives. Appointive officials and employees should
adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the
standard for their position by the appropriate authority.
B. Officials and employees should not exceed their authority, or breach the
law or ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with
other public officials and employees unless prohibited from doing so by
law or by officially recognized confidentiality of their work.
§ 55-4 FOX POINT CODE § 55-9
1:42
§ 55-10. Jurisdiction of Ethics Board. [Amended 11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-12]
A. There is hereby created an Ethics Board to consist of three members.
The membership of the Ethics Board shall consist of three citizens. The
Village Manager shall provide necessary staff assistance to the Ethics
Board and shall serve as its secretary, but shall not vote. The Village
Attorney shall furnish the Ethics Board whatever legal assistance is
necessary to carry out its functions.
B. The members of the Ethics Board shall be appointed by the Village
President subject to confirmation by the Village Board. Terms of office
of the members shall be three years, except that when the initial
appointments are made, one member shall be appointed for one year,
one member for two years, and one for three years. Members of the
Ethics Board shall be limited to serving three full three-year terms. The
members of the Ethics Board shall be residents of Fox Point and shall
not be elected officials, appointed officials, Village employees, or
concurrently serving on any other Village board, committee, or
commission.
C. In the event a member of the Ethics Board is allegedly involved in an
Ethics Code violation, the Village President, subject to confirmation by
the Village Board, shall appoint another individual to replace
temporarily the member of the Ethics Board who is under investigation.
A. The Ethics Board shall administer and enforce the provisions of this
Code of Ethics except as enforced by the District Attorney under
Chapter 19 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. The Ethics Board shall elect its own chairperson and vice-chairperson
and shall develop written rules of procedure which shall be submitted
to the Village Board for approval.
C. The Ethics Board may make recommendations concerning amendments
to this Code of Ethics which shall be submitted to the Village Board for
approval.
D. On sworn complaint of any person alleging facts which, if true, would
constitute improper conduct under the provisions of this code, the
Ethics Board shall conduct a preliminary hearing in closed session to
determine the sufficiency of the complaint. If as a result of the
preliminary hearing the Ethics Board determines that no probable
cause exists to believe that a violation of this code has occurred, the
complaint shall be dismissed and no further action taken. If the Ethics
Board concludes that probable cause exists, it shall conduct a public
hearing in accordance with the requirements of due process of law. The
Ethics Board is empowered to issue subpoenas and administer oaths.
The Ethics Board shall, in written findings of fact and conclusions, make
a determination concerning the propriety of the conduct of the subject
official or employee. If the Ethics Board determines that this code has
§ 55-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-10
1:43
§ 55-11. Sanctions.
A determination that an official's or employee's actions constitute improper
conduct under the provisions of this Code of Ethics may constitute a cause
for suspension, removal from office or employment, or other disciplinary
action. As an alternative or an addition to the sanctions imposed herein, an
official or employee may be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $1,000
for each violation.
Chapter 63
FEES
§ 63-1. Fire Department fees.
been violated, it shall make a determination of sanctions to be imposed,
if any.
E. Records of the Ethics Board's opinions, opinion requests, and
investigations of violation of the Code of Ethics of the Village of Fox
Point may be closed to public inspection in whole or part, except that
the Ethics Board shall permit inspection of records that are made public
in the course of a hearing held to determine if a violation of the Code of
Ethics has occurred.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
NORTH SHORE FIRE DEPARTMENT — That Fire Department created
by an intergovernmental cooperation agreement for fire and emergency
services, which Department is jointly owned and operated by the
Villages of Bayside, Brown Deer, Fox Point, River Hills, Shorewood and
Whitefish Bay and the City of Glendale, pursuant to the amended and
restated North Shore Fire Department Agreement dated December 30,
1994, and under authority of the provisions of § 66.0301, Wis. Stats.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — Defined in § 101.01(11), Wis. Stats., as set
forth here to mean every place, whether indoors or out or underground
and the premises appurtenant thereto where either temporarily or
permanently any industry, trade, or business is carried on, or where
any process or operation, directly or indirectly related to any industry,
trade, or business, is carried on, and where any person is, directly or
indirectly, employed by another for direct or indirect gain or profit,
but does not include any place where persons are employed in private
domestic service which does not involve the use of mechanical power
or in farming.[Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
PUBLIC BUILDING — Defined in § 101.01(12), Wis. Stats., as set forth
here to mean any structure, including exterior parts of such building,
such as a porch, exterior platform, or steps providing means of ingress
or egress, used in whole or in part as a place of resort, assemblage,
§ 55-10 FOX POINT CODE § 63-1
1:44
§ 63-2. Building and HVAC fees. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-13; 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-12; 11-11-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-04; 4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04; 3-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-06]
lodging, trade, traffic, occupancy, or use by the public or by a multiplefamily
dwelling occupied by three or more tenants. For the purposes
of this section, public buildings only include those residential buildings
that are designed for occupancy or are occupied as three or more
separate dwelling units.[Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08]
B. Permit required and permit fees established. Permits are required and
shall be issued by the North Shore Fire Department for all of the plan
reviews and inspections, subject to the payment of fees, all as
established and as amended from time to time by separate resolution of
the Village Board. [Amended 12-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-066]
A. Fees shall be as follows:
(1) Section 756-48, annual inspections of multifamily residential
buildings fee: $50 per unit.
(2) Building permit minimum fee: $70.
(3) One- and two-family and attached garages: $9.50 per $1,000
valuation.
(4) Apartments, three-family and over, row housing, multiple-family
dwellings, and institutional: $9.50 per $1,000 valuation.
(5) Residence additions and remodels: $9.50 per $1,000 valuation.
(6) Local business, office buildings or additions: $9.50 per $1,000
valuation.
(7) Manufacturing or industrial: $9.50 per $1,000 valuation.
(8) Permit to start construction of footings and foundations: $210 oneand
two-family; $280 multifamily, and commercial.
(9) Agriculture buildings, detached garages and accessory buildings:
$9.50 per $1,000 valuation.
(10)HVAC permit minimum fee: $60.
(11) Heating, incinerator units, wood burning appliances. ERV's, HRV's,
heat pumps, and split units: $53 per unit, up to and including
150,000 input BTU units, plus fee of $18 per each additional 50,000
BTU or fraction thereof.
6. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsections C through F, as amended,
which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 63-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-2
1:45
(12) Commercial/industrial exhaust hoods and exhaust systems: $180
per unit.
(13) Heating and air conditioning distribution systems: $2 per 100
square feet of conditioned area.
(14) Air conditioning, heat pumps, and split units: $55 per unit for up to
three tons or 36,000 BTUs plus fee of $18 each additional ton or
12,000 BTUs or fraction thereof.
(15) Permanently installed wall units: $20 per unit.
(16)Wrecking, razing, and interior demolition (Building Inspector may
waive fee if structure is condemned): $85 minimum plus $0.12 per
square feet.
(17) Moving buildings over public ways: $230 plus $0.12 per square
feet.
(18) Fuel tanks: $24 per 1,000 gallons for installation/removal.
(19) Reinspection: $100.
(20) Plan examination: $250 one and two family; $300 plus $27 per unit
multifamily and commercial.
(21) Special inspection: $175 per inspection.
(22)Wisconsin Uniform building permit seal: $65.
(23) Occupancy permit: $100 per unit residential; $200 per unit
commercial.
(24) Temporary occupancy permit (six months or less): $85.
(25) Pools, in-ground/aboveground/spas: $9.50 per $1,000 valuation.
(26) Fence and decks: $9.50 per $1,000 valuation.
(27) Reroofing, residing, and trim: $9.50 per $1,000 valuation.
(28) Foundation repair: $9.50 per $1,000 valuation.
(29) Permit reinstatement: 1/2 the original fee, $70 minimum.
(30) Failure to order final inspection before occupancy: $200.
(31) Building Board: $75.
(32) Refund retained: $30.
(33) Double permit fee for failure to obtain permit before work
commences, except in emergency cases.
(34) Unspecified fees. The Village Building Inspector shall estimate the
actual cost the Village will incur with regard to the application,
§ 63-2 FOX POINT CODE § 63-2
1:46
§ 63-3. Swimming pool fees. [Amended 3-8-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-03; 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-12; 4-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04; 4-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01; 6-12-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-04; 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
which estimate of the cost shall include Village staff time based
on an hourly wage plus 40% for benefits. The Village Building
Inspector shall require payment of this estimated cost to the Village
in advance of performing such work. After the work is performed,
in the event the cost the Village incurs is larger or smaller than
estimated, additional payment shall be required or a refund shall
be provided, respectively. This section shall be interpreted in light
of the Village of Fox Point Chargeback Ordinance, codified as
Article III, Charge to Property Owners for Professional Fees, of
Chapter 67, Finance and Taxation, of the Code of the Village of Fox
Point.
(35) Square footage area shall be defined as follows: The living area of
the building enclosed by the interior surface of the exterior walls
including the basement if finished.
(36) Costs calculation. In determining costs, all construction shall be
included with the exception of heating, air conditioning, electrical
and plumbing work.
A. Applicable fees. The fees to be charged for use of the Village of Fox
Point Municipal Swimming Pool shall be as follows, except as described
in Subsection B:
(1) Resident family membership: $180 per season.
(2) Resident child membership: $50 per season.
(3) Resident adult membership: $80 per season.
(4) Nonresident family membership: $360 per season.
(5) Nonresident child membership: $100 per season.
(6) Nonresident adult membership: $160 per season.
(7) Daily fee for adult guests: $8 before 5:00 p.m.; $5 after 5:00 p.m.
(8) Daily fee for child guests: $6 before 5:00 p.m.; $5 after 5:00 p.m.
(9) Group swim lessons: $75 per set.
(10) Private swim lessons: $80 per set.
(11) Diving team: $95.
(12)Water ballet: $95.
(13) Swim team: $95.
§ 63-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-3
1:47
§ 63-4. Plumbing fees. [Amended 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-12;
11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08; 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-06]
(14) Cancellation of membership: $20.
(15) Cancellation of group lessons, teams or programs: $10.
(16) Daily fee for adult swim between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.: $3.
B. Short-term fee adjustments. The Village Manager is authorized and
empowered to temporarily modify the fees described in Subsection A by
increasing or decreasing the fee or by adding or removing fees as the
Village Manager deems necessary or appropriate in the management of
the Fox Point Municipal Swimming Pool. This flexibility is granted in
order to timely respond to changing opportunities and needs for the
community, to encourage broad participation while minimizing
overcrowding, and for sound financial management of the pool facility.
Such temporary changes shall be clearly publicized in a manner
designed to give notice to the public. Such temporary changes shall
remain in effect for no longer than the remainder of the calendar year in
which they are first created.
A. Fees shall be as follows:
(1) Plumbing permit minimum fee: $60.
(2) Plumbing fixtures: $10 each.
(3) Sanitary building sewer: $60.
(4) Storm building sewer: $60.
(5) Sewers over 100 feet, per foot: $0.50.
(6) Sanitary building drain: $60.
(7) Storm building drain: $60.
(8) Drains over 100 feet, per foot: $0.50.
(9) Water service: $60.
(10)Water service over 100 feet, per foot: $0.50.
(11) Cap sewer and water: $60 each.
(12) Catch basin: $30 each.
(13) Manholes: $30 each.
(14)Well operation permit (five years): $120.
(15)Well abandonment: $60.
(16) Fire protection sprinkler: $60.
§ 63-3 FOX POINT CODE § 63-4
1:48
§ 63-5. Public works fees. [Amended 8-14-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-08]
§ 63-6. Miscellaneous fees.
(17) Reinspection: $100.
(18) Refund retained: $30.
(19) Exhaust hood suppression system commercial: $100.
(20) Double permit fee for failure to obtain permit before work
commences, except in emergency cases.
(21)Water usage charges and charges for testing and setting water
meters shall be as set forth in the rate schedule of the Fox Point
Water Utility as approved by the Public Service Commission.
A. Applicable fees. The fees to be charged pursuant to Chapter 292,
Streets, Sidewalks and Rights-of-Way, of the Village of Fox Point
Municipal Code shall be as follows, with the term "excavation" meaning
any location where pipe is placed, whether by open cut or directional
drill or other method:
(1) Gas permit, main (per § 292-3B): $125 per excavation for up to 100
linear feet; $0.30 per excavation linear foot for each linear foot
beyond the first 100 feet; $75 per excavation for inspection.
(2) Gas permit, household connection (per § 292-3C): $125 per
excavation; $75 per excavation for inspection.
B. Permit fee. There shall be a fee imposed and collected for the review of
the proposed installation of any line, service or equipment in the Village
right-of-way for the transmission of electrical service, telephone service
or cable service, and for inspection, as follows:
(1) For overhead electrical, cable or telephone service: $125 per plan
review (with each plan set being a maximum of 10 drawing sheets);
$100 per pole set.
(2) For underground electrical, cable or television service excavation,
with the term "excavation" meaning any location where pipe is
placed, whether by open cut or directional drill or other method:
$125 per excavation for up to 100 linear feet; $0.30 per excavation
linear foot for each linear foot beyond the first 100 feet; $75 per
excavation for inspection.
A. Athletic events, runs, walks and related events. The fees required for
use of public streets for athletic events, runs, walks and related events
as described within § 292-1 of this Code, including such amendments
and renumbering as may be made thereto from time to time, shall be
$150, plus actual costs for Village services provided for the event.
[Amended 2-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-01]
§ 63-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-6
1:49
B. (Reserved)7
C. Land division. The fees required for filing a land division application as
described within § 738-4A of this Code, including such amendments and
renumbering as may be made thereto from time to time, shall be $300.
D. (Reserved)8
E. Sign permit. The fees required for a sign permit as described in § 540-9
of this Code, including such amendments and renumbering as may be
made thereto from time to time, shall be:
(1) For all permanent and temporary signs, except as described in
Subsection E(2) below: $70.
(2) For all temporary institutional and residential family
announcement signs: $25.
F. Bicycle license. The fee required for a bicycle license as described
within § 591-3C of this Code, including such amendments and
renumbering as may be made thereto from time to time, shall be: $10.
G. Municipal Court fees. The Municipal Court fees required by
§ 814.65(1), Wis. Stats., including such amendments and renumbering
as may be made thereto from time to time, shall be $38, unless
established in a different amount by the Municipal Court Judge.
[Amended 1-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
H. Administrative warrant fee. There shall be a fee imposed and collected
for administrative warrants in the amount of $25.
I. Impound fee. There shall be an impound fee imposed and collected for
impounded vehicles in the amount of $25.
J. Fingerprint fee. There shall be a fingerprint fee imposed and collected
in the amount of $10.
K. "Photocopy fee. The photocopy fee shall be established by the Village
Manager from time to time in an amount designed to recover a
reasonable estimate of the actual costs incurred by the Village, as
required by Wisconsin Statutes Sections §§ 19.35(3)(a), and 66.0628
and other applicable laws. In no event shall the photocopy fee exceed
$0.25 per page." [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13;
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07]
L. Audio or video recording copy fee. The audio or video recording copy
fee shall be established by the Village Manager from time to time in an
amount designed to recover a reasonable estimate of the actual costs
incurred by the Village, as required by Wisconsin Statutes
7. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding Building Board plan review, was repealed
3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-06.
8. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, regarding sanitary sewer connections, was repealed
3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-06.
§ 63-6 FOX POINT CODE § 63-6
1:50
§§ 19.35(3)(a), and 66.0628 and other applicable laws. In no event shall
the fee exceed the actual cost of the physical medium onto which the
audio or video recording is copied. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04; 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07]
M. Electronic format data by email. The electronic format data by email fee
shall be established by the Village Manager from time to time in an
amount designed to recover a reasonable estimate of the actual costs
incurred by the Village, as required by Wisconsin Statutes
§§ 19.35(3)(a), and 66.0628 and other applicable laws. In no event shall
the fee exceed the actual cost incurred. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-07]
N. Electronic format data by mail. The electronic format data by mail fee
shall be established by the Village Manager from time to time in an
amount designed to recover a reasonable estimate of the actual costs
incurred by the Village, as required by Wisconsin Statutes
§§ 19.35(3)(a), and 66.0628 and other applicable laws. In no event shall
the fee exceed the actual cost incurred. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-07]
O. Electronic format data on labels. The electronic format data on labels
fee shall be established by the Village Manager from time to time in an
amount designed to recover a reasonable estimate of the actual costs
incurred by the Village, as required by Wisconsin Statutes
§§ 19.35(3)(a), and 66.0628 and other applicable laws. In no event shall
the fee exceed the actual cost incurred. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-07]
P. Bartender license fee. The fee required by § 125.17(3), Wis. Stats.,
including such amendments as may be made thereto from time to time,
shall be $120 for a two-year license. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-13]
Q. Recycling fee. There shall be a fee imposed and collected for the
collection of residential recyclables in the amount of $78 per year.
[Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13; 12-14-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-17; 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
R. Special pickup fee. There shall be a fee imposed and collected for the
collection of items too large or voluminous to be collected as part of the
weekly rubbish or yard waste collection in the amount of $75, except as
follows. If the collection of such items takes longer than 15 minutes and
includes unusually large items or requires extra equipment, the fee
imposed will be the actual cost of hiring a contractor to collect and
dispose of the waste, including a reasonable charge for Village
administrative costs, and/or of the employee(s) and equipment time to
pick up the material and the cost to dispose the material at the landfill/
recycling center. Items that are too large or voluminous to be collected
as part of the weekly rubbish or yard waste collection include the
following: [Amended 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
§ 63-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-6
1:51
(1) Rubbish that totals more than one cubic yard of material.
(2) Rubbish that includes items that are too large for one person to
pick up.
(3) Yard waste in an amount that the Village Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer or his/her designee estimates will take more than
one hour to take away from the property.
(4) Yard waste that includes materials that are larger than six inches in
diameter.
(5) Waste from the removal of diseased trees and shrubs.
S. Culvert permit fee. The fee required by § 285-17 of this Code for a
permit to cross a watercourse shall be $75. [Added 12-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-13]
T. Erosion control fees. The fee required by § 285-43 of this Code for an
erosion control permit shall be: [Added 12-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-13]
(1) Residential: $150 for initial application review plus $250 for
inspection; total fee due with permit application: $400. In the event
an additional review is required, subsequent to the initial
application review, an additional fee of $75 shall be paid with each
additional submittal.
(2) Nonresidential: $250 plus $150 per acre for initial application
review plus $250 for inspection; total fee due with permit
application: $500 plus $150 per acre. In the event an additional
review is required, subsequent to the initial application review, an
additional fee of $150 shall be paid with each additional submittal.
U. Solid fill permit fee. The fee required by § 272-3 of this Code for a filling
permit shall be: every calendar year, a nonrefundable initial fee of $400
shall accompany the application for filling permit. A nonrefundable fee
of $40 per truck or vehicle hauling fill materials to the fill area shall be
paid. Applicant shall also pay all out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the
Village for its review and issuance of the filling permit or renewal
permit. In the event an additional review is required, subsequent to the
initial application review, an additional fee of $250 shall be paid with
each additional submittal. Renewal permits shall cost $20 per renewal.
[Added 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-139]
V. Special events fee. The fee required by § 546-6 of this Code shall be
$150. [Added 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13]
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 63-6 FOX POINT CODE § 63-6
1:52
W. Longacre Pavilion private use fees. The following fees and deposit shall
apply to private use of the Longacre Pavilion: [Added 12-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-13; amended 2-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-01]
(1) An application fee of $100 shall be paid for applications to use the
Longacre Pavilion building.
(2) An application fee of $75 shall be paid for applications to use the
Longacre Pavilion rest rooms only, which is in lieu of the fee
described in Subsection W(1).
(3) A fee of $10 shall be paid upon cancellation of any reservation to
use the Longacre Pavilion or the Longacre Pavilion rest rooms.
(4) A security deposit may also be required in such amount as may be
established by the Village Board or the Village Manager.
X. Clear cutting permit fee. Requests for a permit per § 310-22 of this
Code shall be accompanied by a fee of $500. [Added 12-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-13]
Y. Certification fee. Requests for certification of Village records shall be
subject to a certification charge of $5 per certification. [Added
12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13]
Z. Returned (NSF) checks. A fee shall be charged in the amount of $35 for
any check received by the Village that is returned to the Village due to
insufficient funds. [Added 2-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-01]
AA. Reissued checks. A fee of $35 shall be required in the event the Village
has issued a check and is later requested or required to cancel the
check and reissue a new check, with such fee to be paid by the party to
whom the Village's check is to be paid. [Added 2-12-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-01]
BB. Grading/drainage/stormwater management plan review. There shall be
a fee imposed and collected for submission of grading and/or drainage
and/or stormwater management plans pursuant to § 756-7E or 285-30
or other sections of this Code for which a grading or drainage or
stormwater management plan is required, which shall be in the amount
of $400. Applications shall not be deemed complete until the fee is paid.
[Added 12-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-17]
CC. Top of the bluff review. The fee required by § 285-2C of this Code shall
be $400. [Added 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-13]
DD. Use of Village athletic fields. The fee for use of Village athletic fields
pursuant to Village Resolution 2004-2 shall be $35 per season per field
or $20 per event. [Added 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
EE. Transient merchants and solicitors. Registration processing fee
(§ 417-5C): $5. Permit fee (§ 417-8A): $20 for two weeks; $50 annual.10
§ 63-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-6
1:53
§ 63-7. Electrical fees. [Amended 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-12;
5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-05; 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08;
3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-06]
FF. Alarm systems. Alarm system permit (§ 441-3B): $25.11
GG. Amusements.12
(1) Carnivals (§ 450-6B). For one or any combination of rides, acts or
stands up to five the sum of $25, plus an additional $5 for each and
every additional ride, act or stand.
(2) Theaters and movies (§ 450-17). The schedule of annual license
fees is fixed as follows:
(a) For structure with seating capacity of fewer than 501 persons:
$100.
(b) For structure with seating capacity from 501 to 800 persons,
inclusive: $150.
(c) For structure with seating capacity of more than 800 persons:
$200.
HH. Cigarette sales. The fee for a retail license for the sale of cigarettes is
$100 per year or a fractional part thereof.13
II. Estate sales. The fee for an estate sale permit shall be $50. [Added
11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
JJ. Chicken permit application fee. The fee to apply to keep chickens in the
Village shall be $100. [Added 9-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
KK. Chicken permit fee, annual. The annual fee for a chicken permit shall be
$25 per year. [Added 9-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
LL. Beekeeping application fee. The fee to apply for beekeeping in the
Village shall be $100. [Added 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-08]
MM.Beekeeping fee, annual. The annual fee for a beekeeping permit shall
be $25 per year. [Added 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-08]
A. Fees shall be as follows:
(1) Electrical permit minimum fee: $60.
(2) Devices (fixtures, switches, receptacles, luminaires): $0.75 each.
(3) Range, disposal, dishwasher, clothes dryer, water heater: $10 each.
10.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
11.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
12.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
13.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 63-6 FOX POINT CODE § 63-7
1:54
§ 63-8. Zoning Code fees.
(4) HID luminaire-Arc, mercury, quartz, etc.: $5 each.
(5) Vent fans, paddle fans, dimmers, GFCI devices: $3 each.
(6) Heating equipment (furnace, boiler): $15 each.
(7) Space heating system, base board: $5 each.
(8) Air conditioning, refrigerating equipment: $15 each.
(9) Feeders or subfeeder sub panel: $15 each.
(10) Service equipment:
(a) Zero to 100 amps: $30 each.
(b) 101 amps to 200 amps: $45 each.
(c) Each additional 100 amps: $5 per 100 amp.
(11) Generators, rectifiers, transformers, etc.: $30.
(12) Swimming pool, spa, hot tub: 60.
(13) Motors, each horsepower or fraction thereof each motor: $1 per
horsepower.
(14) Fuel dispensing equipment: $50 each.
(15) Signs, illuminated: $35 each.
(16) Strip lighting, plug-in strip, Trol-E-Duct, etc.: $1 per foot.
(17) Low voltage devices: $2 each.
(18) Motion picture, stereopticon and X-ray machines, etc.: $30 each.
(19) Pole mounted fixtures: $10 each.
(20) Whirlpool tubs: $10 each.
(21) Fire alarm system: $60.
(22)Raceways, wireways, busways, gutters: $1 per foot.
(23) Temporary service: (90 day period): $60.
(24) Reinspection: $100.
(25) Refund retained: $30.
(26) Double permit fee for failure to obtain permit before work
commences, except in emergency cases.
§ 63-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-8
1:55
A. Special exception at the boundary of a zoning district. The fee required
for an application for a special exception at the boundary of a zoning
district as described within § 745-25B of this Code, including such
amendments and renumbering as may be made thereto from time to
time, shall be $200.
B. Modification of open area. The fee required for an application for a
modification of open area as described within § 745-26 of this Code,
including such amendments and renumbering as may be made thereto
from time to time, shall be $200.
C. D Business District application. The fee required for an application for a
conditional use regulated by the D Business District, as described
within § 745-18 of this Code, including such amendments and
renumbering as may be made thereto from time to time, shall be $300.
The fee required for a site plan application regulated by the D Business
District, as described within § 745-18 of this Code, including such
amendments and renumbering as may be made thereto from time to
time, shall be $300. A separate site plan application fee shall not be
required for an application for a conditional use under § 745-18 of this
Code.
D. E Semi-Business District application. The fee required for an
application regulated by the E Semi-Business District as described
within § 745-19B of this Code, including such amendments and
renumbering as may be made thereto from time to time, shall be $200.
E. F Institutional District application. The fee required for an application
regulated by the F Institutional District as described within § 745-20A
of this Code, including such amendments and renumbering as may be
made thereto from time to time, shall be $300.
F. Planned development overlay application. The fee required for an
application regulated by the Planned Development Overlay District as
described within § 745-21C(1) of this Code, including such amendments
and renumbering as may be made thereto from time to time, shall be
$300.
G. Cultural overlay application. The fees required for an application
regulated by the Cultural Overlay District as described within
§ 745-22B of this Code, including such amendments and renumbering
as may be made thereto from time to time, shall be $300.
H. Board of Appeals application. The fees required for applications made
to the Board of Appeals as described within § 745-36 of this Code,
including such amendments and renumbering as may be made thereto
from time to time, shall be $200.
I. Home occupation application. The fees required for applications for
home occupations as described within § 745-7F(4), including such
amendments and renumbering as may be made thereto from time to
time, shall be $70. [Added 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
§ 63-8 FOX POINT CODE § 63-9
1:56
§ 63-9. Reinspection fee.
To compensate for inspection and administrative costs, a fee of $100 may
be charged for any reinspection to determine compliance with an order to
correct conditions of provisions of the Village of Fox Point Code under the
jurisdiction of the Village Building Inspector, Village Electrical Inspector,
or Village Plumbing Inspector, or delegated or assigned to such person(s),
except no fee shall be charged for the reinspection when compliance is
recorded. Reinspection fees shall be charged against the real estate upon
which the reinspections were made, shall be a lien upon the real estate, and
shall be assessed and collectible as a special charge.
§ 63-10. Alcohol beverages.14
A. Retail license fees.
(1) The fee for Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license,
"Class A" retail intoxicating liquor license, Class "B" fermented
malt beverage retailer's license, "Class B" retail intoxicating liquor
license, reserve "Class B" intoxicating liquor license, and "Class C"
wine license obtained during the year shall be prorated according
to the number of months or fraction thereof for which the license is
issued; all other license fees shall not be prorated. License fees are
established as follows:
(a) Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license: $100 per
year.
(b) Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license: $100 per
year.
(c) "Class A" retail intoxicating liquor license: $500 per year.
(d) "Class B" retail intoxicating liquor license: $500 per year.
(e) Reserve "Class B" intoxicating liquor license: $500 per year.
(f) Initial Reserve "Class B" Intoxicating Liquor License: $10,000.
(g) Temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage license: $10 per
license.
(h) "Class C" wine license: $100 per year.
(2) Grants for certain reserve "Class B" liquor licensees. Wisconsin Act
27 of 1997, effective December 1, 1997, established a new alcohol
beverage license known as a retail reserve "Class B" liquor license
and requires that all who are granted such a license pay an initial
license fee of $10,000 in addition to the regular Class "B" and
"Class B" license fees. The Village Board finds that businesses such
as restaurants, hotels and taverns make important contributions to
14.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 63-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-10
1:57
Chapter 67
FINANCE AND TAXATION
the Village's economy and serve important public purposes,
including but not limited to increasing the Village's property tax
base, providing employment and promoting tourism. The Village
Board also finds that the new initial fee for reserve "Class B"
licenses far exceeds the actual cost of licensing the activity and
that excessive license fees deter new businesses and are contrary
to the above-stated public purposes. It is the purpose of this
subsection to utilize the excess revenue generated by Wisconsin
Act 27 to assist new reserve "Class B" licensees in order to achieve
the important public purposes identified herein.
(a) Accordingly, the Village Board may provide a grant to a reserve
"Class B" licensee if the following conditions are met:
[1] A retail reserve "Class B" liquor license is granted to the
licensee;
[2] The retail reserve "Class B" liquor license applicant
properly completes, executes and submits an application
for a grant to the Village Board on a form provided by the
Village Clerk/Treasurer at the same time the applicant
submits the application for a retail reserve "Class B" liquor
license; and
[3] The retail reserve "Class B" liquor licensee pays the initial
fee of $10,000 to the Village.
(b) In making its determination whether to award any grant to a
retail reserve "Class B" liquor licensee under this subsection,
the Village Board shall make such findings and establish such
conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that any funds
awarded hereunder further the important public purposes
identified herein.
(3) The fee for agent changes and transfers of licenses shall be $10, or
such other fee as from time to time enacted by the Legislature of
the State of Wisconsin, or as set by the Department of Revenue or
such other state administrative agency as shall have jurisdiction to
set fees.
B. Provisional retail license: $15.
C. Provisional operator's license: $15.
§ 63-10 FOX POINT CODE § 63-10
1:58
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as §§ 2.11, 2.12 and 2.13 of the 1961 Code]
§ 67-1. Disbursing Village funds.
§ 67-2. Special assessments where work done prior to procedure for
levying special assessment.
Whenever any municipal work or improvement has been done in the Village
for which a special assessment could have been levied pursuant to
§ 66.0703, Wis. Stats., and proceedings under said statutes for the levy and
collection of a special assessment were not taken in advance, the Village
Board may levy and collect a special assessment; except for the fact that
the work or improvement has already been commenced or completed, the
procedure shall be as nearly as possible as set forth in § 66.0703, Wis. Stats.
§ 67-3. Payment of taxes; obligation of Village.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 70.67(2), Wis. Stats., the Village
Board hereby agrees and binds the Village of Fox Point to pay, in case the
Village Clerk/Treasurer or his successor in office shall fail to do so, all taxes
of any kind required by law to be paid by the Village Clerk/Treasurer or his
successor in office to the County Treasurer or his successor in office.
A. Pursuant to § 66.0607, Wis. Stats., the Village President and Village
Clerk/Treasurer shall sign a Village order directing the Village Clerk/
Treasurer to pay all accounts and demands against the Village thereon
listed, with the name of the payee, the purpose and amount thereof. The
execution of the order shall constitute evidence that the listed accounts
and demands have been duly filed, audited and allowed and ordered
paid by the Village Board at a meeting thereof in accordance with the
Wisconsin Statutes.
B. The payment of all accounts and demands against the Village pursuant
to orders as herein provided shall be by order checks against any
Village depository, signed by the Village Clerk/Treasurer, and the
signature of the President shall not be required. The use of facsimile
signatures shall be permitted as provided by State Statutes.
C. The term "Village President," as used in this section, shall include an
acting President from time to time appointed by Village Board; and the
term "Village Clerk/Treasurer" shall include the duly appointed and
qualified Deputy Village Clerk and/or Deputy Village Treasurer.
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-3
1:59

ARTICLE II
Installment Payments of Taxes or Special Assessments
[Adopted 1-10-1989 by Ord. No. 89-557 (Ch. 10 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 67-4. Payment dates.
Real property taxes and special assessments shall be paid in one of the
following ways:
§ 67-5. Paying in installments.15
Real property taxes and special assessments may be paid in three
installments. Each installment is due on the last day of the following
designated months:
§ 67-6. Minimum payment; balance payable.
The minimum payment amount for installments is $100, and the taxpayer
must pay the remaining unpaid balance on any installment date.
§ 67-7. Option to pay balance.
On any installment date or any prior date, a taxpayer may pay the balance
of the taxes due.
§ 67-8. Special charges and taxes placed on tax roll.
All special charges and special taxes that are placed on the tax roll shall be
paid in full on or before January 31 and any amounts unpaid as of that date
are delinquent as of February 1.
A. In full on or before January 31; or
B. In installments under this article.
A. The first installment: January; 50% of the aggregate real property tax
and special assessments levied and due shall be paid on or before the
last day of January.
B. The second installment: March; 25% of the aggregate real property tax
and special assessments levied and due shall be paid on or before
March 31.
C. The third installment: May; 25% of the aggregate real property tax and
special assessments levied and due shall be paid on or before May 31.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 67-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-9
1:61
§ 67-9. Personal property taxes.16
All taxes on personal property shall be paid in full on or before five working
days after January 31.
§ 67-10. Delinquent taxes.
If any special assessments, special charges or special taxes are entered in
the tax roll as charges against a parcel of real property and are delinquent
under § 67-8, the entire annual amount of real property taxes on that parcel
which is unpaid is delinquent as of February 1.
§ 67-11. Delinquent first installment.17
If the first installment of real property taxes and special assessments is not
paid on or before five working days after January 31, the entire amount
of the remaining unpaid taxes and special assessments on that parcel is
delinquent as of February 1.
§ 67-12. Delinquent second or subsequent installment.18
If the second or any subsequent installment payment of real property taxes
or special assessments is not paid by five working days after the due date
specified in § 67-5 of this article, the entire amount of the taxes or special
assessments that remain unpaid on that parcel are delinquent as of the first
day of the month after the payment is due.
§ 67-13. Payment of delinquent payments, interest and penalty.19
§ 67-14. Delinquent taxes returned; collection by county.
The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall retain the tax roll and make collections
through July 31. On or before August 15, the Village Clerk/Treasurer shall
A. All real property taxes, special assessments, special charges and
special taxes that become delinquent and are paid on or before July 31,
and all delinquent personal property taxes, whenever paid, shall be
paid, together with interest and penalties charged from the preceding
February 1, to the taxation district treasurer.
B. All real property taxes, special assessments, special charges and
special taxes that become delinquent and are not paid under Subsection
A shall be paid, together with interest and penalties charged from the
preceding February 1, to the county treasurer.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 67-9 FOX POINT CODE § 67-14
1:62
return the tax roll to the County Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall
collect all returned delinquent real property taxes, special assessments,
special charges and special taxes, together with interest and penalty
assessed from the previous February 1, as provided under § 74.47, Wis.
Stats.
§ 67-15. Payment priority.
A. If a taxation district treasurer or county treasurer receives a payment
from a taxpayer which is not sufficient to pay all amounts due, the
treasurer shall apply the payment to the amounts due, including
interest and penalties, in the following order:20
(1) Personal property taxes.
(2) Delinquent utility charges.
(3) Special charges.
(4) Special assessments.
(5) Special taxes.
(6) Real property taxes.
B. The allocation under Subsection A(1) to (6) is conclusive for purposes of
settlement under §§ 74.25 to 74.30, Wis. Stats., and for determining
delinquencies under this article.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 67-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-15
1:63

ARTICLE III
Charges for Professional Fees
[Adopted 2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-03 (§ 2.21 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 67-16. Fees for services. [Amended 12-14-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-18]
The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall charge property owners fees for services,
pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes § 66.0627, in the following circumstances:
§ 67-17. Notice; time period for payment.
The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall give each property owner billed for
current services as provided for herein notice that they shall have a
specified period of time not less than 30 days to pay. Said notice shall also
state that within 15 days of the date of the notice, the property owner may
request a hearing before the Village Board regarding the charge against
the property. Said notice shall also include an itemized statement of the
professional services fees to be charged. Thereafter, if the property owner
requests a hearing within the proper time period, the matter shall proceed
as described in § 67-18 below. If a hearing is not requested within the
required time period, if that charge remains unpaid, the Village Clerk/
A. Whenever a property owner contacts the Village Attorney, Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer, Village Forester or other of the Village's
professional staff, whether such professional staff is employed by the
Village or independently contracted, if said contact and subsequent
service results in a charge to the Village of Fox Point for that
professional's time and services and said service is not a service
supplied to the Village of Fox Point as a whole;
B. Whenever the Village Board, Village Manager, Village Clerk/Treasurer,
or other Village official contacts the Village Attorney, Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer, Village Forester or any of the Village's
professional staff, whether such professional staff is employed by the
Village or independently contracted, regarding an application received
from a property owner, if said contact and subsequent service results in
a charge to the Village of Fox Point for that professional's time and
services and said service is not a service supplied to the Village of Fox
Point as a whole; or
C. Whenever the Village incurs professional fees in considering certified
survey maps, subdivision plats, rezoning petitions, conditional use
permit petitions, site development applications, and other petitions
related to the development of land in the Village. For purposes of this
subsection, professional fees shall include any charges incurred by the
Village in relation to such application from the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer, the Village Attorney, Village Forester or any other of
the Village's professional staff, whether such professional staff is
employed by the Village or independently contracted.
§ 67-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-17
1:65
Treasurer shall automatically charge that delinquent bill against the
property on the tax roll as provided by law. In the event the statement
rendered to the property owner becomes delinquent too late in the year
to be extended on that year's tax roll, then the delinquent charge shall be
extended to the following year's tax roll.
§ 67-18. Appeal to Village Board.
Upon receipt of a timely request for hearing, the Village Board shall hold a
hearing regarding the property charges at its next scheduled meeting or as
soon as feasible. Such hearing shall be preceded by posted public notice and
reasonable notice, via first class mail, to the property owner. In the event a
hearing is requested, no charges shall be placed on the tax roll unless and
until such hearing has been held and a decision has been rendered by the
Village Board, and the Village Board approves the charges against the tax
roll in whole or in part. If approved only in part, only that part of the charges
that are approved may be charged against the tax roll.
§ 67-19. Charge to government agencies.
Whenever it is requested that the Village of Fox Point grant approvals
to any other municipality, agency or other governmental body and that
permit process requires the assistance of contracted professional staff of
the Village, those fees shall also be charged back to the municipality, agency
or governmental body seeking the permit in the manner described in this
article.
§ 67-17 FOX POINT CODE § 67-19
1:66
ARTICLE IV
Delinquent Taxes, Assessments and Fees
[Adopted 11-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-10 (§ 2.22 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 67-20. Approval based on payment of delinquent taxes and other
charges.
No initial or renewal license, permit, variance, conditional use approval,
special exception, zoning approval or any other discretionary action of the
Village of Fox Point or any of its boards, commissions, departments or
employees shall be:
A. Approved for any applicant who is:
(1) Delinquent in the payment of any real property taxes, assessments,
special assessments, sanitary sewer assessments, personal
property taxes, special charges, professional fee reimbursements,
or other claim owed to the Village of Fox Point.
(2) Delinquent in the payment of a forfeiture resulting from the
violation of any ordinance of the Village of Fox Point.
B. Issued for any premises or property for which real property taxes,
assessments, special assessments, sanitary sewer assessments,
personal property taxes, special charges, professional fee
reimbursements or other claims of the Village of Fox Point are
delinquent and unpaid.
§ 67-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-20
1:67

ARTICLE V
Investment Policy
[Adopted 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12 (§ 2.19 of the 1961 Code)
§ 67-21. Governing authority.
The Village of Fox Point Investment Policy shall be operated in conformance
with federal, state, and other legal requirements, including § 66.0603, Wis.
Stats.
§ 67-22. Scope; pooling of funds.
§ 67-23. General objectives.
The primary objectives, in priority order, of investment activities shall be
safety, liquidity, and yield.
A. Scope. This policy applies to the investment of all funds, excluding the
investment of employees' retirement funds.
B. Pooling of funds. Except for cash in certain restricted and special funds,
the Village of Fox Point will consolidate cash and reserve balances from
all funds to maximize investment earnings and to increase efficiencies
with regard to investment pricing, safekeeping and administration.
Investment income will be allocated to the various funds based on their
respective participation and in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles.
A. Safety. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the investment
program. Investments shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to
ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. The objective
will be to mitigate credit risk and interest rate risk.
(1) Credit risk. The Village of Fox Point will minimize credit risk, which
is the risk of loss due to the failure of the security issuer or backer,
by:
(a) Limiting investments to the types of securities listed in § 67-27
of this Investment Policy.
(b) Pre-qualifying the financial institutions, brokers/dealers,
intermediaries, and advisers with which the Village of Fox
Point will do business in accordance with § 67-25.
(c) Diversifying the investment portfolio so that the impact of
potential losses from any one type of security or from any one
individual issuer will be minimized.
(2) Interest rate risk. The Village of Fox Point will minimize interest
rate risk, which is the risk that the market value of securities in the
portfolio will fall due to changes in market interest rates.
§ 67-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-23
1:69
§ 67-24. Standards of care.
Those with responsibility for the investment of Village funds shall exercise
the following standards of care in its handling of the Village's investments.
B. Liquidity. The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid to
meet all operating requirements that may be reasonably anticipated.
C. Yield. The investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of
attaining a market rate of return throughout budgetary and economic
cycles, taking into account the investment risk constraints and liquidity
needs. Return on investment is of secondary importance compared to
the safety and liquidity objectives described above. The core of
investments are limited to relatively low risk securities in anticipation
of earning a fair return relative to the risk being assumed.
A. Prudence. The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials
shall be the "prudent person" standard and shall be applied in the
context of managing an overall portfolio. The "prudent person"
standard states that "Investments shall be made with judgment and
care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence,
discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own
affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the
probable safety of their capital as well as the probable income to be
derived." Investment officers acting in accordance with written
procedures and this investment policy and exercising due diligence
shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's
credit risk or market price changes, provided deviations from
expectations are reported in a timely fashion and the liquidity and the
sale of securities are carried out in accordance with the terms of this
policy.
B. Ethics and conflicts of interest. Village officers and employees involved
in the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity
that could conflict with the proper execution and management of the
investment program, or that could impair their ability to make impartial
decisions. Employees and investment officials shall disclose any
material interests in financial institutions with which they conduct
business. They shall further disclose any personal financial/investment
positions that could be related to the performance of the investment
portfolio. Employees and officers shall refrain from undertaking
personal investment transactions with the same individual with whom
business is conducted on behalf of the Village of Fox Point.
C. Delegation of authority. Authority to manage the investment program is
granted to the Village Clerk/Treasurer, hereinafter referred to as
"investment officer." The investment officer shall act in accordance with
established written procedures and internal controls for the operation
of the investment program consistent with this investment policy.
Procedures should include reference to safekeeping, delivery versus
payment, investment accounting, repurchase agreements, wire transfer
§ 67-23 FOX POINT CODE § 67-24
1:70
§ 67-25. Authorized financial institutions, depositories and brokers/
dealers. [Amended 12-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-18]
A list will be maintained of financial institutions and depositories authorized
to provide investment services. This list shall not apply to deposits and redeposits
made pursuant to § 34.05(4), Wis. Stats., which may be made in
such institutions and in such manner as is described therein. In addition,
a list will be maintained of approved security broker/dealers selected by
creditworthiness (e.g., a minimum capital requirement of $10,000,000 and
at least five years of operation). These may include primary dealers or
regional dealers that qualify under Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) Rule 15C3-1. An annual review of the financial condition and
registration of all qualified financial institutions and broker/dealers will be
conducted by the investment officer. All financial institutions and broker/
dealers who desire to become qualified for investment transactions must
supply the following, as appropriate:
§ 67-26. Safekeeping and custody (internal controls).
The investment officer shall establish a system of internal controls, which
shall be documented in writing. The internal controls shall be reviewed by
the Audit Committee, where present, and with the independent auditor. The
controls shall be designed to prevent the loss of public funds arising from
fraud, employee error, misrepresentation by third parties, unanticipated
changes in financial markets, or imprudent actions by employees and
officers of the Village of Fox Point.
§ 67-27. Suitable and authorized investments.
The following types of investments will be permitted by this policy and are
those defined by state and local law, where applicable:
agreements, and collateral/depository agreements. No person may
engage in an investment transaction except as provided under the
terms of this policy and the procedures established by the investment
officer. The investment officer shall be responsible for all transactions
undertaken and shall establish a system of controls to regulate the
activities of subordinate officials.
A. Audited financial statements. Audited financial statements
demonstrating compliance with state and federal capital adequacy
guidelines.
B. Proof of National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) certification.
C. Proof of state registration.
D. Certification of having read and understood and agreeing to comply
with the Village of Fox Point's investment policy.
E. Evidence of adequate insurance coverage.
§ 67-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-27
1:71
§ 67-28. Diversification.
It is the policy of the Village of Fox Point to diversify its investment portfolio.
The investment officer shall establish strategies and guidelines for the
percentage of the total portfolio that may be invested in securities other
than repurchase agreements, treasury bills or collateralized certificates
of deposit. The Village Board shall conduct a periodic review of these
guidelines and evaluate the probability of market and default risk in various
investment sectors as part of its review. Because of inherent difficulties in
accurately forecasting cash flow requirements, a portion of the portfolio
should be continuously invested in readily available funds, such as the
Local Government Investment Pool of the State of Wisconsin, money market
funds, or overnight repurchase agreements to ensure that appropriate
liquidity is maintained to meet ongoing obligations.
§ 67-29. Reporting.
A. United States Treasury obligations, which carry the full faith and credit
guarantee of the United States government and are considered to be
the most secure instruments available. These funds must have a
maximum maturity of five years and be placed in safekeeping in a
segregated account in the Village of Fox Point's name at any designated
public depository or approved financial institution.
B. United States government agency and instrumentality obligations
where principal and interest are guaranteed by the federal government.
These funds must be placed in safekeeping in a segregated account in
the Village of Fox Point's name at any designated public depository or
approved financial institution.
C. Certificates of deposit and other evidences of deposit at financial
institutions maturing within three years or less from the date of
investment issued by any banks, savings and loan associations or credit
unions. Such investments must be collateralized by U.S. Government
securities having a market value of at least 110% of the investment
unless such collaterization shall have been waived or modified by the
Village Board.
D. Repurchase agreements made in securities which are direct obligations
of or guaranteed as to principal and interest by the federal government;
and securities which are obligations of an agency, commission, board or
other instrumentality of the federal government, where principal and
interest are guaranteed by the federal government. Securities
purchased by a repurchase agreement must be placed in safekeeping in
a segregated account in the Village of Fox Point's name at any
designated public depository or approved financial institution.
E. Local Government Investment Pool of the State of Wisconsin.
F. Deposits and re-deposits as authorized by § 34.05(4), Wis. Stats.
[Added 12-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-18]
§ 67-27 FOX POINT CODE § 67-29
1:72
A. The investment officer shall submit periodically an investment report
that summarizes recent market conditions, economic developments and
anticipated investment conditions. The report shall summarize the
investment strategies employed in the most recent reporting period,
and describe the portfolio in terms of investment securities, maturities,
risk characteristics and other features. The report shall explain the
total investment return and compare the return with budgetary
expectations. The report shall include the disclosure of all transactions
during the reporting period. The report shall be in compliance with
state law and shall be distributed to the Village Board and others as
required by law. Each report shall indicate any areas of policy concern
and suggested or planned revision of investment strategies.
B. Copies shall be provided to the Village's independent auditor. Within 60
days of the end of the fiscal year, the investment officer shall present an
annual report on the investment program and investment activity. The
annual report shall include twelve-month and separate quarterly
comparisons of return and shall suggest policies and improvements that
might be made in the investment program.
§ 67-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-29
1:73
Chapter 112
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 67-29 FOX POINT CODE § 67-29
1:74
ARTICLE I
Village Manager
[Adopted as §§ 2.02, 2.03 and 2.04 of the 1961 Code]
§ 112-1. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of the Village Manager. The Village
Manager shall be appointed by the Village President subject to confirmation
by vote of 2/3 of the members elect of the Village Board. The appointment
may be for an indefinite term or for a term of years not to exceed five years.
An employment agreement shall be entered into with a Village Manager by
vote of 2/3 of the members elect of the Village Board.
§ 112-2. Powers and duties.
A. The Village Manager, subject to limitations defined in resolutions or
ordinances of the Village from time to time in effect, shall be the chief
administrative officer of the Village, responsible to the Village Board for
the proper administration of the business and affairs of the Village
pursuant to the statutes and ordinance and resolutions of the Village
Board, with powers and duties as follows:
(1) To appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service,
suspend or remove employees of the Village, except as he may
authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or
remove subordinates in such department or office.
(2) To attend all meetings of the Village Board unless excused by the
Board and to keep the Village Board advised concerning
developments pertaining to Village administration, business and
affairs and to make recommendations from time to time for
improving the efficiency and quality of the services performed by
the Village.
(3) To have charge of the operation and maintenance of all Villageowned
property, lands, buildings, and improvements and
equipment and of all public ways, ditches, drains, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, water mains and water hydrants.
(4) To have charge of the construction of all public ways, public works
and improvements undertaken directly by the Village.
(5) To perform, ex officio, the duties of Superintendent of the Police
Department of the Village.
(6) To prepare annually and submit to the Village Board a financial
budget of anticipated income and expenditures for the ensuing
fiscal year, and supervise the administration of such budget as
adopted.
(7) To purchase all items of labor, materials, supplies or equipment, the
cost of which does not exceed the Village Manager's authority as
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:75
described in the Village of Fox Point Charter Ordinance No. 8,21
subject to all such limitations described therein.
(8) To prepare and submit to the Village Board as of the end of each
fiscal year a complete report on the financial condition and
administrative activities of the Village for such year.
(9) To perform such other duties as may be delegated to him from time
to time by the Village Board or by any committee of the Village
Board.
B. Fees, permits, licenses, and charges. The Village Manager shall, at least
every two years, prepare reports regarding the adequacy of the fees,
permits, licenses, and charges contained in this Code.
C. Transfer of funds. The Village Manager is authorized to transfer funds
of up to 20% of any line item from that line item, unless a line item is
less than $100, in which event it can be overspent by no more than
100% thereof, to meet unexpected but necessary costs. Any revisions
which change the total budgeted expenditures of a department, capital
costs which exceed $500, and wages and salaries of any kind must be
approved by Village Board action. [Amended 10-12-1993 by Ord. No.
93-599]
D. Limited authority to sell or convey surplus property. The Village
Manager may dispose of surplus property or equipment subject to and
in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) For purposes of this section, "surplus property or equipment"
means property or equipment that is obsolete or otherwise no
longer used by the Village.
(2) The Village Manager shall notify the Village Board in writing of the
intent to dispose of surplus property or equipment at least 30 days
before its sale or conveyance.
(3) When the Village Manager intends to sell or convey surplus
property having a combined estimated value of $10,000 or more,
the Village Board must first approve such sale or conveyance.
(4) The Village Manager shall dispose of surplus property under this
section using one or more of the following methods:
(a) Sale. The Village Manager, or his or her designee, shall
advertise the surplus property or equipment to be sold by a
Class 2 notice and seek sealed bids. The Village Manager may
accept or reject any or all bids but shall sell the property or
equipment to the person who makes the highest acceptable
bid. The Village Manager or his or her designee shall conduct
such sales.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. A1000, Charter Ordinances.
§ 112-2 FOX POINT CODE § 112-2
1:76
§ 112-3. Compensation and bond.
§ 112-4. Assistant Village Manager. [Added 9-12-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-13 (§ 2.045 of the 1961 Code)
(b) By public auction. The Village Manager may dispose of the
surplus property or equipment by holding a public auction
following a Class 2 public notice to the public. The surplus
property or equipment shall be sold to the person who makes
the highest bid at the auction. Such auction shall be conducted
under the supervision of the Village Manager or his or her
designee.
(c) Donation of minimal or no-value items. Any surplus property or
equipment reasonably estimated by the Village Manager to
have a value of less than $100 may be donated to a nonprofit
charitable organization or to a governmental agency if, in the
discretion of the Village Manager, the cost of holding a sale or
public auction under Subsection D(4)(a) and (b) of this section
would exceed the value of the item.
(5) The Village Manager shall submit an inventory of all surplus
property and equipment disposed of under this subsection to the
Village Board and provide a copy of such inventory to the Village
Clerk-Treasurer. Such inventory shall include a description of the
property, a record of the date and method of sale, the name and
address of the buyer, and the amount paid to the Village for the
surplus property or equipment sold.
(6) All funds received from sales of surplus property and equipment
shall be paid into the general fund of the Village treasury.
(7) Employees, officers, and agents of the Village may not acquire
property that is sold or conveyed under this subsection.
A. The compensation of the Village Manager shall be fixed by the Village
Board.
B. The Village Manager shall be reimbursed for actual expenditures
incident to the performance of his official duties, as authorized or
approved by the Village Board.
C. When required by the Village Board, the Village Manager will furnish a
surety bond, in a form approved by the Village President, in an amount
fixed by the Village Board conditioned upon the faithful performance of
his duties as Village Manager and upon his proper accounting for all
Village funds which come into his hands. The premium for the bond
shall be paid by the Village.
A. The Village Manager may appoint an Assistant Village Manager who
shall have the responsibilities and duties as delegated by the Manager.
§ 112-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:77
§ 112-4.1. Interim Village Manager. [Added 11-17-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-10]
There is hereby created the office of Interim Village Manager. An Interim
Village Manager may be appointed by the majority of the members of
the Village Board present and voting, if the office of Village Manager is
vacant. The Interim Village Manager shall have all powers and duties of
the Village Manager as described in § 112-2 of this Code, subject to any
limitations that the Village Board may impose on the powers of the Interim
Village Manager by duly adopted motion or employment agreement. The
compensation of the Interim Village Manager shall be fixed by the Village
Board. The appointment may be for a definite or an indefinite term, but
shall be at will and subject to termination at any time by the majority of
the Village Board present and voting. If not terminated earlier by action of
the Village Board, the appointment shall automatically terminate upon the
commencement of employment of a Village Manager appointed pursuant to
§ 112-1 of this Code.
B. The Assistant Manager may hold additional positions and titles within
the Village of Fox Point consistent with Wisconsin Statutes.
C. Whenever the Village Manager is temporarily unable or not available to
perform the duties of office because of illness, absence from the Village
or for any other cause, such duties and powers shall be exercised by the
Assistant Village Manager. If there is no Assistant Village Manager, or
the Assistant Village Manager is also temporarily unable or not
available to perform the duties of the Village Manager's office because
of illness, absence from the Village or for any other cause, such duties
and powers shall be exercised by the Village Department Head
designated by the Village Manager. If there is no Assistant Village
Manager, or the Assistant Village Manager is unable or not available to
perform the duties of the Village Manager's office and the Village
Manager has not designated a Village Department Head to exercise
such duties and powers, they shall be exercised by the Village
President.
§ 112-4 FOX POINT CODE § 112-4.1
1:78
ARTICLE II
Police Department
[Adopted as §§ 3.01 to 3.16 and 3.18 of the 1961 Code]
§ 112-5. Police protection; supervision of Department.
§ 112-6. Superintendent.
The head of the Department of Police shall be known as the Superintendent
of the Department of Police. Duties and responsibilities of the position are
vested in the Village Manager or other individual appointed by the Village
Board. The Superintendent of the Department of Police shall be responsible
to the Village Board for the efficiency and general good conduct of the
Department of Police.
§ 112-7. Authorized positions.
§ 112-8. Chief of Police.
A. Police protection in the Village shall be rendered by a single
department known as the Department of Police.
B. The general administration and supervision of the Department of Police
shall remain with the Village Board.
A. In addition to the Superintendent of the Department of Police, the
following positions are established in said department:
(1) Chief of Police (one).
(2) Captain of Police (one).
(3) Sergeant of Police.
(4) Investigator of Police.
(5) Police Officer.
(6) Police Clerk.22
(7) Administrative Assistant.
(8) Municipal Court Clerk.
(9) Auxiliary Police.
B. There shall always be a Chief. The number of persons in the other
positions provided for shall be decided by the Village Board from time
to time, and the Village Board may from time to time determine that any
position which is vacant shall not be filled.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 112-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-8
1:79
§ 112-9. Captain of Police.
A. The Chief of the Department of Police is responsible for the operation of
the Department, the training of the members in police techniques,
training of the police auxiliary unit, the maintenance of the public
peace, and enforcement of all laws and ordinances of which his/her
Department must take cognizance. Whenever any violations thereof
shall come to his/her knowledge, he/she shall cause the proper
complaint to be made and procure the evidence for the successful
prosecution of the offender or offenders. In addition to the general job
duties contained within this section of the Municipal Code, the Chief
shall prepare and keep current job descriptions for each position
authorized by the Village Board.
B. The Chief shall be responsible for and have the custody and control of
all equipment of every kind necessary for the operation of his/her
Department, and all public property pertaining to, connected therewith,
and belonging thereto.
C. The Chief shall keep or cause to be kept such books and records as may
be specifically provided for by statute and ordinance, and shall submit a
report to the Village Board and Superintendent at the end of each
month showing the number of arrests made during such month as well
as a record of all other types of activities of his/her Department. He/she
shall keep or cause to be kept a full and complete record of all
transactions and complaints against members, and shall prepare an
annual report to the Village Board and the Police Commission. He/she
shall also maintain such other books and records as may be deemed
necessary by the Village Board or the State of Wisconsin.
D. The Chief, or personnel designated by him/her, is authorized to take
bail. The Chief, or designated personnel, may require such person to
deposit money or other negotiable sureties in lieu of money, to insure
such person's appearance in court having cognizance of the offense.
Should such person fail to appear, the court before whom the case is
required to be heard may declare such money, or negotiable sureties
deposited in lieu of money, forfeited, and the amount in excess of the
amount necessary to satisfy the judgment by the payment of money
from the conversion of the negotiable sureties shall be paid into the
Village treasury.
E. The Chief shall obey all lawful written orders of the Superintendent and
the Village Board.
A. The Captain of the Department of Police shall be in charge of the Police
Department and shall assume the Chief's duties during the absence of
the Chief of the Department of Police. He/she shall operate the
Department under existing rules, regulations, procedures, and policies.
He/she shall do related work as directed or required.
§ 112-8 FOX POINT CODE § 112-9
1:80
§ 112-10. Sergeant of Police.23
Each Sergeant of the Department of Police shall be in charge of an assigned
shift. He/she shall operate his/her shift under existing rules, regulations,
procedures, and policies. He/she shall supervise the police officers and
civilian personnel assigned to him/her, and shall take the necessary action
on complaints received by telephone or in person. He/she and the police
officers assigned to him/her shall patrol the Village to insure the
enforcement of all laws and ordinances. He/she shall do related work as
directed or required.
§ 112-11. Police officers.
Each police officer of the Department of Police shall be responsible for
the protection of life and property, the prevention of crime, the arrest
of violators of the law, and the proper enforcement of all the laws and
ordinances of the Village of Fox Point during his/her hours of duty. He/she
shall patrol the portion of the Village to which he/she is assigned. He/she
shall do related work as directed or required.
§ 112-12. Police Clerks.24
Each Police Clerk shall be responsible for performing clerical duties and
providing nonemergency assistance to individuals calling or visiting the
Police Department. The Police Clerks are responsible for processing
citations, reports, memos and office documents, including transcription,
typing, and data entry. The Police Clerks receive and document payments
to the Police Department and query and enter data to the TIME Teletype
System. They shall do related work as directed or required.
§ 112-13. Administrative Assistant.
The Administrative Assistant of the Department of Police shall be
responsible for the general administration of the Department under the
direction of the Chief of Police. This is a confidential position. He/she
shall prepare and maintain all confidential reports, such as union matters,
disciplinary matters, labor negotiations, medical and police reports,
monthly uniform crime reports, annual reports, and personnel matters. He/
she shall also maintain a filing system, project files, training projects, and
B. The Captain shall plan and supervise programs of police training for
members of the Department of Police. He/she shall conduct special
police investigations. He/she shall exercise supervisory and disciplinary
control over all shifts. He/she shall promote and maintain close
cooperative working relations between all members of the Department
of Police and between members thereof and the public.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 112-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-13
1:81
correspondence. He/she shall perform the duties of Court Clerk during the
absence of the Clerk. He/she shall do related work as directed or required.
§ 112-14. Municipal Court Clerk.
The Municipal Court Clerk shall be appointed by the Municipal Judge. He/
she shall, for the purpose of wage administration, benefits, and day-to-day
operations, be under the direction of the Captain of Police. The Municipal
Court Clerk shall be responsible for the administration of the Municipal
Court in compliance with appropriate laws and procedures. He/she shall do
related work as directed or required.
§ 112-15. Commanding officer. [Amended 8-10-1999 by Ord. No.
99-14]
The on-duty sergeant shall be the commanding officer of the shift. In the
absence of a sergeant, the Chief of Police shall designate an officer as shift
commander.
§ 112-16. Vacancies.
§ 112-17. Acting appointment.
A. A vacancy may be considered to exist in the event of:
(1) The death, resignation, or discharge of the person previously
holding the position.
(2) The suspension of the person holding the position, with or without
pay.
(3) The absence on leave of the person holding the position, with or
without pay.
(4) The absence because of illness or injury of the person holding the
position.
B. When it is made to appear to the Village Board or the Police
Commission that any one or more of the above situations exists creating
a vacancy, the Board or Commission may appoint a person to fill such
position. Such person need not be at the time of appointment a member
of the Department of Police of the Village of Fox Point.
A. In the event of a vacancy, a person appointed to an acting position shall
use the title "Acting (title of Office)," and while he/she is in such
position shall exercise and have all the rights, powers, duties, and
obligations of a person permanently in such position, unless specifically
restricted.
B. In the event of a vacancy and the subsequent appointment of an acting
officer, the term of office of such acting officer shall not exceed one
year.
§ 112-13 FOX POINT CODE § 112-17
1:82
§ 112-18. General duties.
In addition to the duties above set forth for respective personnel, each
member of the Department of Police shall perform such other duties as
may be delegated or assigned to him/her from time to time by the
Superintendent or Chief, and in the performance of his/her duties shall obey
all lawful orders of a superior officer.
§ 112-19. Compensation and hours of work.
Wages, hours, and conditions of employment of members of the Department
of Police shall be as established from time to time by the Village Board. The
schedule of days and shifts to be worked shall be as established from time
to time by the Chief.
§ 112-20. Auxiliary police.
C. The compensation for such acting officer shall be established by the
Village Board.
A. Members. The Chief of the Department of Police is hereby authorized
and empowered to appoint from time to time in accordance with
applicable rules adopted by the Village Board from an eligible list
maintained by him/her such number of persons as auxiliary police
officers as the Village Board may authorize from time to time.
(1) Auxiliary police officers do not have the power of arrest (except for
the same power that any citizen has). They are not police officers
and, therefore, not in any respect under the jurisdiction or control
of the Police Commission.
(2) Auxiliary police officers shall serve without compensation unless
otherwise provided by the Village Board. Auxiliary police officers
appointed hereunder shall be and are hereby designated
employees of the Village of Fox Point and shall be included on the
Village's Workers' Compensation Program at a compensation level
equivalent to that of a police officer, regardless of actual
compensation or lack thereof.
B. Eligibility. Each person to be an auxiliary police officer shall at the
minimum, at the time of appointment, and at all times thereafter, meet
the following qualifications:
(1) Be at least 18 years of age.
(2) Be of good moral character and reputation.
(3) Be mentally and physically capable of performing those duties
assigned.
C. Duties. The sole function of auxiliary police is to aid and assist regularly
appointed police officers in the discharge of such police officer's duties.
§ 112-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-20
1:83
(1) Auxiliary police shall perform such duties as may be assigned to
them by the Chief of the Department of Police in the event a civil
defense emergency has been declared, in the case of local disorder
or disturbances, or threatened disorder or disturbances, and at
such other times as the Chief believes the auxiliary police can be of
assistance to the regularly appointed and acting police officers.
(2) Whenever the Chief is not on duty, the powers and authorities given
to him by this subsection shall be exercised by the Commanding
Officer of the Department of Police.
D. Compliance with rules. Every auxiliary police officer shall at all times:
(1) Conform to and comply with rules and regulations for the Fox Point
Department of Police, and with all rules applying specifically to
auxiliary police.
(2) Obey and comply with all orders and directions of regularly
appointed police officers.
E. Removal. The Chief may suspend or remove any person or persons as
an auxiliary police officer at any time without cause.
F. Appeal.
(1) In the event a person has been suspended or removed as an
auxiliary police officer as provided in Subsection E of this section,
such person may appeal to the Village Manager from the action of
the Chief suspending or removing him/her. Such appeal shall be in
writing and shall be delivered to the Village Manager not later than
10 days after the person has been advised of the action by the
Chief.
(2) The Village Manager, on receiving such an appeal, shall schedule a
hearing to be held not more than 20 days after he/she has received
the appeal, and shall give the person appealing and the Chief at
least five days' written notice of the time and place of said hearing.
At said hearing, both the Chief and the person appealing shall be
heard, and after the hearing the Village Manager may reverse,
modify, or affirm the action taken by the Chief. The decision of the
Village Manager is final.
§ 112-20 FOX POINT CODE § 112-20
1:84
ARTICLE III
Village President
[Adopted 9-26-1967 by Ord. No. 345 (§ 2.046 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 112-21. Acting President.
Whenever because of illness, absence from the Village, or for any other
cause the Village President is unable to perform the duties or exercise the
powers of his office, including those which are discretionary, the senior
Trustee present in the Village and not unable to act because of illness or any
other cause may exercise the duties and powers of the President, including
those which are discretionary. Seniority shall be determined on the basis
of continuous tenure in the office of Trustee, provided that if two Trustees
have the same length of continuous tenure in office, then the one whose
last name begins with a letter appearing in the alphabet before the letter
with which the last name of the other begins shall be considered senior
to the other. The Trustee acting hereunder shall be considered the Acting
President.
§ 112-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-21
1:85

ARTICLE IV
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
[Adopted 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12 (§ 2.05 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 112-22. Creation of position.
The position of Director of Public Works/Village Engineer is hereby created
with the duties and qualifications as follows.
§ 112-23. Duties.
The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer shall direct, manage and
coordinate the Village's street maintenance, water distribution, sanitary
sewer collection, stormwater collection, solid waste collection, snow
removal, fleet maintenance, forestry and parks maintenance operations and
related capital projects. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer shall
direct, manage and coordinate the operation of the Village Departments
of Public Works, Forestry and Engineering. The Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer shall be under the supervision of the Village Manager and
shall carry out the general and specific assignments of the Village Manager.
§ 112-24. Qualifications.
The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer shall possess a Bachelor's
Degree in civil engineering, public administration, or a related field and five
years of progressively responsible experience in public works operations
and management or a closely related field. An equivalent combination of
education and experience may be considered. Registration as a professional
engineer is desirable but not required.
§ 112-25. Interpretation.25
At such times as the Village of Fox Point does not employ a Village Engineer
or consulting Village Engineer with regard to any particular project, but
does employ a Director of Public Works, all references in this Code to the
Village Engineer with regard to such project shall be interpreted to refer
instead to the Director of Public Works.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 112-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-25
1:87
Chapter 116
ORDINANCES AND NOTICES
§ 116-1. Official newspaper.
The Village Board shall designate an official newspaper and may change the
same from time to time.
§ 116-2. Publication. [Amended 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
All ordinances and notices which are to be published shall be published in
the official newspaper, except in those cases where the Wisconsin Statutes
require publication in some other manner or the Wisconsin Statutes permit
publication in some other manner; in such cases, publication shall be as
directed by the Village Board. Whenever posting may be used in lieu of
publication in a newspaper, posting shall be as described in § 116-4.
§ 116-3. Village Code.
A Village Code or part thereof shall be published in book or pamphlet form.
§ 116-4. Posting of official public notices.
Chapter 128
A. Except as described in Subsection B and C, below, the following places
are designated as locations in the Village for the posting of official
public notices: [Amended 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
(1) In the front window of the Village Hall located at 7200 N. Santa
Monica Blvd., Fox Point, Wisconsin;
(2) On the Village bulletin board located near the bus shelter at the
intersection of Lake Drive and Dean Road, Fox Point, Wisconsin;
and
(3) On the Village bulletin board located at 8705 North Port
Washington Road (in the River Point Village Shopping Center), Fox
Point, Wisconsin.
B. The Village Manager is authorized to designate temporary alternative
or additional posting locations in the Village as necessary from time to
time due to the locations identified in Subsection A, above, being
temporarily inaccessible or unavailable, or as required by applicable
laws.
C. Whenever § 985.02(2)(a), Wis. Stats., applies, the notice may be posted
in the front window of the Village Hall located at 7200 North Santa
Monica Boulevard, Fox Point, Wisconsin, and placed electronically on
the Village's official Internet site, in lieu of posting in three locations.
[Added 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
§ 112-25 FOX POINT CODE § 116-4
1:88
PROPERTY, LOST AND ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 713.
§ 128-1. Village custody of lost, abandoned or seized property.
§ 128-2. Disposal procedures for particular classes of property.
The following classes of property may be disposed as follows:
A. Applicability. Property which appears to be lost or abandoned,
discovered by officers, seized pursuant to a search warrant, turned in to
the Police Department by citizens, or turned in to the Police
Department by other Village employees or departments shall be
disposed of according to this chapter. Property that is unclaimed for 30
days after it comes into the Village's possession is deemed to be
abandoned.
B. Notice when reasonably possible. The Police Department shall make
reasonable efforts to notify the owner that the property is in the custody
of the Police Department and may be claimed by contacting the Police
Department and providing sufficient proof of ownership, except as
described otherwise in this chapter. If no claim for ownership is made
within 30 days of the date of such notice, the property shall be disposed
of according to this chapter. If no identifying marks are present or the
Police Department is unable to reasonably determine who the owner
may be, the property shall be taken into custody by the Police
Department and disposed of according to this chapter.
A. Seized property, dangerous weapons and ammunition. Property that is
subject to § 968.20, Wis. Stats., shall be disposed as described therein.
B. Illegal or contraband property. Property which cannot be legally
possessed shall be destroyed.
C. Animals. Unclaimed animals are subject to § 173.23, Wis. Stats., which
is administered for the Village by the Milwaukee Area Domestic Animal
Control Commission (MADACC).
D. Abandoned vehicles. Abandoned vehicles shall be disposed of as set
forth in the applicable provisions of Chapter 713, Vehicles, Abandoned,
of the Code of the Village of Fox Point.
E. Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages. Intoxicating liquor
and fermented malt beverages shall be destroyed.
F. Incendiary materials. Flammable, explosive, or incendiary substances,
materials, or devices that pose a danger to life or property in their
§ 116-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-2
1:89
§ 128-3. Lost property.
Property which is found by persons and delivered to the Chief of Police
for the purpose of locating the former owner and which has not been
claimed by the former owner within 30 days from the date the Police
Department take custody of the property shall not be considered abandoned
or unclaimed under this chapter until 30 days after mailing to the person
finding the property a notice to claim said property. The Chief of Police shall
determine what portion, if any, of the property or its value shall be given
to the finder. This provision shall not apply to any Village employee finding
property in the regular course of employment.
§ 128-4. Method of disposal.
Chapter 143
RECORDS
§ 143-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to specify retention periods for certain Village
records and to allow access to the same extent, and in the same manner, as
allowed by state law.
storage, transportation, or use may be immediately disposed per
§ 66.0139(3), Wis. Stats.
A. Property to be disposed pursuant to this chapter may be disposed by
any means determined to be in the best interest of the Village, which
may include public auction, sealed bid, contract, a trade on other
property to be acquired by the Village, or retention for the use of the
Village. An item of property with a fair market value of $100 or less may
be disposed by the Chief of Police, or the department head responsible
for the item, by donation to a nonprofit organization, unless specifically
regulated otherwise by § 128-2 above. Perishable property which
deteriorates to a fair market value of less than $100 shall be destroyed.
A sale by public auction may include the sale of items through a website
via the Internet, independently or using a third party to assist in the
sale of the items. The property shall be sold in an as-is condition. Any
Village official selling property under this chapter shall maintain for
two years an inventory of any property sold that shall include a record
of the date and method of disposal, any payment received for the
property, and the name and address of the person acquiring the
property.
B. Payment to Village Treasury. All sums received from the sale of property
under this chapter shall be paid to the Village Treasury.
§ 128-2 FOX POINT CODE § 143-2
1:90
§ 143-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LEGAL CUSTODIAN — The individual responsible for maintaining records
pursuant to § 19.33, Wisconsin Statutes.
RECORD — Has the meaning defined in § 19.32(2), Wisconsin Statutes.
REQUESTOR — Has the meaning defined in § 19.32(3), Wisconsin Statutes.
RETENTION PERIOD — The minimum required period of time that a
document will be maintained as described in § 143-4.
§ 143-3. Duty to maintain.
Village legal custodians shall maintain all records for the retention period,
and for any additional time period as described in § 143-6, if applicable.
Thereafter, after the State Historical Society has waived receipt of the
records (see § 143-5), the legal custodian may destroy the records.
§ 143-4. Retention period.
§ 143-5. Notice to State Historical Society.
A. The Village Board, by separate resolution, shall adopt a schedule which
describes the minimum time periods for which records shall be
maintained by a legal custodian of the Village of Fox Point. Said
resolution may be amended from time to time, as described below, and
the resolution and any amendments thereto are incorporated herein by
reference.
B. The initial retention schedule resolution that is adopted
contemporaneously with this chapter has been reviewed and approved
along with this chapter by the State of Wisconsin Public Records Board.
The retention schedule resolution shall not be modified in a manner
that reduces the retention periods described in the initial retention
schedule resolution, or which adds additional documents to the
schedule, unless those reductions or retention periods for additional
documents are first reviewed and approved by the Wisconsin Public
Records Board.
C. Any record that is not described in the retention schedule shall be
maintained for a minimum of seven years, and may be destroyed
thereafter unless a longer retention period is required by § 143-6, or by
state statute, rule, or other applicable law.
A. The Wisconsin State Historical Society has waived the notice that would
otherwise be required prior to destruction of certain records as
described in the retention schedule. The retention schedule resolution
shall not be modified in a manner that waives notice to the Wisconsin
State Historical Society, or which adds additional documents to the
§ 143-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-5
1:91
§ 143-6. Additional retention periods.
In addition to the retention period described in the retention schedule,
records shall be maintained for the following additional time periods:
§ 143-7. Reproduced original records.
Records may be kept and preserved through the use of microfilm or another
reproductive device, optical imaging, electronic formatting, or any other
reproduction format authorized by § 19.21(4)(c), Wisconsin Statutes, and
said reproduction shall be deemed an original record for all purposes, in
accordance with § 19.21(4)(c), Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 143-8. Statutes incorporated.
All state statutes incorporated or referenced herein shall be deemed to
include all subsequent amendments, repeals, and renumbering that may
be enacted regarding the same, in order to ensure uniform statewide
regulation of public records.
Part II: Public Works and Utilities
Chapter 239
PARKS AND PARKWAYS
schedule and waives notice of their destruction, unless those waivers
are first reviewed and approved by the Wisconsin Public Records Board
and the Wisconsin State Historical Society.
B. In the event that the retention schedule does not specifically note the
Wisconsin State Historical Society's waiver regarding any particular
record, then the Wisconsin State Historical Society must be given 60
days written notice prior to destruction of the record, as described in
§ 19.21(4)(a), Wisconsin Statutes.
A. A record that is existing at the time of a request shall not be destroyed
until after the request is granted, or in the event the request is denied
until at least the time period described in § 19.35(5), Wisconsin
Statutes, has passed from the date of the denial.
B. A record that is existing at the time that the legal custodian receives
written notice that a mandamus action relating to the record has been
commenced pursuant to § 19.37, shall not be destroyed until the final
court order is issued in the action and the appeals are exhausted, as
further describe in § 19.35(5), Wisconsin Statutes.
C. A record that is known by the legal custodian to be relevant to litigation
or audit that is pending at the time that the record would otherwise be
destroyed, shall not be destroyed until the litigation or audit is resolved.
§ 143-5 FOX POINT CODE § 143-8
1:92
ARTICLE I
Adoption of County Regulations
[Adopted by Ord. No. 424 (§ 47.001 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 239-1. Adoption by reference.
Chapter 47 of the Ordinances of the County of Milwaukee, exclusive of any
provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed for violations of
said ordinance, is herewith adopted by reference and made a part of this
article as though more fully set forth herein. The sections and subsections
of said Chapter 47 of the Ordinances of Milwaukee County are herewith
adopted as sections and subsections of this article of the Fox Point Village
Code. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by Chapter 47 of
the Ordinances of Milwaukee County incorporated herein by reference is
required or prohibited by this article.
§ 239-2. Applicability.
The incorporation into the Fox Point Village Code as above set forth of
Chapter 47 of the Ordinances of the County of Milwaukee applies to this
article as now written and as the same may be amended from time to time.
§ 239-3. Violations and penalties.
The provisions of § 1-4 of the Fox Point Village Code apply to this article.
§ 239-4. Additional and complementary provisions.
The provisions of this article are complementary and in addition to all other
ordinances of the Village of Fox Point and do not replace or supersede any
other ordinance.
§ 239-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-4
1:93

ARTICLE II
Longacre Pavilion
[Adopted 3-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-06 (§ 47.002 of the 1961
Code)]
§ 239-5. Regulation of use.
Use of the Longacre Pavilion may be made available to residents of the
Village of Fox Point subject to rules and regulations established by the
Village Board from time to time, which shall be on file with the Village Clerk/
Treasurer.
§ 239-6. Application; private use agreement.
§ 239-7. Fees required.
A. Any resident of the Village of Fox Point desiring to use the Longacre
Pavilion shall submit an application for such use in the form provided by
the Village Clerk/Treasurer together with the applicable fee(s) as
provided in § 239-7 below.
B. No use of the Longacre Pavilion shall be authorized under this article
until the applicant has entered into a private use agreement in the form
supplied by the Village Clerk/Treasurer and the applicant has complied
with the provisions of § 239-7 below. The Village Manager or designee
shall have the authority to enter into and execute such private use
agreement on behalf of the Village.
A. At the time of application, the applicant shall deposit such use fees as
established by the Village Board from time to time together with the
deposit fee as established by the Village Manager.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, an applicant
requesting use of the Longacre Pavilion on behalf of the following
organizations shall be exempt from the deposit and/or payment of use
fees: [Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-08]
(1) An organization specified in § 70.11(12)(a), Wis. Stats.
(2) A farmers market that is duly licensed pursuant to § 362-7 of this
Code.
(3) An educational, religious, community service, or benevolent
institution that is located within the Village of Fox Point and is
specifically dedicated to public services and/or activities within the
Village of Fox Point as demonstrated by its articles of incorporation,
bylaws, or other similar organizational documents to the
satisfaction of the Village Manager.
C. The Village Manager shall have the authority to determine applicability
of the use fee exemption provided for under Subsection B of this
section; provided, however, that the Village Manager and/or any
§ 239-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-7
1:95
§ 239-8. Offenses during private use of Longacre Pavilion. [Added
5-11-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-10]
The Longacre Pavilion facility and the surrounding grounds, 7343 North
Longacre Road, Fox Point, Wisconsin, is a public facility that is available for
private use under certain circumstances, and subject to the Village of Fox
Point rules and regulations and related approval requirements. During any
such period of private use, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
any of the following activities:
applicant may request Village Board review of a decision by the Village
Manager regarding the applicability of the use fee exemption.
Additionally, any other organization seeking an exemption based upon
service or benefit to the Village of Fox Point may apply to the Village
Board for an exemption from the use fee requirements of this section.
A. Closing time. No person shall remain within the Longacre Pavilion
building or on the Longacre Pavilion grounds after 12:00 midnight.
B. Alcohol beverage limitations.
(1) No intoxicating liquor except wine. No person shall sell, dispense,
consume, possess or otherwise use intoxicating liquor, as defined in
§ 125.02(8), Wis. Stats., in the Longacre Pavilion building or on the
Longacre Pavilion grounds, except wine as defined in § 125.02(22),
Wis. Stats. This prohibition shall not be interpreted to apply to beer
or other fermented malt beverages as defined in § 125.02(6), Wis.
Stats.
(2) No unlicensed sale. No persons shall sell wine or fermented malt
beverages as defined in § 125.02, Wis. Stats., except pursuant to a
license issued under § 125.51(10) or 125.26(6), Wis. Stats.
C. Fire prohibited. No person shall build a fire or allow a fire to be built or
conducted within the Longacre Pavilion building, including within the
fireplace, or on the Longacre Pavilion grounds.
D. Penalties. Violations of this section shall be subject to the penalties
described in § 1-4 of the Village Code.
§ 239-7 FOX POINT CODE § 239-8
1:96
Chapter 260
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater utility — See Ch. 288.
Water — See Ch. 325.
Building construction — See Ch. 756.
Plumbing — See Ch. 825.
§ 239-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-8
1:97

ARTICLE I
Metropolitan Sewer Charges
[Adopted by Ord. No. 455 (Ch. 7 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 260-1. Purpose.
The wastewater of this municipality is collected and treated in whole or
in part by the wastewater system operated by the Sewerage Commission
of the City of Milwaukee (the "Commission") on behalf of itself, the
Metropolitan Sewerage Commission of the County of Milwaukee (the
"Metropolitan Commission") and the Metropolitan Sewerage District of the
County of Milwaukee (the "District"). The purpose of this article is to enable
this municipality to establish and collect from users within the municipality
those charges which represent the proportionate contribution by such users
both to the cost of operating and maintaining the system and that part of
the cost of past and future capital improvements in the system not defrayed
by an ad valorem tax on real property. Such charges are required to enable
the District to become and remain eligible for federal grants for wastewater
facility capital improvements.
§ 260-2. Incorporation of District rules and regulations.
A. The following sections and related appendices of District Rules and
Regulations, Article XVII, promulgated by the Commission, the
Metropolitan Commission and the District, as now in effect and as the
same may be amended from time to time hereafter, are hereby
incorporated by reference and shall be of full force and effect as though
set forth in their entirety herein.
Section 1701.020 Definitions
Section 1701.040 Municipal Transfer of Data
Section 1701.041 Estimated Volume of Discharge
Section 1701.050 User Transfer of Data
Section 1701.051 Discharge Factor Certification
Section 1701.052 Waste Strength Certification
Section 1701.053 Certification Procedures
Section 1701.054 Verification
Section 1701.055 Audit Control of User Connections
Section 1701.056 Appeal Provision
Section 1702.010 Purpose of the User Charge System
Section 1702.020 User Charge Billing Basis
Section 1702.030 Wholesale User Charge Billing Basis
Section 1702.040 Unit Costs of Treatment
Section 1703.010 Purpose of the Local Capital Cost Recovery (LCR)
System
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-2
1:99
§ 260-3. User charges.
There is hereby imposed a charge on each user in this municipality who
discharges wastewater, directly or indirectly, into the wastewater system
operated by the Commission. Such charge shall be in the amount specified
below for the various classes of users.
Section 1703.020 LCR Billing Basis
Section 1703.030 Wholesale LCR Billing Basis
Section 1703.040 Unit Costs of LCR
Section 1704.010 Purpose of the Industrial Cost Recovery (ICR)
System
Section 1704.020 ICR Billing Basis
Section 1704.030 Wholesale ICR Billing Basis
Section 1704.040 Unit Costs of ICR
B. For purposes hereof, "residential structure," as defined in District Rules
and Regulations, Article XVII, shall mean any building accommodating
exclusively one or two residential units.
A. Residential users. The residential user charge shall be based on a
uniform charge, as follows: The uniform charge for each residential unit
shall be calculated by dividing the wholesale residential user charge
(i.e., the charge by the Commission to the municipality) by the number
of residential units in the municipality. Individual residential user
charges shall be calculated as the user's number of residential units
times this uniform charge.
B. Noncertified commercial users. The retail noncertified commercial user
charge shall be based on a volumetric charge, as follows: The
volumetric charge shall be calculated by dividing the wholesale
noncertified commercial user charge (i.e., the charge by the
Commission to the municipality) by the total volume of noncertified
commercial water consumption. Individual noncertified commercial
user charges shall be calculated by multiplying the user's volume of
water consumption times this volumetric charge.
C. Discharge certified commercial users. Each retail discharge certified
commercial user charge shall be equal to each wholesale discharge
certified commercial user charge submitted to the municipality
pursuant to District Rules and Regulations, Article XVII.
D. Waste strength certified commercial users. Each retail waste strength
certified commercial user charge shall be equal to each wholesale
waste strength certified commercial user charge submitted to the
municipality pursuant to District Rules and Regulations, Article XVII.
E. Noncertified industrial users. Each retail noncertified industrial user
charge shall be equal to each wholesale noncertified industrial user
§ 260-2 FOX POINT CODE § 260-3
1:100
§ 260-4. Local capital recovery charges.
There is hereby imposed a local capital recovery (LCR) charge on each
industrial user in this municipality whose function is described by the
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Division D ("LCR user"). The LCR
charge shall be in the amount specified below for the various classes of LCR
users:
§ 260-5. Industrial cost recovery charges.
There is hereby imposed an industrial cost recovery (ICR) charge on each
ICR user (as defined in District Rules and Regulations, Article XVII) in this
municipality. The ICR charge shall be in the amount specified below for the
various classes of ICR users.
charge submitted to the municipality pursuant to District Rules and
Regulations, Article XVII.
F. Discharge certified industrial users. Each retail discharge certified
industrial user charge shall be equal to each wholesale discharge
certified industrial user charge submitted to the municipality pursuant
to District Rules and Regulations, Article XVII.
G. Waste strength certified industrial users. Each retail waste strength
certified industrial user charge shall be equal to each wholesale waste
strength certified industrial user charge submitted to the municipality
pursuant to District Rules and Regulations, Article XVII.
A. Noncertified industrial users. Each retail noncertified industrial LCR
charge shall be equal to each wholesale noncertified industrial LCR
charge submitted to the municipality pursuant to District Rules and
Regulations, Article XVII.
B. Discharge certified industrial users. Each retail discharge certified
industrial LCR charge shall be equal to each wholesale discharge
certified LCR charge submitted to the municipality pursuant to District
Rules and Regulations, Article XVII.
C. Waste strength certified industrial users. Each retail waste strength
certified industrial LCR charge shall be equal to each wholesale waste
strength certified industrial LCR charge submitted to the municipality
pursuant to District Rules and Regulations, Article XVII.
A. Noncertified industrial users. Each retail noncertified industrial ICR
charge shall be equal to each wholesale noncertified industrial ICR
charge submitted to the municipality pursuant to District Rules and
Regulations, Article XVII.
B. Discharge certified industrial users. Each retail discharge certified
industrial ICR charge shall be equal to each wholesale discharge
certified industrial ICR charge submitted to the municipality pursuant
to District Rules and Regulations, Article XVII.
§ 260-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-5
1:101
§ 260-6. Billing.
C. Waste strength certified industrial users. Each retail waste strength
certified industrial ICR charge shall be equal to each wholesale waste
strength certified industrial ICR charge submitted to the municipality
pursuant to District Rules and Regulations, Article XVII.
A. Charges.
(1) User, LCR, and ICR charges shall be billed on a quarterly basis.
Payment of such bills shall be made within 20 days after mailing by
the municipality. In the event that such bill is not paid when due, a
penalty of 1 1/2% per month shall be added thereto. This late
payment charge will be applied to the total unpaid balance,
including late payment charges.
(2) In addition to the charges imposed pursuant to §§ 260-3, 260-4 and
260-5, a charge is hereby imposed to reimburse the Village for
administrative and clerical costs related to collection of the above
referred to charges. The amount of such charge assessed against
individual users shall be determined in the same manner as the
other charges above set forth.
(3) In addition to all the charges above provided for, the Village Board
may, pursuant to the authority of § 66.0821(4), Wis. Stats.,
establish and impose sewer charges as authorized by said section.
Any such charge shall be established and imposed by resolution of
the Village Board setting forth the purpose for such charge and the
amount thereof. Any such charge established by the Village may be
changed from time to time by action of the Village Board, and
additional charges for items authorized by said section of the
statutes may be established and imposed.
B. All bills shall be payable at the office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer,
Village Hall, 7200 North Santa Monica Boulevard, Fox Point,
Wisconsin.26
C. In the event a user fails to certify data or in the event a user's
certification is materially inaccurate or in the event there has been a
substantial change in data since the date of the user's last certification,
the Commission shall notify the user that the verification data
determined by the Commission pursuant to Section 1701.054 of District
Rules and Regulations, Article XVII, shall be used to determine the
charge due for the current billing period and all future billing periods
until the user submits a new certified statement.
D. Should inspection or verification by the Commission reveal that any
statement certified by a user is materially inaccurate, the Commission
shall redetermine the proper charge due and forward the new
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-5 FOX POINT CODE § 260-6
1:102
§ 260-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
computation to the municipality in order that a bill for the deficiency
may be sent. This deficiency billing shall be retroactive to the date
or dates when the bills based upon the inaccurate certification were
originally due and interest charges shall be applied to each deficiency
as provided in Subsection A above.
A. Unpaid user, LCR and ICR charges shall be a lien upon the property
served and shall be enforced as provided in § 66.0821(4), Wis. Stats.
B. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any action required pursuant to District Rules and Regulations,
Article XVII, or this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $10 nor more than $200 and the costs of
prosecution for each violation, and in default of payment of such
forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail or the County
House of Corrections until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are
paid, such imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. [Amended by Ord.
No. 495]
§ 260-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:103

ARTICLE II
Local User Charges
[Adopted by Ord. No. 503 (Ch. 8 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 260-8. Authority.27
Pursuant to §§ 66.0821(4) and 281.57, Wis. Stats., the Village of Fox Point is
authorized and directed to establish a system of equitable user charges for
the operation and maintenance of the local sewer system for which the user
fee system shall be in compliance with Title II of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act (Public Law 92-500, as amended) and the rules promulgated
under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
§ 260-9. Purpose.
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the
Village to collect charges from all users who contribute wastewater to the
Village's collection system. The proceeds of such charges so derived will be
used for the purpose of operating and maintaining the public wastewater
collection system.
§ 260-10. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall be used.
Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number
includes the plural number, the plural number includes the singular number.
The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, while the word "may" is
permissive.
BILLABLE FLOW — A user's recorded quarterly water usage as metered
and/or determined by the Village Water Utility, plus metered water from
wells and other sources and less any sewer exempt metered data as
established by the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District's Sewer User
Certification Program.
CLASSES OF USERS — The division of sewer user customers by waste
characteristics and process discharge similarities or function, such as
residential, commercial, institutional, industrial, or governmental.
FUNCTIONAL OBSOLESCENCE — The process efficiency of a functional
element of the local collection and conveyance system beyond the capacity
of a preventive maintenance program to such extent that a new process
device or piece of equipment would be more cost effective.
LOCAL USER CHARGE — That portion of the total wastewater service
charge which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost
of operation, maintenance, and replacement of the collection system.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-10
1:105
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — Includes all costs, direct and
indirect, not including debt service but inclusive of expenditures
attributable to administration, supervision, labor, employee benefits,
contracted services, supplies and expenses, equipment rental (including
replacement) for local collection and conveyance sewers necessary to
insure sewer service on a continuing basis which conforms to applicable
regulations and assures optimal long-term facility management.
PHYSICAL OBSOLESCENCE — The material deficiency of a functional
element of the local sewer collection and conveyance system or personal
property to a point that repair as normal or preventative maintenance is not
cost benefit effective.
PRIVATE SEWER — A sewer which is not owned by the Village.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer which is owned and controlled by the Village
and is separate from and does not include sewers owned by other
governmental units.
REPLACEMENT COSTS — The expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances necessary during the service life
of operation and maintenance equipment to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such equipment or facilities were designed and
constructed. Such consideration for replacement costs shall be
incorporated into all equipment rental rates established by the Village
Department of Public Works for equipment used in local sewer system
operation and maintenance work. Such rental rates shall be developed
pursuant to guidelines published periodically by the Wisconsin Department
of Transportation. The term "operation and maintenance costs" as defined
in this section includes replacement costs.
REPLACEMENT RESERVE — An account for the segregation of resources
to meet capital consumption of personal or real property.
§ 260-11. Local user charge.
There is hereby imposed a charge on each sewer user in this municipality
who discharges water and/or wastewater, directly or indirectly, into the
local sewer systems owned and operated by the Village. Such charge shall
be determined by the Village Board and collected in accordance with
provisions of this article.
§ 260-12. Determination of sewer user charge.
A. The sewer user charge shall be determined as hereinafter set forth:
(1) User charges based on flow and connections. The annual user
charge to recover total collection system operation, maintenance
and replacement costs shall consist of a connection and volumetric
charge to each user. The annual connection charge shall be
calculated by dividing the total expected billing, meter reading
cost, and any other cost appropriately recovered by a connection
charge by the total number of connections in the system. The
§ 260-10 FOX POINT CODE § 260-12
1:106
§ 260-13. Review of charges.
The Village Board will review the local user charge system at least every
two years and revise local user charge rates as necessary to ensure that
the system generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation
and maintenance including replacement and that the system continues
to provide for the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance
including replacement costs among users and user classes.
§ 260-14. Notification.
The Village Board will notify each user at least annually, in conjunction with
a regular bill, of the rate being charged for operation and maintenance
including replacement of the collection system. This notification will display
separately Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District treatment charges
and local operation, maintenance and replacement rates.
§ 260-15. Payment time and delinquency penalty.
The payment of all local sewer user charge bills shall be made within 20
days after the date of mailing by the Village. In the event that such bill is
not paid within 20 days of issuance, a penalty of 1 1/2% per month will be
added to each quarterly sewer billing and if not paid, placed on the tax roll
as a special charge pursuant to law.
§ 260-16. General fund.
The local user charge system shall generate adequate annual revenue
to pay costs of annual operation and maintenance including replacement
associated with financing the collection system which the Village Board may
designate to be paid by the local user charge system. That portion of the
total local user charge which is designated for operation and maintenance,
including replacement of the collection system, shall be established by the
Village Board.
§ 260-17. Local operation, maintenance and replacement fund.
volumetric rate shall be computed by dividing the total expected
collection system operation, maintenance and replacement costs
(not calculated through a connection cost) by the total expected
billable flow in the system. This rate multiplied by the billable flow
for each user shall represent the volumetric user charge.
B. The Village Board may from time to time change from the method in
effect to any other method which will result in a fair and equitable
charge to each user, such change to be made by resolution adopted by
the Village Board. The first bill for sewer user charge shall be with the
bill for the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District for the calendar
quarter beginning February 1, 1983.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-17
1:107
§ 260-18. Carry forward.
Fiscal year-end balances in the Operation and Maintenance Account and
the Replacement Account shall be carried over to the same accounts, in the
subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no other purposes than those
designated for these accounts. Monies which have been transferred from
other sources to meet temporary shortages in the operation, maintenance
and replacement funds shall be returned to their respective accounts upon
appropriate adjustment of the local user charge rates for operation,
maintenance and replacement. The local user charge rate(s) shall be
adjusted such that the transferred monies will be returned to their
respective accounts within the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which
the monies were borrowed.
§ 260-19. Unpaid charges.
Any unpaid local sewer operation and maintenance charges shall become
a lien upon the property served and shall be enforced as provided in
§ 66.0821(4), Wis. Stats.
§ 260-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to the
penalty provisions set forth in § 1-4 of this Code, except that the minimum
forfeiture shall be $10.
§ 260-21. Appeal procedures.
Appeal procedures with respect to any action taken by the Village shall
be accomplished pursuant to Appeal Provisions of Milwaukee Metropolitan
Sewerage District Rules and Regulations, Article XVII, Section 1701.056, as
presently written and as amended from time to time.
A. That portion of the total local user charge collected which is designated
for operation and maintenance, including replacement purposes, shall
be deposited in a separate nonlapsing fund known as the "Local
Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund," and will be kept in
two primary accounts, as follows:
(1) An account designated for the specific purpose of defraying
operation and maintenance costs (excluding replacement) of the
collection system (Operation and Maintenance Account).
(2) An account designated for the specific purpose of ensuring
replacement needs over the useful life of the collection system
(Replacement Account).
B. Funds in either of the above accounts may be commingled with funds in
the other of said accounts and funds in either or both of said accounts
may be commingled with other Village funds, provided accurate records
are kept in respect to all of said funds.
§ 260-17 FOX POINT CODE § 260-22
1:108
§ 260-22. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be
held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor
of the Village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
power granted by the Statutes of the State of Wisconsin.
§ 260-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-22
1:109

ARTICLE III
Discharges into Sanitary Sewer System
[Adopted 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-11 (Ch. 20 of the 1961 Code);
amended in its entirety 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
§ 260-23. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to eliminate the unnecessary introduction
of clear water and deleterious substances into the public sanitary sewer
system and thereby to reduce the occurrence of overflows and backups
in the sanitary sewer conveyance system; to reduce the cost of operating
the sanitary sewer system; to comply with applicable regulations, rules,
stipulations and other laws and lawful orders of the State of Wisconsin, the
federal government, and the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District;
and to reduce the likelihood of failure of the sanitary sewer system. This
purpose will serve to protect the health, safety and welfare of the Village of
Fox Point and its environs.
§ 260-24. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes a human being (i.e., natural person), firm,
organization, partnership, association, corporation, legal representative,
trustee, trustee in bankruptcy, and receiver, and shall include the plural.
"Person," when used in relation to a property, includes, jointly and severally,
the owner, the occupant, the tenant, the lessee, and all others having a right
of ownership or occupancy of the property.
§ 260-25. Prohibited discharges.
A. Clear water. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
clear water into the public sanitary sewer system, except as described
herein. Clear water includes, without limitation, stormwater,
groundwater, rain water, street drainage, roof runoff, yard drainage,
yard fountain, swimming pool, pond overflow, and subsurface drainage.
Prohibited discharges include, without limitation, any connection pipe
or direct drainage channel carrying flow from a building foundation
drain, sump pump, downspout, or any other means for connecting clear
water to the public sanitary sewer system. This prohibition is subject to
the following exceptions:
(1) Existing connections. Properties that have existing clear water
connections to the sanitary sewer system on the date of adoption of
this article shall remove the clear water connection from the
sanitary sewer system in a manner approved by the Village
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer or Village Building
Inspector. Such properties are allowed six months to do so, as a
grace period, except as follows. If the current or a predecessor
owner of a subject property has ever denied or failed to voluntarily
§ 260-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-25
1:111
§ 260-26. Wastewater treatment devices.
Any property owner, agent, lessee, or occupant who is required to install
and maintain a wastewater treatment device (including without limitation
an interceptor, grease trap or separator, catch basin, or dilution and
grant the Village's reasonable request to inspect the subject
property for clear water connections, no grace period shall apply.
The grace period, if it applies, shall be measured from the date
the property owner first has actual knowledge of the clear water
connection or the date the property owner receives written notice
of the clear water connection from the Village, whichever occurs
first. The Village Director of Public Works/Village Engineer and
Village Building Inspector are, individually, authorized to extend
this grace period for up to an additional six months, in writing,
upon a showing of extenuating circumstances which requires
additional time to remove the illicit connection. Upon expiration
of any such applicable grace period, any connection that remains
in violation of this article is prohibited. [Amended 8-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-10]
(2) Waiver. Any person may petition to the Village Board for a waiver of
the requirements of this Subsection A. The Village Board may grant
a waiver and allow the connection of clear water to the sanitary
sewer system upon a showing that there is no reasonable
alternative method of discharge of the clear water. Any waiver
granted pursuant to this section may be granted subject to
reasonable conditions which may include, without limitation, the
following: limitations on the type of connection; limitations on the
water source that may be connected; inspections by Village officials
at all reasonable times; fees or charges related to the connection
and inspection; and a requirement that the property owner enter
an agreement in a form approved by the Village Board that is
recorded with the Milwaukee County Register of Deeds. Any waiver
granted under this section can be reviewed by the Village Board at
a later date for any reason, and without cause. Upon such review,
the Village Board can order the property owner to appear and show
cause as to why the connection should not be removed, and after
the property owner is heard, or if the property owner does not
appear, the Village Board can rescind the waiver in which case the
connection must be removed within the time required by the
Village Board. Any determination made by the Village Board
pursuant to this section is final and cannot be appealed to the
Board of Appeals.
B. Other deleterious substances. No person shall discharge or cause or
allow to be discharged any substance, or amount of any substance,
prohibited by any Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District rule, as
now in effect and as the same may be amended from time to time, into
the sanitary sewer system within the Village of Fox Point.
§ 260-25 FOX POINT CODE § 260-26
1:112
neutralizing basin) shall be responsible for the regular and proper
maintenance of such wastewater treatment device.
§ 260-27. Inspection; compliance order.
The Plumbing Inspector may, during reasonable hours, inspect any sanitary
sewer installation and any attached device or connection thereto to
determine compliance with this article. In addition or as an alternate to
proceeding under § 260-29, the Plumbing Inspector may order that any
violation of this article be remedied within such time as directed by the
Plumbing Inspector, taking into consideration the nature of the violation
and the potential for damage or obstruction to the sanitary sewer system.
§ 260-28. Other laws.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as limiting or restricting the
obligations described in other sections of the Fox Point Village Code or
other applicable laws. In particular, and without limitation, the following
requirements shall continue to apply as described therein: connection of
surface water to the sanitary sewer (§ 756-48, Fox Point Village Code);
connection of stormwater to the sanitary sewer, whether above or below
the surface of the ground [§ 756-7E(2), Fox Point Village Code]; requiring
sump pumps to discharge into a drainage ditch or into a storm sewer or into
the ground (§ 825-11, Fox Point Village Code); and requiring compliance
upon change of occupancy (§ 756-47, Fox Point Village Code), in addition to
such other regulations as may apply. In the event of conflict between the
requirements of this article and the requirements of any other applicable
ordinance or other law, the more restrictive shall apply as determined by
the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer.
§ 260-29. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to the
penalties and remedies as provided in § 1-4 of the Village of Fox Point
Code. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, and
the Village Board may authorize all actions it deems to be necessary to
abate and enjoin the public nuisance.
B. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be responsible for
any and all maintenance and/or repair costs and all other expenses
incurred by the Village resulting from such violation, and such costs
and expenses may be imposed as a special charge against the property
pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
§ 260-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-29
1:113
Chapter 272
SOLID FILL AND GRADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way — See
Ch. 292.
Trees, shrubs and other plant material — See
Ch. 310.
Signs — See Ch. 540.
Building construction — See Ch. 756.
§ 272-1. Permit required; effect on natural drainage courses.
A. Transporting, dumping, or placement of solid fill. No person, firm or
institution, public or private, shall transport to, dump, or place upon
lands, public or private, solid fill within the Village of Fox Point without
first obtaining a permit therefor. In granting or denying a permit, the
Village Manager, or such authority as shall from time to time be
charged by the Village Board with the regulation of solid fill, shall
consider the purpose for the transportation, dumping, or placement of
such fill. It shall be deemed a legitimate purpose to transport, dump, or
place such minimal amount of fill as reasonably necessary to
accommodate the use and development of property as allowed by the
applicable use regulations of the zoning district in which the property is
situated. A fill permit may be denied or modified if such use can be
accommodated without fill, or by a lesser amount of fill than that which
is requested in the application for a permit, or if it is determined that
the amount of fill presents an unnecessary or unreasonable risk of
harm, particularly as to drainage and stormwater runoff to other
properties in the area.
B. Drainage. Filling operations shall not block a natural drainage course if
building or development can occur consistent with the use regulations
of the zoning district in which the subject property is located without
filling the area of the lot which constitutes such natural drainage
course. In the event building or development can only occur by the
filling of a natural drainage course, such filling operation shall only be
allowed if an alternate drainage course, suitable in the discretion of the
Village Manager or his/her designate, is provided.
C. Natural drainage course defined. For purposes of this section, a natural
drainage course shall be deemed to mean any creek, ravine, gully,
channel, hollow, swale, or depression, through or over which surface
water continuously or periodically flows in its natural course.
D. Notification. In addition to any notice requirements under any
applicable state or federal law, or as otherwise provided in the Village
of Fox Point Code, the Village Clerk/Treasurer, or his/her designee, shall
provide notice by first class mailing to the owners or occupants of all
§ 260-29 FOX POINT CODE § 272-1
1:114
§ 272-2. Application for permit.
Application for a filling permit to transfer, dump or place solid fill within the
Village of Fox Point shall be made by the owner of the lands to be filled or
his designated agent in writing to the Village Manager upon an application
made available by the Village. A separate hauling permit shall be obtained
for each truck or vehicle hauling the fill material. The applicant shall set
forth in the application the following information:
properties within 500 feet of the subject property at least 21 days prior
to any hearing, procedure, or consideration by the Village Manager, or
his/her designate, of such application.
A. Location of filling operation.
B. Proposed routes for hauling fill.
C. Number, type and size of trucks to be used.
D. Proposed trucking schedule, number of days, times of day, etc.
E. Other equipment involved in fill operation.
F. Descriptions and source of fill material.
G. A plan which shall include, but which shall not be limited to, a
description of area where operation is to take place; intent and purpose
of the plan; an estimated length of time to finish plan; engineering
studies if available or if requested by the Village; plan for plantings;
plan for grading; the grade of the terrain surrounding the area
proposed to be filled; cross-section drawings showing the topography of
the land before commencing the filling operation and upon completion
of the filling operation; plan showing the number, type (genus and
species) and size of all trees over six inches in diameter at breast height
(dbh) that are to be removed, and depicting the tree protection zone, as
defined in § 310-3A(2) of this Code, of all trees three inches or larger
dbh that will remain within the areas reasonably affected by the fill
operation, and depicting the exact limits of the fill operation in relation
to the tree protection zone; plan for maintenance and appearance
during time of inactivity; plan for shore protection; and other such
requirements, tests, and surveys that may be imposed and information
that may be requested by the Village concerning the fill area and access
routes thereto. Any and all changes or amendments to the above plans
shall be submitted to the Village for review and approval before such
changes or amendments are executed.
H. Daily cleaning and maintenance schedule for access and hauling route,
including description of the personnel and equipment on site or
contracted for this purpose. Applicant shall provide a description of
measures to be taken to control dust, mud, ice, stormwater, etc.
§ 272-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-3
1:115
§ 272-3. Fees. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13]
Filling permit fees shall be paid for the initial application, for any renewal
annually, and for any additional review, as established by the Village Board
from time to time and as shown in Chapter 63 of this Code.
§ 272-4. Fill material.
Fill material shall be clean, inert material free from organic matter, brush,
garbage and material subject to organic decomposition. Fill containing
items such as hollow containers, appliances and equipment subject to
subsequent collapse or settlement is prohibited. Generally, material such
as earth fill and broken concrete of a size to be approved by the Village
Manager and/or Director of Public Works/Village Engineer will be classified
as acceptable fill subject to other permit requirements.
§ 272-5. Weight of trucks.
The Village Manager shall review the proposed truck routes and the weight
of said trucks, both unloaded and loaded, and because of weight may
restrict or prohibit said trucks from using certain Village streets and
highways as a condition of a filling permit.
§ 272-6. Issuance of permit. [Amended 2-14-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-02]
A. The Village Manager may issue a filling permit to each applicant when
she/he is satisfied that:
(1) The fill material meets the requirements in § 272-4 above;
(2) The filling operation will not create unreasonable noise, traffic or
other problems detrimental to a residential community in the area
of said filling;
(3) The tree protection zone [as defined in § 310-3A(2) of this Code]
surrounding all remaining trees with a three-inch diameter at
breast height (dbh) or larger within the areas reasonably affected
by the fill operation will be preserved; and
(4) A reasonable number of appropriate trees will be planted to replace
trees that are to be removed as a result of the filling activities,
provided that the Village Manager shall not require that the total
dbh of the replacement trees exceeds the total dbh of the trees that
are removed, and the Village Manager shall also not require the
planting of more three-inch dbh or larger trees than three times the
number of three-inch dbh or larger trees that are removed.
B. The permit shall not authorize any filling between the hours of 5:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or Saturdays nor at any time on Sunday
or on a statutory holiday. The permit may restrict the hours of filling or
the number of trucks involved based on the location of the filling
§ 272-3 FOX POINT CODE § 272-6
1:116
§ 272-7. Cash deposit.
The filling permit shall not be effective until the posting of a cash deposit
of $250 with the Village. Said cash deposit shall be held by the Village to
ensure adequate clean up of streets and surrounding areas from spillage,
debris, dust, all other material from the trucks carrying the fill, and
inspection of filling operations by Village personnel. In the event the
permittee or his contractor fails to clean up the streets at sufficient time
intervals, the Village may clean up said streets and use such part of the cash
deposit for the expense of clean up. The Village shall maintain a record of
inspections conducted by Village personnel and use such part of the cash
deposit for the expense of inspections. In the event that all or any portion of
the initial cash deposit of $250 is used for such cleanup or inspection, the
permittee or his contractor shall post additional sums of money so that the
deposit will continue to be maintained in the amount of $250 for the entire
time period of the filling permit.
§ 272-8. Bond.
The filling permit shall not be effective until the posting of a surety bond
executed by a surety company licensed to do business in Wisconsin in the
sum of not less than $5,000 or in such higher amount as is necessary in
the opinion of the Village Manager for the purpose of securing the Village
against any and all damages to Village property and/or unreimbursed
expenses the Village may incur from such filling operations.
§ 272-9. Other permits.
The filling permit shall not be effective until all applicable county, state
or federal licenses or permits are obtained and copies are provided to the
Village. This section shall in no way limit the requirements of those other
jurisdictions to restrict or require their approval or permit, if necessary.
§ 272-10. Exceptions.
The following activities are excluded from the requirements of this chapter:
operation and the traffic conditions in the area of the filling. [Amended
8-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
C. The filling permit shall be for a period of not to exceed three
consecutive months but may be renewed not more than two times in a
calendar year. The hauling permit shall be for a period not to exceed
three consecutive months but may be renewed not more than two times
in a calendar year. Renewal permits shall be subject to the conditions of
the initial application. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
D. Filling and hauling permits are nontransferable.
A. Top dressing. This chapter shall not apply to customary top dressing or
fertilizing of lawns and gardens.
§ 272-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-10
1:117
§ 272-11. Signage.
Any signs shall be in accordance with Chapter 540 of the Fox Point Village
Code.
§ 272-12. Appeal.
Any person, firm or institution who is denied a filling permit or whose filing
operation is restricted due to noise, traffic or other conditions may appeal
to the Village Board by filing a written notice of appeal with the Village
Manager.
§ 272-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or institution who is engaged in filling without a permit or
who fails to follow the plans submitted in the application or fails to comply
with the terms and conditions of a permit issued to him shall be subject
B. Patios and driveways. This chapter shall not apply to construction of
block or concrete patios, or driveways permitted under the Village
Code, or the filling of such areas with soil after they have been removed
from the property.
C. Berms. This chapter shall not apply to the construction of a berm of 2.5
feet or less in height, provided the berm shall not change the capacity
or rate of flow of water so as to adversely effect the drainage of surface
water in the vicinity of the berm.
D. Existing barrier repair. This chapter shall not apply to the repair of an
existing lake or stream barrier.
E. Minor grading. This chapter shall not apply to filling activities of 25
cubic yards of fill or less, provided that the direction of the flow of water
is not altered or the grading work changes the flow from a back pitch
into a residential structure to a pitch away from the residential
structure, provided that such change does not direct flow toward
another residential structure. The intent of this exception is to allow for
minor grading and construction of planting beds, flower gardens, rain
gardens, and similar activities.
F. Razing activities. This chapter shall not apply to fill that is placed
following razing activities that are regulated by § 756-10B of this Code.
G. Trench filling. This chapter shall not apply to fill that is placed into a
trench that is excavated for utility or drainage purposes, provide the
trench is filled to the level of the preexisting grade.
H. Swimming pool removal. This chapter shall not apply to fill that is
placed to fill the void left following the removal of a swimming pool,
provided that the excavation is filled to the level of the surrounding
grade and provided further that the fill material complies with § 272-4.
[Added 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08]
§ 272-10 FOX POINT CODE § 272-13
1:118
to immediate suspension of the filling permit and filling activities by the
Village Manager and to the penalty provided in § 1-4 of the Fox Point Code.
Chapter 276
SOLID WASTE
§ 272-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-13
1:119

ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted as §§ 24.01 to 24.04 of the 1961 Code]
§ 276-1. Purpose.
Since the Village of Fox Point is primarily a residential Village and the
operation of a dump in the Village creates an unsightly situation and a
health menace and thereby depreciates the value of property in the
neighborhood in which such a dump might exist it is, therefore, necessary
to prohibit the dumping of certain materials and to regulate the dumping of
others.
§ 276-2. Dumping.
§ 276-3. Solid waste collection.29
The Village collection of solid waste from properties within the Village
is restricted to collection of rubbish, yard waste and recyclables. The
following items, in any form, shall be prohibited, and shall not be placed for
collection by any person or entity:
A. No person shall dump or deposit on any property in the Village, public
or private, any rubbish, stones, wire, earth, ashes, cinders, sawdust,
glass, manure, filth, paper, dirt, construction wastes, garbage, old iron,
tin cans, industrial waste, or other nauseous materials. This section
shall not prohibit:
(1) The use in a normal manner of certain of these materials for
improving property by fertilizing.
(2) The use of earth, dirt, stones, cinders, ashes, founders sand or
noncombustible construction waste for the purpose of filling in and
grading property located in the Village so long as any of said
materials other than earth and dirt is covered with not less than six
inches of earth within one week after such material has been
dumped.
(3) The dumping or depositing of construction waste during the course
of construction so long as such waste is promptly removed from the
premises.
B. No person owning property in the Village shall authorize or permit the
dumping or depositing on his property of materials prohibited in this
section, except as permitted by this section.28
28.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 24.025, Village solid waste dropoff site, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 276-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-3
1:121
§ 276-4. Burning garbage or rubbish. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-03]
A. Appliances, generally referred to as "white goods," including
refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers, dishwashers, water heaters,
microwaves, humidifiers, dehumidifiers, televisions, stereos, stereo
components, and any and all types of computer equipment.
B. Tires.
C. Hazardous materials.
D. Construction materials having an approximate mass in excess of one
cubic yard.
E. Scrap metal materials.
F. Lawn clippings.
G. Synthetic motor oils.
H. Waste oil.
I. Latex and oil paints.
J. Soil, dirt, concrete, stones, rocks, blocks, and concrete block.
K. Vehicle batteries.
A. It is necessary in the interests of public safety, public welfare, the
protection of property and the reduction of unnecessary expense in
fighting fires, to regulate the setting or starting of fires for the burning
of grass, brush or rubbish within the Village.
B. Garbage. No person shall cause or undertake to burn or set fire to any
garbage except within an incinerator or furnace permanently installed
in a dwelling.
C. Grass, brush or rubbish with permit. No person shall cause or
undertake to burn or set fire, outside of an incinerator or furnace
permanently installed in a dwelling, to any grass, whether growing or
cut, brush or rubbish on any premises, including any portion of a public
or private way, except as hereinafter expressly provided, without first
making application for and obtaining from the Police Chief a permit
therefor. Application for such permit shall be made upon the form
provided by the Village Clerk/Treasurer. A permit shall be issued only to
the owner or occupant of the premises described in the application, or
his duly authorized agent. The following permit conditions apply:
(1) No permit shall be issued for starting, burning or setting of any fire
and no fire shall be burned within a distance of 100 feet of any
building or structure, nor at a time or under circumstances when it
may reasonably be anticipated that there is danger of the fire
spreading in a manner so as to endanger any land or buildings
§ 276-3 FOX POINT CODE § 276-4
1:122
§ 276-5. Storing materials or waste.
No person shall store any building materials, tool shed, work house,
machinery or equipment, or building material scrap or waste on any
property in the Village except when incident to construction, repair or
remodeling to a building on the property or property adjacent thereto, and
then from not more than one week prior to commencement of construction,
repair or remodeling until one week after completion of such work.
within the Village nor without supervision or contrary to
regulations of the Police Chief.
(2) The permit shall state the name of the person applying for the same
and the location of the premises upon which such fire is to be set,
and set forth the regulations and the manner in which such fire
shall be supervised and controlled.
(3) It is the duty of the Police Chief before issuing any permit to make
such survey and examination of the premises as he shall deem
necessary prior to the issuance of the permit. Refusal to issue such
permit shall be reviewable by the Board of Appeals.
D. Grass, brush or rubbish in compliant container. The owner or occupant
of any premises or his agent may, without applying for or obtaining a
permit therefor, burn or cause to be burned grass, brush or rubbish,
exclusive of garbage, if the same is completely enclosed in a metal or
metal mesh container with holes in the bottom thereof no larger than 22
inches in diameter, and with holes in the side or top thereof no larger
than 1/2 inch in diameter, and provided that such container is not
placed closer than 25 feet to any structure nor on or near an area
containing dry grass, weeds or other combustible material.
E. Nothing in this § 276-4 shall be interpreted to prohibit open burning
that is specifically exempted by § 781-16 of this Code.
F. Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalty provided for violating this code and shall also pay
all costs incurred by the Village in extinguishing or attempting to
extinguish such fire with its fire equipment or otherwise.
§ 276-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-5
1:123

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 3-8-1994 by Ord. No. 94-600 (Ch. 36 of the 1961 Code);
amended 12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 94-609]
§ 276-6. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Recycling Ordinance for the Village of
Fox Point."
§ 276-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote recycling, composting, and
resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling
program, as provided in § 287.11, Wis. Stats., and Chapter NR 544, Wis.
Administrative Code.
§ 276-8. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted as authorized under §§ 287.09 and 61.35, Wis. Stats.
§ 276-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or
interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this
article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall apply.
§ 276-10. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where
any terms or requirements of this article may be inconsistent or conflicting,
the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a
provision of this article is required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by a standard
in Chapter NR 544, Wis. Administrative Code, and where the ordinance
provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the
Wisconsin Statutes and the Chapter NR 544 standards in effect on the date
of the adoption of this article, or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this article.
§ 276-11. Applicability.
The requirements of this article apply to all persons within the Village of
Fox Point.
§ 276-12. Administration.
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the Fox Point Village
Manager.
§ 276-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-13
1:125
§ 276-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BIMETAL CONTAINER — A container for carbonated or malt beverages and
other liquid or food products that is made primarily of a combination of steel
and aluminum.
CONTAINER BOARD — Corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
FOAM POLYSTYRENE PACKAGING — Packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
HDPE — High-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 2.
LDPE — Low-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 4.
MAGAZINES — Magazines, catalogs, and other materials printed on similar
paper.
MAJOR APPLIANCE — A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven with its
capacitor, oven, refrigerator, stove, television set, residential and
commercial furnaces, boilers, dehumidifiers, water heaters, and
incinerators.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A property containing five or more
residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
NEWSPAPER — Newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES — Commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional, and governmental facilities and properties. This
term does not include multiple-family dwellings.
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade printing and writing papers from offices in
nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This
term does not include industrial process waste.
OTHER RESINS OR MULTIPLE RESINS — Plastic resins labeled by the SPI
Code No. 7.
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
local governmental unit, as defined in § 66.0131(1)(a), Wis. Stats., state
agency or authority, or federal agency.
PETE — Polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI Code No. 1.
A. Is designed for serving food or beverages.
Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
B.
Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
C.
§ 276-13 FOX POINT CODE § 276-13
1:126
PLASTIC CONTAINER — An individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can,
jar, or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a
product that is the subject of a consumer sale.
POSTCONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in § 291.01(7),
Wis. Stats., waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap
automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in § 289.01(17),
Wis. Stats.
PP — Polypropylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 5.
PS — Polystyrene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 6.
PVC — Polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI Code No. 3.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Includes lead acid batteries; major
appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper
or other container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers;
magazines; newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including
those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple
resins; steel containers; waste tires; and bimetal containers.
SEPARATION/SEPARATE — Sorting or segregating recyclable material from
other types (nonrecyclable) of residential household solid waste. It does not
mean sorting or segregating one type of recyclable material from another
type of recyclable material.
SOLID WASTE — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(33), Wis. Stats.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(35), Wis.
Stats.
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process which
is designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological character or
composition of solid waste. "Treatment" includes incineration.
WASTE TIRE — A tire which is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage, or defect.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in
diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots, or shrubs with intact
root balls.
§ 276-14. Separation of recyclable materials.
Occupants of single family and two unit to four unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings, condominiums, and nonresidential facilities and
properties shall separate the following materials from postconsumer waste:
A. Lead acid batteries.
B. Major appliances.
C. Waste oil.
§ 276-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-14
1:127
§ 276-15. Separation requirements exempted.
The separation requirements of § 276-14 do not apply to the following:
§ 276-16. Care of separated recyclable materials.
To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in
accordance with § 276-14 shall be clean and kept free of contaminants,
such as food residue, product residue, oil, grease, and other nonrecyclable
materials, including, but not limited to, household hazardous waste, medical
waste, and agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall
be stored in a manner which protects them from wind, rain, and other
inclement weather conditions.
D. Yard waste.
E. Aluminum containers.
F. Bimetal containers.
G. Corrugated paper or other container board.
H. Foam polystyrene packaging.
I. Glass containers.
J. Magazines.
K. Newspaper.
L. Office paper.
M. Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and
other resins or multiple resins.
N. Steel containers.
O. Waste tires.
A. Occupants of single-family and two-to-four-unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings, condominiums, and nonresidential facilities and
properties that send their postconsumer waste to a processing facility
licensed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that
recovers the materials specified in § 276-14 from solid waste in as pure
a form as is technically feasible.
B. Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less
than 30% of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste
burned as supplemental fuel.
C. A recyclable material specified in § 276-14E through O for which a
variance has been granted by the Department of Natural Resources
under § 287.11(2m), Wis. Stats., or § NR 544.14, Wis. Administrative
Code.
§ 276-14 FOX POINT CODE § 276-17
1:128
§ 276-17. Management of lead-acid batteries, major appliances,
waste oil, yard waste and waste tires.
Occupants of single-family and two-to-four-unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings, condominiums, and nonresidential facilities and properties shall
manage lead-acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil, and yard waste as
follows:
§ 276-18. Preparation and collection of recyclable materials.
Except as otherwise directed by the Village Board, occupants of singlefamily
(including condominiums) and two-to-four-unit residences shall do
the following for the preparation and collection of the separated materials
specified in § 276-14E through O, excluding § 276-14L:
A. Lead-acid batteries shall be taken to a retail business for exchange at
the time of purchase of a replacement battery.
B. Major appliances shall be disposed of to a firm that collects/disposes of
such items for salvage.30
C. Yard waste shall be placed at the roadside in front of the occupant's
dwelling for collection on the same day as regular rubbish collection.
Material shall be placed in containers as prescribed from time to time
by the Village Board. The Village will collect yard waste only at
dwellings/facilities at which it collects rubbish. Yard waste too large or
voluminous to be collected as part of the weekly rubbish and yard waste
collection shall be subject to special pick-up fees pursuant to § 63-6R of
this Code. [Amended 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
D. Waste tires shall be taken to a retail tire vendor for disposal at the time
of replacement.
A. Aluminum containers shall be rinsed of product residue and any caps
removed and discarded. The containers shall be placed in the approved
recycling bin at the designated location on the collection day.
B. Bimetal containers shall be rinsed of product residue and any caps
removed and discarded. The containers shall be placed in the approved
recycling bin at the designated location on the collection day.
C. Corrugated paper or other container board shall be free of debris,
flattened, stacked and tied, and placed at the designated location on the
collection day.
D. Foam polystyrene packaging shall be placed in a paper or plastic bag.
This bag shall be placed in the approved recycling bin at the designated
location on the collection day.
30.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1.14(3), regarding depositing waste oil in the waste oil
receptacle at the rear of Village Hall, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08.
§ 276-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-18
1:129
§ 276-19. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
multiple-family dwellings.
E. Glass containers shall be rinsed of product residue and any caps
removed and discarded. The containers shall be placed in the approved
recycling bin at the designated location on the collection day.
F. Magazines shall be tied in bundles or placed into a grocery-type bag.
This bundle/bag shall be placed at the designated location on the
collection day.
G. Newspapers shall be tied in bundles or placed into a grocery-type bag.
This bundle/bag shall be placed at the designated location on the
collection day.
H. Rigid plastic containers shall be prepared and collected as follows:
plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and other
resins or multiple resins shall be rinsed of product residue and any caps
removed and discarded. The containers shall be placed in the approved
recycling bin at the designated location on the collection day.
I. Steel containers shall be shall be rinsed of product residue and any caps
removed and discarded. The containers shall be placed in the approved
recycling bin at the designated location on the collection day.
A. Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of
the following to recycle the materials specified in § 276-14E through O,
excluding § 276-14L:
(1) Provide adequate separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify tenants in writing about the established recycling program
at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling and at least
semiannually thereafter.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility.
(4) Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which
materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to
meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites,
locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or company,
including a name, address, and telephone number.
B. The requirements specified in Subsection A do not apply to the owners
or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings if the postconsumer
waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a processing facility
licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for
recycling the material specified in § 276-14E through O from solid
waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
§ 276-18 FOX POINT CODE § 276-20
1:130
§ 276-20. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
nonresidential facilities and properties.
§ 276-21. Prohibitions on disposal of recyclable materials separated
for recycling.
No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid
waste treatment facility any of the materials specified in § 276-14E through
O which have been separated for recycling, except waste tires, which may
be burned with energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
§ 276-22. Proper disposal of recyclables.
A. Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties
shall do all of the following to recycle the material specified in
§ 276-14E through O:
(1) Provide adequate separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify tenants, users, and occupants in writing about the
established recycling program at the time of rental or lease and at
least semiannually thereafter.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from solid
waste by the users, tenants, and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
(4) Notify users, tenants, and occupants of reasons to reduce and
recycle, which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in
order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or
sites, locations, and hours of operation, and contact person or
company, including a name, address, and telephone number.
B. The requirements specified in Subsection A do not apply to the owners
or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties if the
postconsumer waste generated within the facility or property is treated
at a processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural
Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in
§ 276-14E through O from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically
feasible.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of or dump recyclables in
any street, alley, or other public place within Fox Point, unless legally
disposed of at the Village recycling center.
B. No person shall place for collection recyclables at any designated
location not owned or occupied by such person.
C. It shall be unlawful to burn or bury solid waste, rubbish, and
recyclables.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for disposal any of the
following wastes: hazardous and toxic wastes, chemicals, explosives,
§ 276-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-22
1:131
§ 276-23. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
flammable liquids, paint, construction debris, carcasses, and medical
wastes.
E. It shall be unlawful to bring into Fox Point for disposal recyclables from
outside the Village corporate limits unless authorized by agreement
with the Village.
F. The Village, or its designated contractor, has the right to reject or leave
at any designated location any recyclable material that is not prepared
according to the specifications in this article or as set forth in
instructions provided by the Village or its designated contractor. The
Village, or its designated contractor, has the right to reject or leave at
any designated location any postconsumer waste intended for disposal
which contains any of the recyclable material(s) specified in § 276-14E
through O, excluding § 276-14L.
G. Once placed for collection, recyclable materials become the property of
the Village of Fox Point.
A. For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
article, any authorized officer, employee, or representative of the
Village of Fox Point may inspect: recyclable materials separated for
recycling; postconsumer waste intended for disposal; rubbish; recycling
collection sites; any facilities, collection vehicles, and collection areas
of multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and
properties; and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall
be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information.
No person may refuse access to any officer, employee, or authorized
representative of the Village of Fox Point who requests access for
purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No
person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such an inspection.
B. Any person who violates a provision of this article may be issued a
citation by the Village of Fox Point. The issuance of a citation shall not
preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the
same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law
relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance
of a citation under this subsection.
C. Penalties for violating this article may be assessed as follows: Any
person who violates a provision of this article may be required to forfeit
not less than $50 nor more than $2,000 for each violation.
§ 276-22 FOX POINT CODE § 276-23
1:132
Chapter 285
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, EROSION CONTROL AND
BLUFF REGULATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Board — See Ch. 19, Art. II.
Stormwater utility — See Ch. 288.
Trees, shrubs and other plant material — See
Ch. 310.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 724.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 738.
Zoning — See Ch. 745.
Building construction — See Ch. 756.
§ 276-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-23
1:133

ARTICLE I
Construction and Cutting on Banks of Ravines and Lake Bluff
[Adopted as Ch. 17 of the 1961 Code]
§ 285-1. Purpose.
Because of the danger of erosion or increasing the erosion of the banks of
ravines and the Lake Michigan bluff, and the possibility of disturbing the
natural runoff of surface and percolating water which in either case could
lead to the partial or complete collapse of buildings; to promote the public
health, safety and welfare; to ensure proper access for fire, emergency and
police vehicles; to preserve the natural beauty of the ravines and bluffs; and
to protect the natural environment, the regulations hereinafter set forth are
hereby established.
§ 285-2. Definitions.
A. The definition of "building" and "structure" as presently set forth in
§ 745-2 of the Fox Point Village Code shall include retaining walls and
driveways.
B. "Owner" as used in this article means the owner of the property as
appears in the records of the Village; in the case of joint owners or
tenants in common, any one or more of such owners. The vendee under
a land contract may be considered an owner.
C. "Top of the bluff," as used in this article, means the area on a lot that is
up slope of the Village of Fox Point bluff line as delineated by the
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission (SEWRPC) in
2003 and which is depicted on maps within the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer's office and which may be updated from time to
time by SEWRPC, except as follows. Property owners may, upon
application and payment of the applicable fee, request the adoption of a
different "top of the bluff" area for their particular parcel on a case-bycase
basis. The property owner shall submit to the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer a map which depicts this area, and no building
permit or work regulated by this article shall commence unless and
until the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer has approved the
map submitted by the property owner. The property owner's application
shall include all of the following: [Added 12-13-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-13]
(1) A topographic map, prepared by a State of Wisconsin registered
land surveyor, with one-foot contour lines referred to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum, which has been prepared or reaffirmed
within one year of the date of the application at a scale not smaller
than one inch equals 20 feet.
(2) The bluff line shall be depicted as the demarcation between those
areas within slopes steeper than six horizontal to one vertical
(6H:1V) and which transition to slopes shallower than 6H:1V
§ 285-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-2
1:135
§ 285-3. Basic restriction. [Amended 4-19-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-09; 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-13]
measured perpendicular to the one-foot contour lines across the
entire parcel.
(3) If the lay of the land has been obscured by improvements, such as
filling or the construction of walls and pavements, the lines for
analysis shall be projected through the area of the improvements
using the most direct line connecting the top of bluff demarcation
line where it is interrupted by the improvements.
(4) The topographic survey shall also include the following:
(a) An outline of all existing and proposed structures or proposed
expansion of existing structures;
(b) The existing property line;
(c) Abutting public streets and/or right-of-way lines, street
pavements, drives and service walks;
(d) Pertinent existing landscaping features;
(e) Drainage structures and drainageways; and
(f) The SEWRPC top of the bluff line.
(5) The area on the lot that is upslope of the line established by this
procedure shall be the top of the bluff, subject to and upon the
approval of the Director of the Public Works, for purposes of the
pending application only.
(6) Disclaimer. Although the foregoing procedure is intended to define
the top of the bluff in a reasonable and objective manner that
relates to the slope of the land, no assurance is hereby provided
that such identified area is well suited for any particular use or
construction. It is recommended that the property owner hire
either a licensed professional geotechnical engineer or other soils
expert to investigate particular soil stability and suitability for any
particular uses or construction on the top of the bluff. Such
investigation may show particular design requirements for
construction or uses on the top of the bluff or may show that
construction or uses should be away from the top of the bluff
demarcation, among other possible findings. No specific
representation is made herein.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure shall be
erected downslope from top of the bluff of the lake bluff or downslope
from top of the bluff of a ravine bank or at the foot of the lake bluff or
ravine in the Village of Fox Point.
§ 285-2 FOX POINT CODE § 285-3
1:136
§ 285-4. Retaining walls.
Retaining walls may be built farther than 25 feet from the closest point
of the principal structure of the lot only if they are solely and expressly
for the purpose of preventing and retarding erosion and slippage of the
lake bluff or the bank of a ravine. Retaining walls may be built 25 feet
or closer to the closest point of the principal structure of the lot only if
they are for the primary purpose of preventing and retarding erosion and
slippage of the lake bluff or the bank of a ravine; however, in this case,
ancillary purposes are allowed, such as the purpose of creating a flat area
or patio adjacent to the principal building. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
retaining walls may be constructed in any location on a property if they
are a necessary part of a driveway access to the property, if the property
would otherwise not have driveway access, as determined by the Village
Building Inspector. It is suggested that retaining walls of over six feet in
height be avoided because they would pose a safety hazard and constitute,
unless screened from view, an aesthetically unappealing surface. Terracing
is suggested as preferable, if feasible, to a retaining wall of over six feet.
Before any retaining wall is built, a building permit shall be obtained and
plans for retaining walls shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer. If, in his opinion, the footings and method of construction
and materials are adequate from an engineering standpoint to serve the
purpose for which such retaining wall is being built and adequate provision
is made for the flow of surface and percolating water, he shall so certify to
the Building Inspector. No building permit shall be issued by the Building
Inspector without such certificate.
§ 285-5. Driveways.
Before a driveway is built, a building permit shall be obtained. The grade
of a driveway shall not exceed 12°, and it is suggested that a driveway
be one course. Plans for a driveway shall be submitted to the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer. If in his opinion the method of construction
and materials are adequate from an engineering standpoint and adequate
provision is made for the flow of surface and percolating water, he shall so
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, the erection, repair,
and/or replacement of any publicly owned bridge, publicly owned
stormwater facility, publicly owned utility facility, and any related
publicly owned structure(s) (but not buildings) downslope from the top
of the bluff of the lake bluff or any ravine in the Village is exempt from
all requirements of this article, subject to the following. An application
describing each such structure shall be submitted to the Village Board,
and the Village Board shall approve the structure unless it finds in its
discretion that such structure(s) will be contrary to the purposes set
forth in § 285-1 of this article. A structure is "publicly owned" for
purposes of this subsection if it is owned by the United States of
America, State of Wisconsin, Milwaukee County, Village of Fox Point,
utilities of the Village of Fox Point, Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage
District, or the North Shore Water Commission.
§ 285-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-5
1:137
certify to the Building Inspector. No building permit shall be issued by the
Building Inspector without such certification.
§ 285-6. Structure or building at foot of lake bluff or ravine bank.
A. A structure or building may be built at the foot of the lake bluff where
the bluff abuts on North Beach Drive or on flat land that abuts on North
Beach Drive or a ravine bank.
B. A registered professional engineer retained by the owner of the lot shall
certify to the Village that the construction of the proposed building and
structure(s) will be safe. The engineer shall have recognized experience
and expertise in geotechnical investigations, soil mechanics, and
structural and coastal engineering. Specifically, he shall certify that:
(1) The design of any building or structure(s), the method of
constructing such building or structure(s), and the materials used
therefor are structurally adequate and will protect the public
health and safety.
(2) The proposed building and structure(s) will not in any way
adversely affect the structural integrity or safety of any building or
structure(s) located on adjoining or adjacent sites.
(3) The proposed building and structure(s) will not adversely disturb
ravine or bluff slopes, interfere with surface or subsurface
drainage, or create new or exacerbate existing problems of erosion
and recession, assuring the continued integrity of the ravine or
bluff slopes involved.
(4) The drainage system will protect the downhill properties or
downstream properties.
(5) There is no danger to the proposed structure or building and its
occupants from slippage of the slope above and/or below the
proposed structure or building.
C. The engineer shall make a technical report accompanying the
certificate which shall include, at a minimum:
(1) Recommendations regarding site preparation, foundation, design,
lateral earth pressure, and support of slabs on grade.
(2) The stability of the slope before, during, and after construction.
(3) The effect of the construction on the natural drainage in the area,
including any measures such as "weepers" which are designed to
improve natural drainage in the area.
(4) The effect of the construction on flora and fauna.
D. In addition to the standards contained in Chapter 19, Article II, Building
Board, of this Code, no building permit for any structure on the foot of
§ 285-5 FOX POINT CODE § 285-6
1:138
§ 285-7. Survey or plat required.
§ 285-8. Cantilever over face of lake bluff.
the lake bluff or ravine shall be issued unless it has been found as a
fact by the Building Board by at least a majority vote, after a view of
the site of the propose structure and an examination of the application
papers for a building permit, that the location of the proposed structure
will, when erected, not be so at variance with the structures already
constructed on the neighboring properties or in the character of the
immediate neighborhood as to cause a substantial depreciation in the
property values of a neighboring property or of the immediate
neighborhood. The Building Board shall give notice of the meeting
at which it will consider an application for approval of a building or
structure. Such notice shall be given to the applicant and to the owners
of properties within 500 feet of the property in question; it shall be
in writing and mailed not less than seven days before the day of the
meeting. Persons to whom the notice is required to be given may attend
the Building Board meeting and be heard.
A. There shall be filed with the application for a building permit for any
such building or structure a survey or plat of the lot drawn to a scale of
one inch equals 10 feet, and with contour lines at one-foot intervals
from North Beach Road or bottom of the ravine to at least 30 feet up the
slope from the slope side of the building or structure, and shall show all
trees with a diameter of eight inches or more located within the
perimeter of the planned construction extended in all directions 50 feet
or to the lot line if closer, and shall also show such trees within the area
of a proposed driveway.
B. The plan submitted with an application for a building permit for any
structure or building which will be built at the foot of the lake bluff or
ravine, as above provided, shall show that the planned construction will
be done with minimum disturbance of soil and the natural cover
thereon, such as trees, shrubs, and plants, including grasses, and shall
also show adequate provision for the control and channeling of ground
waters, both surface water and percolating waters.
C. If, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer, the
above requirements have been met, he shall so certify to the Building
Inspector. Without such certification, the Building Inspector shall not
issue a building permit.
A. A building or structure may be built on the flat area of a lot at the top of
the bluff of the lake bluff and a portion thereof may be cantilevered over
and beyond the top of the bluff. [Amended 12-13-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-13]
B. All foundations or footings for such building or structure shall be on or
below the surface of the flat area at the top of the bluff. [Amended
12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-13]
§ 285-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-8
1:139
§ 285-9. Extending over slope of ravine bank. [Amended 12-13-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-13]
C. The cantilevered portion of such building or structure shall not exceed
more than 25 feet out from the top of the bluff, and zoning setbacks in
the zoning district shall be determined from the foundation and
cantilevered portion. [Amended 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-13]
D. In addition to the standards contained in Chapter 19, Article II, Building
Board, of this Code, no building permit for any structure on the top of
the bluff shall be issued unless it has been found as a fact by the
Building Board by at least a majority vote, after a view of the site of the
proposed structure and an examination of the application papers for a
building permit, that the location of the proposed structure will, when
erected, not be so at variance with the structures already constructed
on the neighboring properties or in the character of the immediate
neighborhood as to cause a substantial depreciation in the property
values of a neighboring property or of the immediate neighborhood.
The Building Board shall give notice of the meeting at which it will
consider an application for approval of a cantilevered building or
structure. Such notice shall be given to the applicant and to the owners
of properties within 500 feet of the property in question; it shall be in
writing and mailed not less than seven days or delivered to a person on
the premises not less than five days before the day of the meeting.
Persons to whom the notice is required to be given may attend the
Building Board meeting and be heard. [Amended 12-13-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-13]
E. The plan submitted with an application for a building permit for any
structure or building which will be cantilevered over and beyond the
top of the bluff, as above provided, shall show that the planned
construction will be done with minimum disturbance of soil and the
natural cover thereon, such as trees, shrubs, and plants, including
grasses, and shall also show adequate provision for the control and
channeling of groundwaters, both surface water and percolating
waters. [Amended 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-13]
F. A registered professional engineer having the qualifications specified in
§ 285-6B above shall submit to the Village a certificate and
accompanying technical report as specified in § 285-6B and C.
G. If, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer, the
above requirements (other than Subsection D above) have been met, he
shall so certify to the Building Inspector. Without such certification, the
Building Inspector shall not issue a building permit.
A. A building or structure may be built on the flat area of a lot at the top of
the bluff of a ravine and may be extended over and beyond the top of the
bluff of the ravine bank by cantilevering.
§ 285-8 FOX POINT CODE § 285-9
1:140
§ 285-10. Release.
Any lot owner whose professional engineer submits a certificate as to safety
as provided in §§ 285-6, 285-8 and 285-9 above shall, as a condition for
obtaining a building permit, give to the Village a release from any liability
for injury to persons or damage to property arising from the slippage of soil
or building or structure on the lot where the slope and construction thereon
were certified as being safe. Such release shall be in a form acceptable to
the Village Attorney.
§ 285-11. Restriction on cutting.
Wherever in the Village the slope of the lake bluff or the slope of the bank
of a ravine averages 12° or over, no one shall prune, cut, kill, or remove
any natural vegetation, including trees, shrubs, bushes, plants, flowers, and
grasses, without first obtaining a permit as hereinafter provided.
B. All the provisions of § 285-8 apply to the building of any building or
structure, a portion of which will extend over and beyond the top of the
bluff of a ravine.
A. An application for the proposed pruning, cutting, killing, or removing
shall be filed with the Village Clerk/Treasurer, which application shall
give the name of the owner and address of the property on which the
work is proposed, and the name of the person, company or corporation
who will do the work. The Clerk/Treasurer shall refer the application to
the Village Forester. The Village Forester shall examine said application
and shall view the location of the proposed work. If, after such viewing,
it is the opinion of the Village Forester that the proposed work is minor
in nature and primarily for the improvement and care of the plant life
involved, he shall issue the permit.
B. If after the delivery of an application to the Village Forester and a view
of the premises, as above provided, the Village Forester is of the opinion
that Subsection A above does not apply, he shall refer the matter to the
Building Board. The Building Board shall consider the application at a
duly called meeting; notice of said meeting shall be given to the
applicant and to the owners of abutting lots. Such notice shall be in
writing, mailed not less than six days or delivered to a person on the
premises not less than five days before the day of the meeting. Persons
to whom notice is required to be given may attend the Building Board
meeting and be heard. If upon evidence produce at such meeting, the
Building Board is of the opinion that the proposed work will not
increase erosion or slippage of soil or the danger thereof and will not
unreasonably and unnecessarily damage or destroy the beauty of the
natural vegetation, it shall direct that the requested permit be issued.
Otherwise, it shall deny such permit or may modify the proposed work
and authorize the issuance of a permit if the owner agrees to such
modifications.
§ 285-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-11
1:141
§ 285-12. Refuse.
Any refuse, which includes but is not limited to grass cuttings, branches,
logs, paper, appliances and rubbish, deposited in any manner on the slope
of the lake bluff or the slope of the bank of a ravine shall not be permitted
and must be removed within 48 hours of deposit.
§ 285-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of §§ 285-11 and 285-12 shall be subject
to a forfeiture of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000. Each act of
violation and every day upon which a violation occurs or exists constitutes
a separate offense.
§ 285-14. Appeal.
§ 285-15. Applicability of other code sections.
The provisions of Chapter 19, Article II, Building Board, of this Code as
now in effect or as the same may be amended, modified, or recreated from
time to time, shall apply to the issuance of any building permit subject to
this article. Also, in respect to any construction subject to this article, the
Zoning Ordinance of the Village, Chapter 745 as it now exists, or as it may
be amended, modified or re-created from time to time, shall apply.
C. In the event of the absence or inability to act of the Village Forester, the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer shall perform the functions
above given to the Village Forester.
D. This section does not apply to the areas on which the structure is
authorized to be built, the driveway, and an area extending outward
from the foundation of such structure by a distance to be approved by
the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer as consistent with the
objective of this article of controlling erosion and preserving the natural
vegetation on the slope of the bluff or ravine.
A. Wherever certification by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
is required by the foregoing provisions, any person aggrieved by the
issuance of such a certificate or refusal to issue such a certificate may
appeal to the Board of Appeals, and the provision of § 62.23(7), Wis.
Stats., as now written or as such provision may be modified from time to
time shall apply to such appeal.
B. In respect to any matter referred to the Building Board by the above
provision, appeal from its decision may be taken as provided in Chapter
19, Article II, Building Board, of the Fox Point Village Code, as now
written or as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 285-11 FOX POINT CODE § 285-15
1:142
ARTICLE II
Drainage
[Adopted as § 30P.05(9) of the 1961 Code]
§ 285-16. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WATERCOURSE — Any creek, ravine, gully, channel, hollow, swale, or
depression, or any artificial ditch, drain, culvert or pipe, through or over
which surface water continuously or periodically flows in its natural course.
§ 285-17. Application for permit.
No person shall build, erect or construct any highway, driveway, bridge,
culvert or structure or place any obstruction of any nature in, upon, across,
over or through any watercourse, whether such crossing or obstruction
shall be located on public or private lands, within the Village without first
making application therefor and obtaining a permit so to do from the
Building Inspector. Such application shall be accompanied by an application
fee as described in Chapter 63 of this Code. The application must include
a diagram, drawn to scale, showing the lot and adjacent Village right-ofway,
the location of the proposed structure/culvert, and all trees that are
two inches in diameter at breast height (dbh) or larger within the Village
right-of-way and within 20 feet of any construction or excavation activity.
If any tree within the Village right-of-way is removed, reimbursement and
replacement are required pursuant to § 310-3F of this Code, even if such
removal is authorized and is not in violation of § 310-3.
§ 285-18. Drainage ditches.
No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant certifies that a
culvert will be installed under a driveway leading from the public highway
to the lot prior to commencement of construction, in accordance with the
ordinances of the Village and with this article.
§ 285-19. Culverts.
All culverts installed or reinstalled in any public way shall be of corrugated
copper-steel, with a minimum inside diameter of 12 inches and of wall
thickness as set forth by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer. The
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer can, in specific cases, allow the
use of other materials.
A. The minimum length of culverts shall conform to the following:
Length of Culvert Ditch Depth
20 feet 1 foot 9 inches
22 feet 1 foot 9 inches to 2 feet 9 inches
§ 285-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-19
1:143
§ 285-20. Installation and maintenance of culverts. [Amended
9-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-08]
Length of Culvert Ditch Depth
24 feet 2 feet 9 inches to 3 feet 9 inches
26 feet 3 feet 9 inches to 4 feet 3 inches
B. The depth of ditch shall be measured from the crown of the road to the
bottom of the ditch.
A. Setting of culverts. After the permit has been issued, the owner or his
representative shall notify the Department of Public Works at least 48
hours prior to the setting of the culvert, and the Department shall
establish the required grade of the culvert. The owner shall then have
the culvert installed in accordance with the requirements set forth by
the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer and, after the culvert has
been installed, shall notify the Department of Public Works. After such
notification, the Department of Public Works shall inspect the
installation. If the installation does not conform to the requirements of
the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer, the Building Inspector
shall notify the owner and shall place a time limit on correcting the
installation. In the event that the correction is not made in the required
time, penalties as set forth by this article shall be enforced.
B. Prohibited culvert installation. No person, firm, or corporation shall
install or cause the installation of any culvert which is within or will
allow access to a public right-of-way or easement in the Village unless
authorized specifically by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer.
Any culvert installed in violation hereof shall be removed by the owner
of the property serviced by the culvert within 10 days following written
notification of such violation by the Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer. If not removed within the prescribed time period, the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer shall have the culvert
removed and, if necessary and warranted, a legal culvert installed. The
property owner shall pay all expenses for any such removal as well as
the costs involved in the installation of a legal culvert. All costs and
expenses shall be charged to the property owner pursuant to § 67-17 of
this Code.
C. Continuing responsibility for culvert. Every property owner has the
continuing responsibility and obligation to maintain and repair the
culvert(s) servicing their property. Should any culvert reach such a
condition or state of disrepair or be damaged to such extent that the
flow of drainage or access by motor vehicles is affected thereby, the
property owner shall take whatever actions are necessary to repair or
replace said defective culvert. In the event a property owner shall fail to
maintain a culvert in good repair or install a replacement culvert as
required, the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer shall have the
right to proceed, after notification as outlined in Subsection B to repair
§ 285-19 FOX POINT CODE § 285-20
1:144
§ 285-21. Obstruction of watercourses; procedure to remove or
remedy.
or replace the defective culvert at the expense of the property owner
and recover all costs incurred as prescribed by Subsection B.
A. No owner, occupant or person in charge of public or private land within
the Village shall construct, maintain or permit to exist any obstruction
in a watercourse on such land, whether such obstruction is artificial or
of natural causes, which shall reduce the capacity or rate of flow of such
watercourse so as to prevent or otherwise adversely affect the drainage
of surface water from other lands adjacent to or in the vicinity of such
land; provided, however, that no obstruction shall be prohibited by this
subsection or be deemed in violation thereof if the same is due to
natural causes and its removal cannot be effected at a reasonable cost
by the owner, occupant or person in charge of the land on which such
construction is located. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08]
B. If any watercourse is obstructed in violation of Subsection A of this
section, whether such obstruction arose before or after April 18, 1958,
or was installed or maintained pursuant to a permit under this article,
the owner or occupant of any lands (other than public highways and
lands owned by the Village) affected or damaged by such obstruction
may, in writing, request the removal or remedying thereof by such
owner, occupant or person in charge of the land where such obstruction
is located. If such removal or remedying is not made within six days
after receipt of such written request, the owner or occupant of the lands
so affected may make complaint to the Village Manager, filing at the
same time a copy of the written request, and the Village Manager, after
viewing the watercourse and being satisfied that the complaint is just,
shall make his recommendations for the removal of such obstruction or
the taking of such remedial action as may be appropriate to maintain
the capacity and rate of flow of such watercourse, and if such
recommendations are not followed within 20 days after service upon
the owner, occupant or person in charge of the lands of a written copy
of the recommendations, the Village Board shall, after notice and
hearing and determination that such removal or other remedial action
is necessary to maintain the capacity or rate of flow of such
watercourse or to prevent further damage, by resolution order the
obstruction removed or other remedial action taken by the employees
of the Village under direction of the Village Manager. The cost of such
removal of the obstruction or other remedial action shall thereafter be
determined, and by resolution of the Village Board, the Village Clerk/
Treasurer shall be directed to place the same upon the tax roll as a
special charge against the lands upon which the obstruction was
located, and the same shall be collected as other special assessments
are collected. Any interference with the officers, agents or employees of
the Village in carrying out this section, other than by due legal
proceedings, shall constitute a violation of this section.
§ 285-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-21
1:145
C. If, after viewing any such obstruction in a watercourse as is referred to
in Subsection B of this section, the Village Manager shall be of the
opinion that said obstruction prevents or otherwise adversely affects
the drainage of a public highway or of Village-owned property, the
Village Manager may, as though an "owner or occupant of any lands
affected or damaged by such obstruction" under Subsection B of this
section, in writing request the removal or remedying thereof by the
owner, occupant or person in charge of the land where such obstruction
is located, and if such removal or other remedial action is not
consummated within 20 days after receipt of such written request of
the Village Manager, the Village Manager shall present to the Village
Board a copy of his request for such removal or other remedial action
which was served upon said owner, occupant or person in charge of the
land where the obstruction is located, whereupon the Village Board
shall then proceed as provided for in Subsection B of this section.
§ 285-21 FOX POINT CODE § 285-21
1:146
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 37 of the 1961 Code; amended in its entirety
4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-05]
§ 285-22. Authority.
§ 285-23. Findings of fact.
The Village of Fox Point finds that uncontrolled, postconstruction runoff
has a significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and
general welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and
use of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled postconstruction runoff
can:
A. This article is adopted by the Village of Fox Point under the authority
granted by § 61.354, Wis. Stats. This article supersedes all provisions of
an ordinance previously enacted under § 61.35, Wis. Stats., that conflict
with this article in relation to stormwater management regulations.
B. The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the same governing body.
C. The requirements of this article do not preempt more stringent
stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by any of
the following:
(1) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules,
permits or approvals, including those authorized under §§ 281.16
and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
(2) Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated in
rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under
§ NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
(3) The authority exercised by the Village under §§ 61.354(6) and
236.45, Wis. Stats.
A. Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion,
increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge,
diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperature;
B. Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life,
recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of
sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria,
pathogens and other urban pollutants;
C. Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by
increasing pollutant loads;
D. Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading;
§ 285-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-23
1:147
§ 285-24. Purpose.31
This article integrates federal and state construction and postconstruction
site stormwater water quality standards with duties to reasonably manage
the quantity of water runoff for regional flood abatement. This article
implements the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District rules on release
rates for development creating more than a de minimis amount of new
impervious surface, to reduce the probability of increased regional floods as
the metropolitan area approaches full build-out forecast for 2050.
§ 285-25. Stormwater quality and quantity management
applicability.
E. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
overtaxing storm sewers, drainageways, and other minor drainage
facilities;
F. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
increasing major flood peaks and volumes;
G. Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence
and levels of flooding; and
H. Aggravate excessive infiltration and inflow of water into sanitary sewer
connections during peak storm events causing the conveyance system
to surcharge, overflow or back up into basements.
A. The water quality management duties apply to property development
disturbing five or more acres or property development disturbing one
or more acres after March 10, 2003, and the water quantity
management duties apply to development that increases impervious
surface by 1/2 acre or more or disturbs an area larger than two acres,
unless the site is exempt under Subsection B or C.
B. A site meeting any one of the following criteria is exempt from
stormwater quality requirements:
(1) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
(2) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
(3) Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of land
disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
(4) Underground utility construction such as water, sewer and fiber
optic lines. This exemption does not apply to the construction of
any aboveground structures associated with utility construction.
C. Water quantity management.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 285-23 FOX POINT CODE § 285-25
1:148
(1) Water quantity management duties do not apply to:
(a) Residential infill where the lot is five acres or less, the
development is exclusively residential, the net increase in the
area of impervious surface is less than 20% of the area of the
site, and each boundary of the site is contiguous to:
[1] Sites that contain earlier development served by sanitary
sewers, streets, or public water supply, when the
governmental unit receives the plans for the new
development; or
[2] Parkland or other public land, a utility right-of-way, or a
watercourse.
(b) Sites where the area of impervious surface after development
will be 5% or less of the total area of the site.
(c) Recreational trails if the trail is less than or equal to 10 feet in
width and has a continuous pervious buffer at least five feet
wide on each side, disregarding interruption by streets,
driveways, or other impervious surfaces crossing the trail.
(d) Sites that are riparian to Lake Michigan.
(e) Previously approved projects. Runoff management is not
required if:
[1] The Village approved a development or redevelopment
before the effective date of the applicable requirements;
and
[2] This approval had sufficient finality to create a vested right
to proceed with the development.
(f) Road construction. If the construction or reconstruction of a
public road will increase impervious surface by 1/2 acre or
more, then water quantity management is necessary for the
net increase in impervious surface. The requirements of
§ 285-28C(2)(b)[1] shall apply. Water quantity management is
not required for the reconstruction of public roads when the
area of impervious surface is not changing.
(g) Parking lots. Water quantity management is required for the
reconstruction of parking lots only when the parking lot will be
reconfigured or re-contoured. Water quantity management
requirements do not apply to pavement maintenance activities,
such as sealing, milling and overlaying, or pulverizing and
compacting.
(2) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection
C(1)(a), this article applies to postconstruction sites of any size
that, in the opinion of the administering authority, are likely to
§ 285-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-25
1:149
§ 285-26. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — The Village Manager or the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer.
AGRICULTURAL FACILITIES AND PRACTICES — Has the meaning given in
§ 281.16, Wis. Stats.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A calendar year of precipitation,
excluding snow, which is considered typical.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to:
BUSINESS DAY — A day the office of the administering authority is
routinely and customarily open for business.
CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land disturbing
construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM — A system for conveying both sanitary
sewage and stormwater runoff.
CONNECTED IMPERVIOUSNESS — An impervious surface that is directly
connected to a separate storm sewer or water of the state via an impervious
flow path.
CRITICAL TIME — The period starting at the time of peak rainfall intensity
with a duration equal to the time of concentration of the watershed.
result in runoff that exceeds the capacity of the existing drainage
facilities or the level of flooding protection in a watercourse that
causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by
scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or that
endangers property or public safety.
D. Comity. State agencies should design and incorporate best
management practices for surface water quality and stormwater
quantity management for new impervious surfaces. The runoff
management techniques should be the same as flood abatement plans
and techniques utilized by local governments in the watershed. The
lead agency preparing an environmental assessment for a federal or
state project shall identify the mitigating runoff management
techniques to prevent increases in peak flood flows from new
impervious areas.
Avoid or minimize sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of
the state; or
A.
B. Manage the rate or volume of runoff.
§ 285-25 FOX POINT CODE § 285-26
1:150
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a
specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency,
and total depth of rainfall.
DEVELOPMENT — The construction of buildings, roads, parking lots, and
paved or unpaved storage areas.
DIVISION OF LAND — The creation from one parcel of two or more parcels
of one or fewer acres each in area where such creation occurs at one time
or through the successive partition within a five-year period.
EFFECTIVE INFILTRATION AREA — The area of the infiltration system that
is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access,
berms or pretreatment.
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by the
action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
EXCEPTIONAL RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.11, Wis.
Adm. Code.
EXTRATERRITORIAL — The unincorporated area within three miles of the
corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city or within 1.5 miles of a
fourth class city or village.
FINAL STABILIZATION — All land disturbing construction activities at the
construction site have been completed and a uniform, perennial, vegetative
cover has been established, with a density of at least 70% of the cover,
for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or
employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE — An irrevocable letter of credit, in a form
approved by the Village Attorney, or similar guarantees that are approved
by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer as to amount, and by the
Village Attorney as to form, submitted to the administering authority by the
responsible party to assure that requirements of this article are carried out
in compliance with the stormwater management plan.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any pavement or structural element that
prevents rain, surface water runoff, or melting snow from infiltrating into
the ground below, including, but not limited to, roofs and paved roads,
driveways, and parking lots.
INFILL AREA — An undeveloped area of land located within existing
development.
INFILTRATION — The entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the
soil.
INFILTRATION SYSTEM — A device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain
garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not
include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting
of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices,
such as swales or roadside channels, designed for conveyance and pollutant
removal only.
§ 285-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-26
1:151
KARST FEATURE — An area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock
dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may
include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces,
sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets.
LAND DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and
lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters
of the state. Land-disturbing construction activity includes clearing and
grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading
activities.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legal document that provides for longterm
maintenance of stormwater management practices.
MEP or MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — A level of implementing best
management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified
in this article which takes into account the best available technology, costeffectiveness
and other competing issues, such as human safety and
welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and
geographic features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the
performance standards and may vary based on the performance standard
and site conditions.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Development resulting from the conversion of
previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the property boundary described in the permit
application.
ON-SITE — Located within the property boundary described in the permit
application.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The meaning given in § NR 115.03(6),
Wis. Adm. Code.
OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.10, Wis.
Adm. Code.
PERCENT FINES — The percentage of a given sample of soil which passes
through a No. 200 sieve.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
PERMIT — A written authorization made by the administering authority
to the applicant to conduct land-disturbing construction activity or to
discharge postconstruction runoff to waters of the state.
PERMIT ADMINISTRATION FEE — A sum of money paid to the
administering authority by the permit applicant for the purpose of
recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the
permit.
§ 285-26 FOX POINT CODE § 285-26
1:152
PERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff a small portion of
the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other
similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious.
POLLUTANT — The meaning given in § 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
POLLUTION — The meaning given in § 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
POSTCONSTRUCTION SITE — A construction site following the completion
of land disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization.
PREDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — The extent and distribution of land
cover types present before the initiation of land-disturbing construction
activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are
managed in an environmentally sound manner.
PREVENTIVE ACTION LIMIT — The meaning given in § NR 140.05(17),
Wis. Adm. Code.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any road, alley, street, parking lot, sidewalk,
plaza, mall, or pathway owned by or dedicated to a governmental unit.
RECREATIONAL TRAIL — A path that is:
REDEVELOPMENT — New development that replaces older development.
REGIONAL FLOOD — The peak flow and peak elevation of water with a onepercent
probability of occurring during any one year, considering rainfall
time and intensity patterns, rainfall duration, area distribution, antecedent
moisture, and snow melt. The common misnomer, "one-hundred-year flood
or floodplain" implies a temporal element rather than a one in 100 random
probability of the event.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any entity holding fee title to the property or
other person contracted or obligated by other agreement to implement and
maintain postconstruction stormwater BMPs.
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or
similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances,
including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the
following criteria:
A. Distinctly set apart from a roadway, street, or sidewalk;
Designed for activities such as jogging, walking, hiking, bird watching,
bicycle riding, roller skating, or similar recreational activities not
involving the use of motorized vehicles; and
B.
C. Not a sidewalk according to § 340.01(58), Wis. Stats.
A. Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff;
B. Is not part of a combined sewer system;
C. Is not draining to a stormwater treatment device or system; and
§ 285-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-26
1:153
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land disturbing construction activity occurred.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the administering authority
which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan designed
to reduce the discharge of pollutants from stormwater after the site has
undergone final stabilization following completion of the construction
activity.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A comprehensive plan
designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic
units on a regional or municipal scale.
TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design, predicted
performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material,
device or method.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time period for the furthest runoff from
the outlet of a watershed to contribute to flow at the watershed outlet.
TOP OF THE CHANNEL — An edge, or point on the landscape, landward
from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the state, where
the slope of the land begins to be less than 12% continually for at least 50
feet. If the slope of the land is 12% or less continually for the initial 50 feet
landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of the channel is the
ordinary high-water mark.
TR-55 — The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55,
June 1986.
TYPE II DISTRIBUTION — A rainfall type curve as established in the United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical
Paper 149, published 1973. The Type II curve is applicable to all of
Wisconsin and represents the most intense storm pattern.
VILLAGE OF FOX POINT — When referring to the governing body and not
the geographical area, means Village Board of Trustees.
WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT — The stormwater standards and duties
established under the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., parallel
state law regulating the discharge of pollutants, and implementing
regulations.
WATER QUANTITY MANAGEMENT — Runoff management requirements
to manage the volume, timing, and peak flow rate from development or
redevelopment pursuant to Chapter 13 of the Milwaukee Metropolitan
Sewerage District (MMSD) rules as implemented and enforced by this
municipality.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The meaning given in § 281.01(18), Wis. Stats.
D. Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
§ 285-26 FOX POINT CODE § 285-27
1:154
§ 285-27. Technical standards.
The following methods shall be used in designing the water quality, peak
flow shaving and infiltration components of stormwater practices needed to
meet the requirements of this article:
§ 285-28. Performance standards.
A. Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Subchapter V of
Chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other technical standards
may be used, provided that the methods have been approved by the
administering authority.
C. The most recent rainfall data available from the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission or more protective data shall
be the basis for the analyses required by this article.
A. Responsible party. The responsible party shall implement a
postconstruction stormwater management plan that incorporates the
requirements of this section.
B. Plan. A written stormwater quality and quantity management plan in
accordance with § 285-30 shall be developed and implemented for each
postconstruction site.
C. Requirements. The water quality plan required under Subsection B
shall include the following:
(1) Total suspended solids. BMPs shall be designed, installed and
maintained to control total suspended solids carried in runoff from
the postconstruction site as follows:
(a) For new development, by design, reduce to the maximum
extent practicable the total suspended solids load by 80%,
based on the average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed
an 80% total suspended solids reduction to meet the
requirements of this subsection.
(b) For redevelopment, by design, reduce to the maximum extent
practicable the total suspended solids load by 40%, based on
the average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed a
40% total suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements
of this subsection.
(c) For infill development under five acres that occurs within 10
years after October 1, 2002, by design, reduce to the maximum
extent practicable the total suspended solids load by 40%,
§ 285-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-28
1:155
based on an average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed a
40% total suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements
of this subsection.
(d) For infill development that occurs 10 or more years after
October 1, 2002, by design, reduce to the maximum extent
practicable the total suspended solids load by 80%, based on
an average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed
an 80% total suspended solids reduction to meet the
requirements of this subsection.
(e) Notwithstanding Subsection C(1)(a) to (d), if the design cannot
achieve the applicable total suspended solids reduction
specified, the stormwater management plan shall include a
written and site-specific explanation why that level of
reduction is not attained and the total suspended solids load
shall be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
(2) Runoff management requirements.
(a) The responsible party shall manage the volume, timing, and
peak flow rate of runoff from development or redevelopment
approved by the Village after the effective date of this chapter.
The responsible party may implement runoff management
requirements on a watershed basis or at individual sites.
(b) Standards for development; demolition or construction during
redevelopment.
[1] For development, runoff management shall prevent
increases in the regional flood and stream bank erosion
rates.
[2] If demolition or construction during redevelopment will
disturb an area larger than two acres, then the responsible
party shall reduce the runoff release rate by the amount
listed in the following table for the one-percent/onehundred-
year and fifty-percent/two-year storms, except as
provided in Subsection C(2)(e).
Area Disturbed by
Demolition or
Construction
Reduction to the
Existing Runoff Release
Rate as of October 25,
2010
Between 2 acres and 3.5
acres
10%
From 3.5 to 5 acres 15%
Greater than 5 acres 20%
§ 285-28 FOX POINT CODE § 285-28
1:156
(c) The responsible party may prepare a watershed or subwatershed
stormwater management plan or a local stormwater
management plan for multiple sites considered together. These
analyses shall show how runoff volume is distributed over the
critical time of the watershed sufficient to comply with
Subsection C(2)(b). The responsible party shall analyze runoff
and determine the critical time according to guidance provided
by the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District (MMSD).
When evaluating how a development will affect the
watercourses, the responsible party shall use models and
conditions approved by the MMSD. The responsible party shall
use 2020 or later land use conditions. The responsible party
shall use pre-project channel conditions. The responsible party
shall submit these plans and analyses to the MMSD for review
and approval. Such plans are subject to approval of the MMSD,
in addition to the approval of the Village.
(d) In the absence of an approved watershed management plan
that covers development at a particular site, the responsible
party shall implement either site-specific maximum runoff
release rates that will distribute runoff over the critical time
sufficient to comply with Subsection C(2)(b)[1], calculated
according to guidance provided by MMSD, or the following
uniform rates:
Storm(probability/
recurrence interval)
Maximum Runoff Release
Rate(cubic feet per second per
acre)
1%/100-year 0.5
50%/2-year 0.15
(e) Redevelopment may reduce the runoff release rate by an
amount less than required by Subsection C(2)(b)[2] when
conditions make compliance unreasonable. Relevant
conditions include, but are not limited to, soil contamination,
groundwater contamination, land use requirements, land
availability, opportunities for off-site management,
construction delays, marginal costs, and the availability of
financing. In this case, redevelopment shall achieve the
greatest practicable reduction.
(f) When selecting the runoff management techniques
appropriate for a particular development, responsible parties
shall consider the following techniques, in order of preference:
[1] Preservation of the natural features of development sites,
including natural storage and infiltration characteristics;
[2] Preservation of existing natural streams, channels, and
drainageways;
§ 285-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-28
1:157
[3] Minimization of new impervious surfaces;
[4] Conveyance of stormwater in open vegetated channels;
[5] Construction of structures that provide both quantity and
quality control, with structures serving multiple sites
being preferable to structures serving individual sites; and
[6] Construction of structures that provide only quantity
control, with structures serving multiple sites being
preferable to structures serving individual sites.
(g) If impervious surface is removed after the effective date of this
chapter, then the responsible party may reduce the degree of
runoff management necessary for new impervious surface
within the same watershed or sub-watershed, to the extent that
the net result complies with Subsection C(2)(b). The
responsible party shall implement this subsection according to
guidance provided by the MMSD.
(h) Runoff management systems may be either public or private.
(i) The responsible party shall ensure that facilities constructed to
manage runoff are maintained to preserve their effectiveness.
(j) If a runoff management system is not constructed or
maintained according to an approved site development
stormwater management plan or otherwise fails to comply with
Subsection C(2)(a), then the responsible party shall construct
new facilities, expand or correct previously constructed
facilities, or implement other remedial action.
(3) Infiltration. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to
infiltrate runoff to the maximum extent practicable in accordance
with the following, except as provided in Subsection C(3)(e)
through (g).
(a) For residential developments, one of the following shall be
met:
[1] Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the
postdevelopment infiltration volume shall be at least 90%
of the predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an
average annual rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement,
no more than 1% of the project site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
[2] Infiltrate 25% of the postdevelopment runoff from the twoyear,
twenty-four-hour design storm with a type II
distribution. Separate curve numbers for pervious and
impervious surfaces shall be used to calculate runoff
volumes and not composite curve numbers as defined in
§ 285-28 FOX POINT CODE § 285-28
1:158
TR-55. However, when designing appropriate infiltration
systems to meet this requirement, no more than 1% of the
project site is required as an effective infiltration area.
(b) For nonresidential development, including commercial,
industrial and institutional development, one of the following
shall be met:
[1] Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the
postdevelopment infiltration volume shall be at least 60%
of the predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an
average annual rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement,
no more than 2% of the project site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
[2] Infiltrate 10% of the runoff from the two-year, twenty-fourhour
design storm with a type II distribution. Separate
curve numbers for pervious and impervious surfaces shall
be used to calculate runoff volumes and not composite
curve numbers as defined in TR-55. However, when
designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this
requirement, no more than 2% of the project site is
required as an effective infiltration area.
(c) Predevelopment condition shall be the same as in Subsection
C(3)(b).
(d) Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for
parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in
commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will enter an
infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to
protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled
maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in accordance
with Subsection C(3)(g). Pretreatment options may include,
but are not limited to, oil/grease separation, sedimentation,
biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips.
(e) Infiltration exclusions. The runoff from the following areas is
prohibited from meeting the requirements of this subsection:
[1] Areas associated with Tier 1 industrial facilities identified
in § NR 216.21(2)(a), Wis. Adm. Code, including storage,
loading, rooftop and parking.
[2] Storage and loading areas of Tier 2 industrial facilities
identified in § NR 216.21(2)(b), Wis. Adm. Code.
[3] Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas.
[4] Areas within 1,000 feet up gradient or within 100 feet
down gradient of karst features.
§ 285-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-28
1:159
[5] Areas with less than three feet separation distance from
the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of
seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock, except
this subsection does not prohibit infiltration of roof runoff.
[6] Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and
institutional parking lots and roads and residential arterial
roads with less than five feet separation distance from the
bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of
seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock.
[7] Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as
specified in § NR 811.16(4), Wis. Adm. Code, or within 100
feet of a private well as specified in § NR 812.08(4), Wis.
Adm. Code, for runoff infiltrated from commercial,
industrial and institutional land uses or regional devices
for residential development.
[8] Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in § NR
720.03(2), Wis. Adm. Code, are present in the soil through
which infiltration will occur.
[9] Any area where the soil does not exhibit one of the
following soil characteristics between the bottom of the
infiltration system and the seasonal high groundwater and
top of bedrock: at least a three-foot soil layer with 20%
fines or greater; or at least a five-foot soil layer with 10%
fines or greater. This does not apply where the soil medium
within the infiltration system provides an equivalent level
of protection. This subsection does not prohibit infiltration
of roof runoff.
(f) Infiltration exemptions. The following are not required to meet
the requirements of this subsection:
[1] Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.6
inch per hour measured at the site.
[2] Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet
for commercial and industrial development.
[3] Redevelopment postconstruction sites.
[4] Infill development areas less than five acres.
[5] Infiltration areas during periods when the soil on the site is
frozen.
[6] Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land
uses, and arterial residential roads.
(g) Protection of groundwater quality.
§ 285-28 FOX POINT CODE § 285-28
1:160
[1] Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this
subsection shall, to the extent technically and
economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants
infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance
with the preventive action limit at a point of standards
application in accordance with Ch. NR 140, Wis. Adm.
Code. However, if site-specific information indicates that
compliance with a preventive action limit is not
achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed or
shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum
extent practicable.
[2] Notwithstanding Subsection C(3)(g)[1], the discharge
from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard
at the point of standards application.
(4) Protective areas.
(a) "Protective area" means an area of land that commences at the
top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the
delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the
following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the
channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest
impervious surface. However, in this subsection, "protective
area" does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream
enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot enter
the enclosure at this location.
[1] For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource
waters, and for wetlands in areas of special natural
resource interest as specified in § NR 103.04, Wis. Adm.
Code, 75 feet.
[2] For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a
United States geological survey 7.5-minute series
topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever
is more current, 50 feet.
[3] For lakes, 50 feet.
[4] For highly susceptible wetlands, 50 feet. Highly
susceptible wetlands include the following types: fens,
sedge meadows, bogs, low prairies, conifer swamps, shrub
swamps, other forested wetlands, fresh wet meadows,
shallow marshes, deep marshes and seasonally flooded
basins. Wetland boundary delineations shall be made in
accordance with § NR 103.08(1m), Wis. Adm. Code. This
subsection does not apply to wetlands that have been
completely filled in accordance with all applicable state
and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands
that have been partially filled in accordance with all
applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured
§ 285-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-28
1:161
from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been
placed.
[5] For less susceptible wetlands, 10% of the average wetland
width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less
susceptible wetlands include degraded wetlands
dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass.
[6] In Subsection C(4)(a)[1], [4] and [5], determinations of the
extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be
made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff
susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the
standards and criteria in § NR 103.03, Wis. Adm. Code.
[7] For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas
greater than 130 acres, 10 feet.
(b) This subsection applies to postconstruction sites located within
a protective area, except those areas exempted pursuant to
Subsection C(4)(d) of this section.
(c) The following requirements shall be met:
[1] Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective
area to the maximum extent practicable. The stormwater
management plan shall contain a written site-specific
explanation for any parts of the protective area that are
disturbed during construction.
[2] Where land-disturbing construction activity occurs within
a protective area, and where no impervious surface is
present, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover
of 70% or greater shall be established and maintained. The
adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be
sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish
habitat and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland
flow areas under sheet flow conditions. Nonvegetative
materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on the
bank as necessary to prevent erosion, such as on steep
slopes or where high velocity flows occur.
[3] Best management practices such as filter strips, swales, or
wet detention basins that are designed to control
pollutants from nonpoint sources may be located in the
protective area.
(d) This subsection does not apply to:
[1] Redevelopment postconstruction sites.
[2] Infill development areas less than five acres.
§ 285-28 FOX POINT CODE § 285-28
1:162
[3] Structures that cross or access surface waters such as
boat landings, bridges and culverts.
[4] Structures constructed in accordance with § 59.692(1v),
Wis. Stats.
[5] Postconstruction sites from which runoff does not enter
the surface water, except to the extent that vegetative
ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability.
(5) Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle
maintenance areas shall, to the maximum extent practicable, have
BMPs designed, installed and maintained to reduce petroleum
within runoff, such that the runoff that enters waters of the state
contains no visible petroleum sheen.
(6) Swale treatment for transportation facilities.
(a) Applicability. Except as provided in Subsection C(6)(b),
transportation facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance
and pollutant removal meet all of the requirements of this
section if the swales are designed to the maximum extent
practicable to do all of the following:
[1] Be vegetated. However, where appropriate, nonvegetative
measures may be employed to prevent erosion or provide
for runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or
check dams.
[2] Carry runoff through a swale for 200 feet or more in length
that is designed with a flow velocity no greater than 1.5
feet per second based on a two-year, twenty-four-hour
design storm. If a swale of 200 feet in length cannot be
designed with a flow velocity of 1.5 feet per second or less,
then the flow velocity shall be reduced to the maximum
extent practicable.
(b) Exemptions. The administering authority may, consistent with
water quality standards, require other provisions of this
section be met on a transportation facility with an average
daily travel of vehicles greater than 2,500 and where the initial
surface water of the state that the runoff directly enters is any
of the following:
[1] An outstanding resource water.
[2] An exceptional resource water.
[3] Waters listed in Section 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water
Act that are identified as impaired, in whole or in part, due
to nonpoint source impacts.
§ 285-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-28
1:163
[4] Waters where targeted performance standards are
developed under § NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code, to meet
water quality standards.
D. General considerations for on-site and off-site stormwater management
measures. The following considerations shall be observed in managing
runoff:
(1) Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales,
natural depressions, native soil-infiltrating capacity, and natural
groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the
extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section.
(2) Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be
provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream
drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream
property or public safety.
(3) BMPs for water quantity management shall utilize the following
techniques, in order of preference:
(a) Preservation of the natural features of development sites,
including natural storage and infiltration characteristics;
(b) Preservation of existing natural streams, channels, and
drainageways;
(c) Minimization of new impervious surfaces;
(d) Conveyance of stormwater in open vegetated channels;
(e) Construction of structures that provide both quantity and
quality control, with structures serving multiple sites being
preferable to structures serving individual sites; and
(f) Construction of structures that provide only quantity control,
with structures serving multiple sites being preferable to
structures serving individual sites.
E. Location and regional treatment option.
(1) The BMPs may be located on-site or off-site as part of a regional
stormwater device, practice or system within the same watershed.
(2) Postconstruction runoff within a nonnavigable drainage way that
flows into a BMP, such as a wet pond, is not required to meet water
quality performance standards unless designed to provide
treatment. Postconstruction BMPs may be located in nonnavigable
surface waters.
(3) Except as allowed under Subsection E(4), postconstruction runoff
from new development shall meet the postconstruction
performance standards prior to entering a navigable surface water.
§ 285-28 FOX POINT CODE § 285-28
1:164
(4) Postconstruction runoff from any development within a navigable
surface water that flows into a BMP is not required to meet the
performance standards of this article if:
(a) The BMP was constructed prior to the effective date of this
article and the BMP either received a permit issued under Ch.
30, Wis. Stats., or the BMP did not require a permit under Ch.
30, Wis. Stats.; and
(b) The BMP is designed to provide runoff treatment from future
upland development.
(5) Runoff from existing development, redevelopment and infill areas
shall meet the postconstruction performance standards in
accordance with this subsection.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, BMPs shall be located to
treat runoff prior to discharge to navigable surface waters.
(b) Postconstruction BMPs for such runoff may be located in a
navigable surface water if allowable under all other applicable
federal, state, and local regulations, such as Ch. NR 103, Wis.
Adm. Code, and Ch. 30, Wis. Stats.
(6) The discharge of runoff from a BMP, such as a wet pond, or after a
series of such BMPs is subject to this article.
(7) The administering authority may approve off-site management
measures, provided that all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The administrating authority determines that the
postconstruction runoff is covered by a stormwater
management system plan that is approved by the Village of Fox
Point and that contains management requirements consistent
with the purpose and intent of this article.
(b) The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
[1] The facility is in place.
[2] The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a
level of stormwater control equal to or greater than that
which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the
performance standards of this article.
[3] The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its
long-term operation and maintenance.
(8) Where a regional treatment option exists such that the
administering authority exempts the applicant from all or part of
the minimum on-site stormwater management requirements, the
applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount determined in
negotiation with the administering authority. In determining the fee
§ 285-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-28
1:165
§ 285-29. Permit requirements, procedures and fees.
for postconstruction runoff, the administering authority shall
consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land, engineering
design, construction, and maintenance of the regional treatment
option.
F. Alternate requirements. The administering authority may establish
stormwater management requirements more stringent than those set
forth in this section if the administering authority determines that an
added level of protection is needed to protect sensitive resources.
G. Credit for removal of impervious surfaces.
(1) Same site credit. The administering authority may use the removal
of pavement, covered structures or other impervious surfaces at
the same property to calculate the net postconstruction impervious
acreage and corresponding water quantity management duties.
Credit may equal, but not be larger than the acreage of impervious
surfaces removed when runoff release rates and detention are the
best management practices utilized at the site. When best
management practices with a higher order of preference are
utilized in lieu of detention, equivalent credit may be granted as
determined by the administering authority with the concurrence of
the MMSD. Credit for reducing impervious surfaces at a site, not
utilized by the development on the site, belongs to the
administering authority and may be banked for allocation to other
development within the watershed under Subsection G(2).
(2) Dispersed site in same watershed credit. The administering
authority may bank the removal of impervious surfaces, which
individually must be 1/2 acre or more, within the same watershed,
where the volume, timing and peak flow of runoff will be
distributed over the critical time sufficient to assure the level of
protection provided by MMSD flood abatement projects will not be
reduced. The administering authority may allocate banked credit to
promote a policy of smart growth. The total acreage banked or
allocated, or both, shall be reported, by watershed or
subwatershed, annually to the MMSD for concurrence.
A. Permit required. No responsible party may undertake a land-disturbing
construction activity without receiving a postconstruction runoff permit
from the administering authority prior to commencing the proposed
activity.
B. Permit application and fees. Unless specifically excluded by this article,
any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the
administering authority a permit application made on a form provided
by the administering authority for that purpose.
§ 285-28 FOX POINT CODE § 285-29
1:166
(1) Unless specifically excepted, a permit application must be
accompanied by a stormwater management plan, a maintenance
agreement and a nonrefundable permit administration fee.
(2) The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the
requirements of §§ 285-28 and 285-30, the maintenance agreement
shall be prepared to meet the requirements of § 285-31, the
financial guarantee shall meet the requirements of § 285-32, and
fees shall be those established by the Village of Fox Point as set
forth in § 285-33.
C. Review and approval of permit application. The administering authority
shall review any permit application that is submitted with a stormwater
management plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee, as
follows:
(1) Within 30 business days of the receipt of a complete permit
application, including all items as required by Subsection B of this
section, the administering authority shall inform the applicant
whether the application, plan and maintenance agreement are
approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this article.
(2) If the stormwater permit application, plan and maintenance
agreement are approved, or if an agreed-upon payment of fees in
lieu of stormwater management practices is made, the
administering authority shall issue the permit.
(3) If the stormwater permit application, plan or maintenance
agreement is disapproved, the administering authority shall detail
in writing the reasons for disapproval.
(4) The administering authority may request additional information
from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the
administering authority shall have 20 business days from the date
the additional information is received to inform the applicant that
the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or
disapproved.
(5) Failure by the administering authority to inform the permit
applicant of a decision within 30 business days of a required
submittal shall be deemed an approval of the submittal and the
applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued.
D. Permit requirements. All permits issued under this article shall be
subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under
this article shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The
administering authority may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of
a permit condition, following written notification of the responsible
party. An action by the administering authority to suspend or revoke
this permit may be appealed in accordance with § 285-35.
§ 285-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-29
1:167
(1) Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party
of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state,
and local laws and regulations.
(2) The responsible party shall design and install all structural or
identify nonstructural stormwater management measures, or both,
in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and
this permit.
(3) The responsible party shall notify the administering authority at
least 10 business days before commencing any work in conjunction
with the stormwater management plan, and within five business
days upon completion of the stormwater management practices. If
required as a special condition under Subsection E of this section,
the responsible party shall make additional notification according
to a schedule set forth by the administering authority so that
practice installations can be inspected during construction.
(4) Practice installations required as part of this article shall be
certified "as-built" by a licensed professional engineer. Completed
stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection by
the administering authority or its designee to determine if they are
in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and
this article. The administering authority or its designee shall notify
the responsible party in writing of any changes required in such
practices to bring them into compliance with the conditions of this
permit.
(5) The responsible party shall notify the administering authority of
any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved
stormwater management plan. The administering authority may
require that the proposed modifications be submitted to it for
approval prior to incorporation into the stormwater management
plan and execution by the responsible party.
(6) The responsible party shall maintain all stormwater management
practices until the responsibility is transferred to the Village of Fox
Point, or subsequent private owners as specified in the approved
maintenance agreement.
(7) The responsible party authorizes the administering authority to
perform any work or operations necessary to bring stormwater
management measures into conformance with the approved
stormwater management plan, and consents to a special
assessment or charge against the property as authorized under
§ 66.0627 or Subchapter VII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats., or to charging
such costs against the financial guarantee posted under § 285-32.
(8) If so directed by the administering authority, the responsible party
shall repair at the responsible party's own expense all damage to
adjoining municipal facilities and drainage ways caused by runoff,
§ 285-29 FOX POINT CODE § 285-29
1:168
§ 285-30. Stormwater management plan.
where such damage is caused by activities that are not in
compliance with the approved stormwater management plan.
(9) The responsible party shall permit property access to the
administering authority or its designee for the purpose of
inspecting the property for compliance with the approved
stormwater management plan and this permit.
(10) Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in
direction, increases in the peak rate or the total volume of runoff,
the administering authority may require the responsible party to
make appropriate legal arrangements with affected property
owners concerning the prevention of endangerment to property or
public safety.
(11) The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and
penalties detailed in § 285-34, if the responsible party fails to
comply with the terms of this permit.
E. Permit conditions. Permits issued under this section may include
reasonable and necessary conditions established by administering
authority in addition to the requirements needed to meet the
performance standards in § 285-28 or a financial guarantee as provided
for in § 285-32.
F. Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from
the date of issuance through the date the administering authority
notifies the responsible party that all stormwater management
practices have passed the final inspection required under Subsection
D(4).
A. Plan requirements. The stormwater management plan required under
§ 285-29B shall contain at, a minimum, the following information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their
designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice
design and certification; person(s) responsible for installation of
stormwater management practices; and person(s) responsible for
maintenance of stormwater management practices prior to the
transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party.
(2) A proper legal description of the property proposed to be
developed, referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to
block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat.
(3) Predevelopment site conditions, including:
(a) One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet. The site maps shall show the following: site
location and legal property description; predominant soil types
§ 285-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-30
1:169
and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition;
topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed two
feet; topography and drainage network including enough of the
contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through,
and from the site; watercourses that may affect or be affected
by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all
stormwater conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used
in hydrology determinations to show compliance with
performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels,
ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent
to the site; limits of the regional flood (the 1% probability
storm event) floodplain; location of wells and wellhead
protection areas covering the project area and delineated
pursuant to § NR 811.16, Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to
show compliance with performance standards. All major
assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be
clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required
map(s).
(4) Postdevelopment site conditions, including:
(a) Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural
topography and land cover features to minimize changes in
peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and
wetlands.
(b) Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management
measures in the development area imposed by wellhead
protection plans and ordinances.
(c) One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet showing the following: postconstruction
pervious areas including vegetative cover type and condition;
impervious surfaces including all buildings, structures, and
pavement; postconstruction topographic contours of the site at
a scale not to exceed two feet; postconstruction drainage
network including enough of the contiguous properties to show
runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; locations and
dimensions of drainage easements; locations of maintenance
easements specified in the maintenance agreement; flow path
and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections; location
and type of all stormwater management conveyance and
treatment practices, including the on-site and off-site tributary
drainage area; location and type of conveyance system that will
carry runoff from the drainage and treatment practices to the
nearest adequate outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain,
or natural drainageway; watershed boundaries used in
hydrology and pollutant loading calculations and any changes
§ 285-30 FOX POINT CODE § 285-30
1:170
§ 285-31. Maintenance agreement.
to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other
watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site.
(d) Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to
show compliance with performance standards. The
computations shall be made for each discharge point in the
development, and the geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required
map(s).
(e) Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for
the placement and design of stormwater management
measures. Detailed drawings including cross-sections and
profiles of all permanent stormwater conveyance and
treatment practices.
(5) A description and installation schedule for the stormwater
management practices needed to meet the performance standards
in § 285-28.
(6) A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater
management practice, including the required maintenance
activities and maintenance activity schedule.
(7) Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of
each stormwater management practice.
(8) Other information requested in writing by the administering
authority to determine compliance of the proposed stormwater
management measures with the provisions of this article.
B. Certification. All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and
drawings shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer to be
prepared in accordance with accepted engineering practice and
requirements of this article.
C. Alternate requirements. The administering authority may prescribe
alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption
to on-site stormwater management performance standards under
§ 285-28E.
A. Maintenance agreement required. The maintenance agreement
required under § 285-29B for stormwater management practices shall
be an agreement between the Village and the responsible party to
provide for maintenance of stormwater practices beyond the duration
period of this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with
the County Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is
binding upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the
stormwater management practices.
§ 285-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-31
1:171
§ 285-32. Financial guarantee.
B. Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the
following information and provisions and be consistent with the
maintenance plan required by § 285-30A(6):
(1) Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the
drainage area served by the facilities.
(2) A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the
stormwater management system consistent with the stormwater
management plan required under § 285-29B.
(3) Identification of the responsible party(ies), organization or city,
county, town or village responsible for long-term maintenance of
the stormwater management practices identified in the stormwater
management plan required under § 285-29B.
(4) Requirement that the responsible party(ies), organization, or city,
county, town or village shall maintain stormwater management
practices in accordance with the schedule included in Subsection
B(2).
(5) Authorization for the administering authority, its designee and the
Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District to access the property
to conduct inspections of stormwater management practices as
necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and
operated in accordance with the agreement.
(6) A requirement on the administering authority to maintain public
records of the results of the site inspections, to inform the party
responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and to
specifically indicate any corrective actions required to bring the
stormwater management practice into proper working condition.
(7) Agreement that the party designated under Subsection B(3) of this
section as responsible for long-term maintenance of the
stormwater management practices shall be notified by the
administering authority of maintenance problems which require
correction. The specified corrective actions shall be undertaken
within a reasonable time frame as set by the administering
authority.
(8) Authorization of the administering authority to perform the
corrected actions identified in the inspection report if the
responsible party designated under Subsection B(3) does not make
the required corrections in the specified time period. The
administering authority shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls
and collect the money as a special charge against the property
pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
§ 285-31 FOX POINT CODE § 285-32
1:172
§ 285-33. Fee schedule.
The fees referred to in other sections of this article shall be established by
the Village Board and may from time to time be modified by the Village
Board. A schedule of the fees established by the administering authority
shall be available for review at the Village Hall.
A. Establishment of the guarantee. The administering authority may
require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of
which shall be subject to the approval of the administering authority.
The financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the
administering authority to be the estimated cost of construction and the
estimated cost of maintenance of the stormwater management
practices during the period which the designated party in the
maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial
guarantee shall give the administering authority the authorization to
use the funds to complete the stormwater management practices if the
responsible party defaults or does not properly implement the approved
stormwater management plan or to use the funds to maintain the
stormwater management practices if the responsible party does not
properly do so pursuant to the approved stormwater management plan.
The administering authority shall be entitled to draw on the letter of
credit upon written notice to the financial institution holding the
financial guarantee by the administering authority that the
requirements of this article have not been met. Additional terms and
conditions applicable to the financial guarantee may be depicted in the
maintenance agreement.
B. Conditions for release. Conditions for the release of the financial
guarantee are as follows:
(1) The administering authority shall release the portion of the
financial guarantee established under this section that applies to
construction of the stormwater practices, less any costs incurred
by the administering authority to complete installation of practices,
upon submission of "as built plans" by a licensed professional
engineer which are approved by the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer and document full compliance. The administering
authority may make provisions for a partial pro rata release of the
financial guarantee based on the completion of various
development stages.
(2) The administering authority shall release the portion of the
financial guarantee established under this section to assure
maintenance of stormwater practices, less any costs incurred by
the administering authority, at such time that the responsibility for
practice maintenance is passed on to another entity via an
approved maintenance agreement and an approved financial
guarantee.
§ 285-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-34
1:173
§ 285-34. Enforcement.
A. Any land-disturbing construction activity or postconstruction runoff
initiated after the effective date of this article by any person, firm,
association, or corporation subject to the provisions of this article shall
be deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
B. The administering authority shall notify the responsible party of any
noncomplying land disturbing construction activity or postconstruction
runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial
actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, or additional
enforcement action which may be taken; however, the notice of
enforcement shall not limit or prevent the Village from pursuing
different or alternative means of enforcement than as described in the
notice. Any technique that effectively provides actual and verifiable
notice may be used.
C. Upon receipt of written notification from the administering authority
under Subsection B, the responsible party shall correct work that does
not comply with the stormwater management plan or other provisions
of this permit. The responsible party shall make corrections as
necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the
administering authority in the notice.
D. If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this article are likely to
result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the state,
the administering authority may enter the land and take corrective
actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the
administering authority plus interest and legal costs shall be paid by
the responsible party.
E. If the administering authority determines that any person is in violation
of this article or a stormwater permit, the administering authority may
issue a notice of violation, a stop-work order, or a cease-and-desist
order, or revoke the permit, or refer the noncompliance to the Village
Attorney for civil enforcement, penalties, injunctive orders or other
appropriate relief.
F. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance and subject to
prosecution under § 1-4 of the Fox Point Code.
G. The administering authority may revoke a permit issued under this
article for noncompliance with the provisions of this article.
H. Any permit revocation, stop-work order, or cease-and-desist order shall
remain in effect unless retracted by the administering authority or by a
court with jurisdiction.
I. The administering authority is authorized to refer any violation of this
article, or of a stop-work order or cease-and-desist order issued
§ 285-34 FOX POINT CODE § 285-34
1:174
§ 285-35. Appeals.
pursuant to this article, to the Village Attorney for the commencement
of further legal proceedings in any court with jurisdiction.
J. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with
the provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties described
in § 1-4 of this Code. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
K. Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by
injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to
prosecute for forfeiture or a cease-and-desist order before resorting to
injunctional proceedings.
L. When the administering authority determines that the holder of a
permit issued pursuant to this article has failed to follow practices, or
has failed to comply with schedules in a stormwater management plan,
the administering authority or a party designated by the administering
authority may enter upon the land and perform the work or other
operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into
conformance with requirements of the approved plan. The
administering authority shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs
and expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall
be deducted from any financial security posted pursuant to § 285-32 of
this article. Where such a security has not been established, or where
such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and
expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the
property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year
in which the work is completed.
A. Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or
determination made by the administering authority in administering
this article. The Board shall also use the rules, procedures, duties, and
powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals. Upon
appeal, the Board may authorize variances that are not contrary to the
public interest, and where owing to special conditions unique to the
property, a literal enforcement would be an unnecessary hardship.
B. Who may appeal. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any
aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the
Village of Fox Point affected by any decision of the administering
authority.
§ 285-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-35
1:175

ARTICLE IV
Construction Site Erosion Control
[Adopted 3-13-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-03 (Ch. 38 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 285-36. Authority.
This article is adopted by the Village Board under the authority granted it
in § 61.354, Wis. Stats.
§ 285-37. Findings and purpose.
§ 285-38. Applicability of regulations.
This article applies to land-disturbing and land-developing activities on land
within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village and the public and
private lands subject to extraterritorial review under Ch. 236, Wis. Stats.
All state-funded or conducted construction is exempt from this article if, at
a minimum, such construction activities meet the requirements contained
in the "State Plan for the Control of Construction Erosion and Stormwater
Runoff," which contains similar requirements as contained in this article.
§ 285-39. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL LAND USE — Use of land for planting, growing,
cultivating and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption and
pasturing or yarding of livestock.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — A practice or combination of
practices to control erosion and attendant pollution.
BMP HANDBOOK — The most recent edition of the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management
Practices Handbook.
COMMERCIAL LAND USE — Use of land for the retail or wholesale sale of
goods or services.
CONSTRUCTION SITE BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — A best
management practice used to meet the requirements of § 285-42.
A. Findings. The Village Board finds that runoff from construction sites
carries a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to the
waters of the state and the Village of Fox Point.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to preserve the natural
resources; to protect the quality of the waters of the state and Village;
and to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the people
to the extent practicable by minimizing the amount of sediment and
other pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from construction sites
to lakes, streams and wetlands.
§ 285-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-39
1:177
CONTROL PLAN — A written description of the number, locations, sizes and
other pertinent information of best management practices designed to meet
the requirements of this article submitted by the applicant for review and
approval by the Village staff.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
LAND-DEVELOPING ACTIVITY — The construction, demolition, and/or
redevelopment of buildings, roads, parking lots, paved storage areas and
similar facilities.
LAND-DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made change
of the land surface including removing vegetation cover, excavating, filling
and grading, but not including agricultural land uses such as planting,
cultivating and harvesting of crops; growing and tending of gardens;
harvesting of trees; and landscaping modifications.
LANDOWNER — Any person holding title to or having any interest in land.
LAND USER — Any person operating, leasing, renting, or having made
other arrangements with the landowner by which the landowner authorizes
uses of his land.
RUNOFF — The rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the
ground surface.
SET OF ONE-YEAR DESIGN STORMS — The following rain intensities and
rain volumes or corresponding values specific to the community for the
storm durations of 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 6, 12 and 24 hours that occur approximately
one per year. The following are typical characteristics of these one-year
storms for most of Wisconsin.32
Storm Duration
(hours)
Rain Intensity
(inches/hour)
Average Total Rain
(inches)
0.5 1.8 0.9
1 1.1 1.1
2 0.7 1.3
3 0.5 1.5
6 0.3 1.7
12 0.2 2.0
24 0.1 2.3
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land disturbing or land development activity is proposed in the
permit application.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 285-39 FOX POINT CODE § 285-39
1:178
STABILIZE — Make the site steadfast or firm, minimizing soil movement by
mulching and seeding, sodding, landscaping, placing concrete or gravel or
other measure.
VILLAGE PERSONNEL — Employees of the Village of Fox Point authorized
by the Village Board to implement provisions of this article of the Village
Code.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All lakes, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells,
impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage system and other
surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within
the state or its jurisdiction.
WORKING DAY — A calendar day, except Saturdays, Sundays, and Villageobserved
holidays.
§ 285-40. Design criteria standards and specifications for best
management practices.
All best management practices required to comply with this article shall
be maintained by the applicant or subsequent landowner during the period
of land disturbance and development of the site in a satisfactory manner
to ensure adequate performance and to prevent nuisance conditions. The
standard for maintenance of best management practices shall be set forth
in the BMP Handbook or adopted by the Village.
§ 285-41. Maintenance of best management practices.
All sedimentation basins and other best management practices necessary to
meet the requirements of this article shall be maintained by the applicant
or subsequent landowner during the period of land disturbance and land
development of the site, in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate
performance and to prevent nuisance conditions.
§ 285-42. Control of erosion and pollutants during land disturbance
and development.
A. Applicability. This section applies to the following sites of land
development, demolition, redevelopment, and/or land-disturbing
activities:
(1) Those requiring a subdivision plat approval or the construction of
houses or commercial, industrial or institutional buildings on lots of
approved subdivision plats.33
(2) Those requiring a certified survey approval or the construction of
houses or commercial, industrial or institutional buildings on lots of
approved certified surveys.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 285-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-42
1:179
(3) Those involving grading, removal of protective ground cover or
vegetation, excavation, land filling or other land-disturbing activity
affecting a surface area of 8,000 square feet or more.
(4) Those involving excavation or filling, or a combination of
excavation and filling, affecting 800 cubic yards or more of dirt,
sand or other excavation or fill material.
(5) Those involving street, highway, road or bridge construction,
enlargement, relocation or reconstruction.
(6) Those involving the laying, repairing, replacing or enlarging of an
underground pipe or facility for a distance of 600 feet or more.
(7) Those involving grading, removal of protective ground cover or
vegetation, excavation, demolition, land filling or other land
disturbing activity on slopes of 10% or more.
Note: Utility companies responsible for energy repair work should
enter into a "memorandum of agreement" with the Village Staff
clearly stating their responsibilities if their activities may be
included under any of the above applicability criteria.
B. Erosion and other pollutant control requirements. The following
requirements shall be met on all sites described in Subsection A:
(1) Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by
temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters,
upslope chambers, hydrocyclones, swirl concentrators, or other
appropriate controls designed and used to remove particles of 100
microns or greater for the highest dewatering pumping rate. If the
water is demonstrated to have no particles greater than 100
microns during dewatering operations, then no control is needed
before discharge, except as determined by the Village Staff. Water
may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion of the site
or receiving channels.
§ 285-42 FOX POINT CODE § 285-42
1:180
Note: There are several ways to meet this particle size
performance objective depending on the pumping rate. As an
example, if the pumping rate is very low (one gallon per minute),
then an inclined or vertical enlargement pipe (about eight inches
in diameter for one gallon per minute) several feet long would
be an adequate control device to restrict the discharge of 100
micron, and larger, particles. As the pumping rate increases, then
the "device" must be enlarged. At a moderate (100 gallons per
minute) pumping rate, a vertical section of corrugated steel pipe,
or concrete pipe section, or other small "tank" (about 4 1/2 feet
across for a 100 gallons per minute pumping rate) several feet
tall would be adequate. With these pipe sections or small tanks,
inlet baffles would be needed to minimize turbulence. With very
large pumping rates (10,000 gallons per minute), sediment basins
(about 35 feet in diameter for a pumping rate of 10,000 gallons per
minute) at least three feet in depth with a simple but adequately
sized pipe outlet would be needed. More sophisticated control
devices (such as swirl concentrators or hydrocyclones) could be
specially fabricated that would generally be smaller than the
simple sedimentation devices described above, but they would not
be required.
(2) Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building
materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater,
toxic materials, or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed
of and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel
or storm sewer system.
(3) Tracking. Each site shall have graveled roads, access drives and
parking areas, constructed as set forth in the BMP Handbook, to
prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private
roadways. These areas shall be inspected and maintained each
workday.
(4) Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets shall be protected with
a straw bale, filter fabric, or equivalent barrier meeting accepted
design criteria, standards and specifications.
(5) Sediment cleanup. All off-site sediment deposits occurring as a
result of a storm event shall be cleaned up by the end of the next
workday. All other off-site sediment deposits occurring as a result
of construction activities shall be cleaned up by the end of that
same workday. Clean up shall be done by means of a "pick-up" type
sweeper; flushing is not allowed.
(6) Site erosion control. The following criteria apply only to land
development or land disturbing activities that result in runoff
leaving the site:
(a) Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through the
site shall be diverted around disturbed areas, if practical.
§ 285-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-42
1:181
Otherwise, the channel shall be protected as described below
in Subsection B(6)(c)[3]. Sheetflow runoff from adjacent areas
greater than 10,000 square feet in area shall also be diverted
around disturbed areas unless shown to have resultant runoff
velocities of less than 0.5 foot per second across the disturbed
area for the set of one-year design storms. Diverted runoff shall
be conveyed in a manner that will not erode the conveyance
and receiving channels.
(b) All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical
sequence to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any one
time.
(c) Runoff from the entire disturbed area on the site shall be
controlled by meeting either of the following:
[1] All disturbed ground left inactive for seven or more days
shall be stabilized by seeding or sodding (only available
prior to September 15) or by mulching or covering, or
other equivalent best management practice.
[2] For sites with more than 10 acres disturbed at one time, or
if a channel originates in the disturbed area, one or more
sedimentation basins shall be constructed. Each
sedimentation basin shall have a surface area of at least
1% of the area draining to the basin and at least three feet
of depth and constructed in accordance with accepted
design specifications. Sediment shall be removed to
maintain a depth of three feet. The basin shall be designed
to trap sediment greater than 15 microns in size, based on
the set of one-year design storms having durations from
0.5 to 24 hours. The basin discharge rate shall also be
sufficiently low as to not cause erosion along the discharge
channel or the receiving water.
[3] For sites with less than 10 acres disturbed at one time,
filter fences, straw bales, sediment traps, or equivalent
best management practices shall be placed along all
sideslope and downslope sides of the site. If a channel or
area of concentrated runoff passes through the site, filter
fences shall be placed along the channel edges to reduce
sediment reaching the channel.
(d) Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than 10 cubic
yards of material should not be located with a downslope
drainage length of less than 25 feet to a roadway or drainage
channel. If remaining for more than seven days, they shall be
stabilized by mulching, vegetative cover, tarps or other means.
Erosion from piles which will be in existence for less than
seven days shall be controlled by placing straw bales or filter
fence barriers around the pile. In-street utility repair or
§ 285-42 FOX POINT CODE § 285-42
1:182
§ 285-43. Permit application; control plan; permit issuance.
construction soil or dirt storage piles located closer than 25
feet to a roadway or drainage channel must be covered with
tarps or suitable alternative control if exposed for more than
seven days, and the storm drain inlets must be protected with
straw bales or other appropriate filtering barriers.
(e) When the disturbed area has been stabilized by permanent
vegetation or other means, temporary best management
practices such as filter fabric fences, straw bales, and sediment
traps shall be removed.
(f) Sites with slopes of 12% or more may require additional or
different controls than listed in Subsection B(6)(c), above.
Requirements for such slopes shall be as specified by the
Village in Article I of this chapter.
A. Permit application. No landowner or land user may commence a land
disturbance or land development activity subject to this article without
receiving prior approval of a control plan for the site and a permit from
the Village staff. At least one landowner or land user controlling or
using the site and desiring to undertake a land disturbing or land
developing activity subject to this article shall submit an application for
a permit and a control plan and pay an application fee to the Village
staff. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the
Village staff to enter the site to obtain information required for a review
of the control plan.
B. Content of the control plan for land disturbing activities covering more
than one acre.
(1) Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions on a scale of at
least one inch equals 100 feet showing the site and immediately
adjacent areas:
(a) Site boundaries of adjacent lands which accurately identify site
location;
(b) Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, environmental corridors,
ditches and other watercourses on or within 500 feet of the site
(Note: The Village should identify sensitive local waters that
may need to be further addressed by the control plan.);
(c) One-hundred-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways;
(d) Location of the predominant soil types;
(e) Vegetative cover;
(f) Location and dimensions of stormwater drainage systems and
natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the
site;
§ 285-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-43
1:183
(g) Locations and dimensions of utilities, structures, roads,
highways, and paving; and
(h) Site topography at a contour interval not to exceed five feet.
(2) Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on the
same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes.
(3) Site construction plan. A site construction plan including:
(a) Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing
activities;
(b) Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt
stockpiles;
(c) Locations and dimensions of all construction site management
best management practices necessary to meet the
requirements of this article;
(d) Schedule of anticipated starting and completion dates of each
land-disturbing or land-developing activity, including the
installation of construction site best management practices
needed to meet the requirements of this article; and
(e) Provisions of maintenance of the construction site best
management practices during construction.
C. Content of control plan statement for land disturbing activities covering
less than one acre, but meeting the applicability requirements stated in
§ 285-42A. An erosion control plan statement (with simple map) shall be
submitted to briefly describe the site and erosion controls (including
the site development schedule) that will be used to meet the
requirements of this article.
D. Review of control plan. Within 45 days of receipt of the application,
control plan (or control plan statement) and fee, the Village staff shall
review the application and control plan to determine if the
requirements of this article are met. The Village Staff shall approve the
plan, inform the applicant and issue a permit. If the conditions are not
met, the Village staff shall inform the applicant in writing and may
either require needed information or disapprove the plan. Within 30
days of receipt of needed information, the Village staff shall again
determine if the plan meets the requirements of this article. If the plan
is disapproved, the Village staff shall inform the applicant in writing of
the reasons for the disapproval.
E. Permits.
(1) Duration. Permits shall be valid for a period of 180 days, or the
length of the building permit or other construction authorizations,
whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The Village staff
may extend the period one or more times for up to an additional
§ 285-43 FOX POINT CODE § 285-43
1:184
§ 285-44. Inspection.
The Village Staff shall inspect construction sites at least once a month
during the period starting March 1 and ending October 31, and at least
two times during the period starting November 1 and ending February
28 to ensure compliance with the control plan. If land-disturbing or land
development activities are being carried on without a permit, the Village
staff shall enter the land pursuant to the provisions of § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
§ 285-45. Enforcement.
180 days. The Village staff may require additional best
management practices as a condition of the extension if they are
necessary to meet the requirements of this article.
(2) Surety bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit,
the Village staff may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond
or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution of
the approved control plan and any permit conditions.
(3) Permit conditions. All permits shall require the permittee to:
(a) Notify the Village staff within 48 hours of commencing any
land-disturbing activity;
(b) Notify the Village staff of completion of any best management
practices within 14 days after their installation;
(c) Obtain permission in writing from the Village staff prior to
modifying the control plan;
(d) Install all best management practices as identified in the
approved control plan;
(e) Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage
systems, best management practices and other facilities
identified in the control plan;
(f) Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces
and drainageways resulting from land-developing or disturbing
activities;
(g) Inspect the construction best management practices after each
rain of 0.5 inch or more and at least once each week make
needed repairs;
(h) Allow the Village staff to enter the site for the purpose of
inspecting for compliance with the control plan or for
performing any work necessary to bring the site into
compliance with the control plan; and
(i) Keep a copy of the control plan on the site.
§ 285-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-45
1:185
§ 285-46. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a forfeiture as provided in § 1-4 of the Code of the Village of Fox Point. Each
day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 285-47. Appeals.
A. Stop-work order. The Village Staff may post a stop-work order if:
(1) Any land disturbing or land developing activity regulated under
this article is being undertaken without a permit;
(2) The control plan is not being implemented in a good faith manner;
(3) The conditions of the permit are not being met; or
(4) No permit has been issued.
B. Revocation. If the permittee does not cease the activity forthwith upon
posting of a stop-work order, the Village staff may revoke the permit,
and the violator shall be subject to prosecution as provided in § 1-4 of
the Village Code. Limited work, as approved by Village staff, may
proceed for the limited purpose of correcting any violation, and
violations shall be corrected within 10 days of the posting of a stopwork
order. In the event of failure to correct the violation within 10
days, the Village staff may revoke the permit, and the violation shall be
subject to prosecution under § 1-4 of the Village Code.
C. Retraction of revocation. The Village Staff, or the Board of Appeals
upon appeal, may retract the stop-work order or the revocation.
D. Right to cure violations. Ten days after posting a stop-work order, the
Village may issue a notice of intent to the permittee or landowner or
land user of the Villages intent to perform work necessary to comply
with this article. Village personnel may go on the land and commence
the work after 14 days from issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the
work performed by the Village, plus interest at the rate authorized by
the Village, shall be billed to the permittee or the landowner. In the
event a permittee or landowner fails to pay the amount due, the Village
Clerk/Treasurer shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect
as a special assessment against the property pursuant to § 66.0627,
Wis. Stats.34
E. Injunction. Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be
enforced by injunction.
A. Appeals. The Board of Appeals, created under § 745-36 of the Code of
the Village of Fox Point, pursuant to §§ 62.23(7)(e) and 68.11, Wis.
Stats, shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 285-45 FOX POINT CODE § 285-47
1:186
§ 285-48. Fees.
Fees referred to in this article shall be established by the Village Board
in a fee schedule and may, from time to time, be modified by ordinance
or resolution. Fees shall be related to costs involved in handling permit
applications, reviewing control plans, conducting site inspections, and
administering the erosion control program.
error in any order, decision or determination made by the Village Staff
in administering this article. Upon appeal, the Board of Appeals may
authorize variances from the provisions of this article which are not
contrary to the public interest and where owning to special conditions
a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in
unnecessary hardship. The Board of Appeals shall use the rules,
procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute for zoning boards
of appeals in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances.
B. Who may appeal. Any applicant, permittee, landowner, land user or
aggrieved party may appeal any order, decision or determination made
by the Village Staff in administering this article.
§ 285-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-48
1:187

ARTICLE V
Illicit Discharges or Connections to Storm Drainage System
[Adopted 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-04 (Ch. 4B of the 1961 Code)]
§ 285-49. Discharges prohibited.
No person, firm, association, or corporation may discharge, spill or dump
substances or materials which are not entirely composed of stormwater
into receiving bodies of water, storm sewers or drainage facilities, or onto
driveways, sidewalks, parking lots or other ways that drain into the Village
drainage system.
§ 285-50. Discharge exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this article unless
found to have an adverse impact on the stormwater:
§ 285-51. Connections prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this article to connect a wastewater building sewer
or drain to the Village drainage system.
§ 285-52. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a forfeiture as provided in § 1-4 of the Village Code. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Discharges authorized by a permit issued by the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources.
B. Discharges resulting from firefighting activities.
C. Discharges in compliance with construction site erosion controls
(Article IV of this chapter) or the stormwater management system
regulations applicable to already developed or currently vacant
property (Article III of this chapter).
D. Discharges from uncontaminated groundwater, potable water source,
roof drains, foundation drain and sump pump, air-conditioning
condensation, springs, lawn watering or irrigation, individual
residential car washing, water main and hydrant flushing and
swimming pools if the water has been dechlorinated.
§ 285-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-52
1:189
Chapter 288
STORMWATER UTILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Board — See Ch. 19, Art. II.
Stormwater management, erosion control and
bluff regulation — See Ch. 285.
Trees, shrubs and other plant material — See
Ch. 310.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 724.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 738.
Zoning — See Ch. 745.
Building construction — See Ch. 756.
§ 288-1. Purpose.
A. Stormwater runoff may cause erosion of lands and threaten businesses
and residences and other facilities with water damage. Stormwater and
other surface water discharge may create environmental damage to the
rivers, streams and other bodies of water within and adjacent to the
Village. The management of stormwater and other surface water
discharges within and beyond the Village is a matter that affects the
health, safety and welfare of the Village, its residents and businesses.
B. In 1994, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources ("WDNR")
promulgated Ch. NR 216, Stormwater Discharge Permits, Wis. Adm.
Code, which was revised March 2003, and Ch. NR 151, Runoff
Management, Wis. Adm. Code, that established performance standards
for the Village's stormwater program. These administrative rules were
developed pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act, as amended by the
Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.).
C. In order to effectively manage stormwater and other surface water
discharges, the Village operates and maintains a stormwater
management system to manage the quantity and quality of stormwater
and other surface water discharges for all properties in the Village. In
order to ensure the future usefulness and value of the existing
stormwater management system owned and operated by the Village,
the Village must have an adequate and stable funding source to
effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use and enhance the
stormwater management systems and facilities in the Village. A
stormwater utility provides the most practical and appropriate means
of properly delivering stormwater management services, systems and
facilities to all properties throughout the Village. The stormwater utility
would render both services and benefits to individual properties,
property owners, citizens and residents of the Village.35
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 285-52 FOX POINT CODE § 288-1
1:190
§ 288-2. Creation.
There is hereby established a stormwater utility to be known as the Village
of Fox Point Stormwater Utility ("Stormwater Utility"), which shall be
responsible for stormwater management services, systems and facilities
throughout the Village, and which shall provide for the management,
protection, control, regulation, use, construction, reconstruction,
improvement, extension, operation, maintenance, repair and enhancement
of the Village's stormwater management services, systems and facilities.
D. A schedule of stormwater utility service charges based on the area of
impervious surface located on each property is the most appropriate
and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management
services, systems and facilities throughout the Village. Such
stormwater service charges may be complemented by other types of
charges which address specific needs, including, but not limited to,
special service fees, special assessments, use of proceeds from special
purpose local option sales taxes and other forms of revenue, as deemed
appropriate by the Village Board. Proceeds from all stormwater service
charges together with any other revenues raised shall be deposited into
the Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund that will be dedicated solely to
those purposes of the Village Stormwater Utility.
E. Privately owned and maintained on-site stormwater facilities, which
significantly reduce or otherwise mitigate the impact of a particular
property on the Village's stormwater utility's cost of providing
stormwater management, should be taken into account to reduce the
service charge on that property or assessed as a rebate.
A. The operation, management and control of the Stormwater Utility is
vested in the Village Board acting under the provision of §§ 61.34,
66.0621, 66.0809, 66.0811, 66.0821, and 66.0627 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, and the Village Board is hereinafter referred to as the
"Approving Authority." All records of the Stormwater Utility shall be
kept by the Village Clerk/Treasurer in the Village Hall or other officially
designated place.36
B. The operation of the Stormwater Utility shall be under the supervision
of the Village Manager.
C. There is established a Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund in the Village
budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and
protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of
the Stormwater Utility, including, but not limited to, rentals, rates,
charges, fees and licenses, as may be established by the Village Board
from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated
to the Stormwater Utility. All revenues and receipts of the Stormwater
Utility shall be placed in the Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund, and
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 288-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-2
1:191
§ 288-3. Authority.
The Village, acting through the Stormwater Utility, may, without limitation
due to enumeration, do the following:
all expenses and capital investments of the Stormwater Utility shall be
paid from the Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund; provided, however,
that other revenues, receipts and resources not accounted for in the
Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund may be applied to stormwater
management services, systems and facilities as deemed appropriate by
the Village Board.
D. The Village Board shall place within the Stormwater Utility such
responsibility as the Village has for operation, maintenance and
regulation of the existing stormwater management services, systems
and facilities previously performed, owned and operated or maintained
by the Village, and other related assets, including, but not limited to,
properties, other than road rights-of-way, upon which such stormwater
management systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-ofentry
and access and certain equipment used solely for stormwater
management.
E. The Village Manager shall prepare an annual budget which is to include
all operation and maintenance costs, education, capital improvements,
debt service and other costs related to the operation of the Stormwater
Utility. The budget is subject to approval by the Village Board.
F. The costs shall be spread over the customer classifications as
determined by the Village Board.
G. The Village Board shall cause an annual audit of the books of the
Stormwater Utility to be made and shall make the books and records
relating to the Stormwater Utility available for inspection during
regular business hours.
A. Acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, construct,
reconstruct, improve, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair,
manage and finance such facilities and equipment as are deemed by the
Village to be proper and necessary for storm and surface water
management. These facilities may include, without limitation due to
enumeration, surface and underground drainage facilities, sewers,
watercourses, retaining walls, ponds, streets, roads, ditches and such
other natural or man-made facilities as will support a stormwater
management system.
B. Undertake any operations or activities, or provide any services deemed
by the Village to be proper and necessary for storm and surface water
management.
C. Maintain compliance with all regulatory requirements for storm and
surface water management.
§ 288-2 FOX POINT CODE § 288-4
1:192
§ 288-4. Scope of responsibility for systems and facilities.
§ 288-5. Definitions.
A. The Village owns or has rights which allow it to operate, maintain,
improve and access those stormwater management systems and
facilities which are located:
(1) Within public road rights-of-way and easements;
(2) On private property as provided for by recorded easement,
prescriptive easement, or other rights acquired or allowed by law;
(3) On public land which is owned by the Village; or
(4) On public land which is owned by another governmental entity, and
to which the Village has an agreement, recorded easement,
prescriptive easement, or other rights acquired or allowed by law.
B. Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater
management systems and facilities which are located on private or
public property not owned by the Village, and for which there has been
no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights-ofaccess,
rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the Village
for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such
stormwater management and systems and facilities, shall be and
remain the legal responsibility of the property owner.
C. It is the express intent of this chapter to protect the public health,
safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create
any special duty of the Village, or to create any relationship between
the Village and any individual person, or to establish any obligation of
the Village for any specific property within or outside the boundaries of
the Village. The fact that the Village may have a legal right does not
mean that it has a legal obligation, and the Village assumes no such
obligation by this section or this chapter. The Village expressly reserves
the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action
seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the
Village, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents arising out
of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship.
A. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the content clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT — Refers to the Clean Water Act, as amended by the Water Quality
Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as amended, and the rules
and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant thereto.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Village Board of the Village of Fox
Point or its duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.
§ 288-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-5
1:193
CREDIT — A reduction in the stormwater service charge to the owner
of a particular parcel for the existence and use of privately owned,
maintained and operated on-site or off-site stormwater systems or
facilities, or continuing provision of services or activities that reduce
or mitigate the cost of stormwater management services for that
particular parcel.
CUSTOMER — Any owner of property that is located in the Village of
Fox Point, and also means any non-owner that is a resident of property
that is located in the Village of Fox Point.
DEVELOPED PROPERTY — A parcel that has been altered from its
natural state by the addition of any improvement, such as a building,
structure or other impervious surface with a footprint greater than
300 square feet, or where construction of such an improvement is at
least 50% complete and construction is halted for a period exceeding
three months. Removal of improvements shall not change a parcel that
was once developed property into an undeveloped parcel; however, the
parcel may then qualify for an exemption per § 288-9.
EQUIVALENT RUNOFF UNIT (ERU) — The statistical average
impervious area in the first quartile of single-family properties in the
Village. The average square footage of impervious surface for the first
quartile of single-family properties in the Village of Fox Point is
determined to be 2,988 square feet, which shall constitute one ERU.
FOOTPRINT AREA — The total area covered by all buildings and roofed
structures on a parcel, measured on a horizontal plane at the furthest
extent of the structures, roofs or roof overhangs.
IMPERVIOUS AREA — An area measured on a horizontal plane which
has been compacted or covered so that it prevents or impedes the
infiltration of stormwater into the soil. It includes, but is not limited to,
all footprint area and all areas covered by structures, roofs, sidewalks,
patios, porches, driveways, loading docks, parking lots, compacted
gravel surfaces, as well as any other similar surfaces.
NON-OWNER — One that pays rent for use or occupies land, a building,
or other property owned by another.
OWNER — Any person or entity vested with the fee interest in real
property, in whole or in part, and includes but is not limited to any joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety of the whole or part of such property.
PARCEL — A discrete unit of land within the Village to which the
property Assessor or tax lister has assigned a distinct ad valorem
property tax identification number; except that two or more such units
of land that are abutting, are owned by the same owner, and are treated
and occupied as a single unit, shall constitute one parcel.
SINGLE-FAMILY — A developed property that contains exactly one
detached structure which serves as its primary purpose of providing
§ 288-5 FOX POINT CODE § 288-5
1:194
one permanent dwelling unit and which is classified as residential in
the assessment rolls of the Village.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SERVICES — Services provided by the
Village that may address the quality and/or the quantity of stormwater
runoff which relate to the:
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES — Those
natural and man-made channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams,
creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, inlets, catch basins,
pipes, head walls, storm sewers, lakes and other physical works,
properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or
otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff, which are
owned by the Village or through which the Village has an easement
or other legally binding right of use for stormwater drainage, and for
which the Village has the right of maintenance for stormwater drainage
purposes.
STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGE — The periodic service charge
imposed pursuant to this chapter by the Village of Fox Point
Stormwater Utility for providing the stormwater management services,
systems and facilities, including but not limited to all costs associated
with acquisition, construction, operation, maintenance, reconstruction,
improvement, extension, expansion, replacement, cleaning, dredging,
repair, or other management of stormwater management systems and
stormwater activities in the Village. This term may also include special
charges to the owners of particular properties for services, systems or
facilities related to stormwater management, including, but not limited
to, charges for development plan review, inspection of development
projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced levels
of stormwater service above the threshold level.
STORMWATER UTILITY ENTERPRISE FUND — Provides revenue for
the acquisition, construction, operation, maintenance, reconstruction,
Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff
through the Village;
(1)
Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing stormwater
management systems and facilities;
(2)
Planning, development, design and construction of additional
stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and
anticipated needs;
(3)
Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems
and facilities;
(4)
(5) Education of the public as to stormwater issues; and
Construction of facilities and other infrastructure as may be
needed to properly manage the quality and quantity of stormwater
runoff.
(6)
§ 288-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-5
1:195
improvement, extension, expansion, replacement, cleaning, dredging,
repair, or other management of stormwater management systems and
stormwater activities in the Village. Services delivered through this
fund are paid for with a stormwater service charge to all developed
property in the Village.
TIER 1 SINGLE-FAMILY/DUPLEX — The first quartile of single-family
or duplex properties with the total footprint area less than or equal to
2,031 square feet.
TIER 2 SINGLE-FAMILY/DUPLEX — The second quartile of singlefamily
or duplex properties with the total footprint area of more than
2,031 square feet but is less than or equal to 2,517 square feet.
TIER 3 SINGLE-FAMILY/DUPLEX — The third quartile of single-family
or duplex properties with the total footprint area of more than 2,517
square feet but is less than or equal to 3,213 square feet.
TIER 4 SINGLE-FAMILY/DUPLEX — The single-family or duplex
properties with the total footprint area of more than 3,213 square feet
but is less than or equal to 5,980 square feet.
TIER 5 SINGLE-FAMILY/DUPLEX — A single-family or duplex property
with more than 5,980 square feet footprint area.
TIER 6 NON-SINGLE-FAMILY/DUPLEX — Any developed property
which is not single family or duplex, including, but not limited to,
transient rentals (such as hotels and motels), multifamily apartment
buildings or condominiums of three or more units, commercial,
industrial, institutional, governmental property, and parking lots.
UNDEVELOPED — A parcel which does not have any improvements
such as a building, structure, or impervious surface that does not total
more than 300 square feet of impervious area.
USER — Any property within the Village that discharges stormwater
into the stormwater management system.
USER FEE — The charge established by the Village Board on developed
property in the Village to pay operations and maintenance, extension
and replacement and debt service for the Stormwater Utility, which
may include payment for principal and interest on debt obligations,
lease payments, operating expenses, capital outlays, nonoperating
expenses, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed
appropriate by Village Board.
VILLAGE CREDIT POLICY — The Village Credit Policy is a written
document prepared by the Village Manager and approved by the Village
Board, currently contained in § 288-9B, which sets forth the criteria
under which Tier 6 Non-Single-Family Customers may be eligible for a
credit to reduce stormwater charges.
VILLAGE MANAGER — The Village Manager of Fox Point, or his/her
designee.
§ 288-5 FOX POINT CODE § 288-5
1:196
§ 288-6. Rates and charges.
B. Construction of undefined terms. Terms not herein specifically defined
shall be construed in the manner commonly accepted and the
interpretation of the same will be furnished by the Village Manager
upon application.
A. Stormwater service charges shall be imposed on all developed property
in the Village to recover all or a portion of the costs of the stormwater
utility program. The amount of such charges shall be based on a rate
per equivalent runoff unit (ERU).
B. It shall be the policy of the Village that service charges and user fees for
the stormwater management services, systems and facilities that are to
be provided by the stormwater utility shall be equitably derived through
methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands
and impacts imposed on the stormwater management services, systems
and facilities by individual properties and/or the level of service
rendered by or resulting from the provision of stormwater management
services, systems and facilities. Stormwater service charge rates shall
be structured so as to be fair and reasonable, and the resultant service
charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing
stormwater management services, systems and facilities.
C. In setting or modifying such rates, it shall be the goal of Village Board
to establish rates that are sufficient to support the cost of the
stormwater management services, systems and facilities, including, but
not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations,
lease payments, operating expenses, capital outlays, nonoperating
expenses, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed
appropriate by Village Board.
D. The Village Manager shall assign a customer classification to all
developed property within the Village that is consistent with the terms
of this chapter. The Village Manager shall be responsible for reasonably
determining the impervious area, land area, land use or other factors as
may be needed for the fair, reasonable and equitable allocation of the
stormwater fee based on what the Village Manager believes is the best
readily available information, including, but not limited to, data
supplied by the Village Assessor, aerial photography, the property
owner, tenant or developer. The Village Manager may require additional
information as necessary to make the determination. The billing
amount shall be updated by the Village Manager to the extent
practicable based on any additions to the impervious area as approved
through the building permit process.
E. Calculation of the stormwater service charge is as follows:
(1) The basis of the stormwater utility fee for the stormwater service
charges shall be the Equivalent Runoff Unit (ERU).
§ 288-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-6
1:197
§ 288-7. Stormwater service charge.
The stormwater service charge shall be established from time to time by
separate resolution of the Village Board, as a dollar amount per ERU per
month, pursuant to the standards described in § 288-6 above. A schedule of
current rates shall be maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk/
Treasurer.
§ 288-8. Billing, delinquencies and collections.
(2) The number of ERUs that will form the basis of the stormwater
service charge for each customer classification shall be established
in the following manner:
(a) Tier 1 single-family/duplex shall be assigned 1.0 ERU.
(b) Tier 2 single-family/duplex shall be assigned 1.2 ERUs.
(c) Tier 3 single-family/duplex shall be assigned 1.6 ERUs.
(d) Tier 4 single-family/duplex shall be assigned 2.6 ERUs.
(e) Tier 5 single-family/duplex shall be assigned 4.8 ERUs.
(f) Tier 6 non-single-family/duplex: the number of ERUs assigned
to the property shall be computed by dividing the total
impervious area of the property by the square footage of an
ERU.
(g) Undeveloped shall be assigned zero ERUs and will not receive
a stormwater utility bill.
A. Billing.
(1) Stormwater service charges shall begin to accrue February 10,
2009, and shall be billed in arrears. A bill for stormwater service
charges may be sent through the United States Postal Service or by
alternative means, notifying the owner or non-owner of the
property being billed of the amount of the stormwater service
charge, less credits, the date the payment is due and the date when
payment is past due.
(2) The stormwater service charge may be billed and collected
separately or along with water and sanitary sewer charges, or
along with other fees for services, as deemed most effective and
efficient by the Village Board.
(3) The stormwater service charge may be billed to the customer of
record in the Village utility billing system or the owner of the
property, as deemed most effective and efficient by the Village
Manager.
§ 288-6 FOX POINT CODE § 288-8
1:198
§ 288-9. Exemptions.
Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall
receive a credit or offset against stormwater service charges. No credit,
offset or other reduction in stormwater service charges shall be granted
based on the tax status, economic status, race, religion, age or sex of
the owner of the property being served, or based on any other condition
unrelated to the provision of stormwater management services, systems and
facilities. Type II and Type III exemptions, except as to razed parcels, apply
only to work that is conducted on parcels subsequent to the date of adoption
of this chapter. There shall be three categories of exemptions, as follows:
(4) Frequency of the billing of stormwater service charges shall be
determined by the Village Manager.
(5) Failure to receive a bill shall not be justification for nonpayment.
Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the
owner of each developed property subject to stormwater service
charges shall be obligated to pay stormwater service charges as
well as any penalty and/or interest on delinquent stormwater
service charge payments.
(6) The owner of the property will be ultimately held responsible for
the payment of the stormwater service charge.
(7) The owner of any property which is occupied by a customer of
record shall have the right to examine, during normal business
hours, the appropriate records of the Village to determine whether
stormwater service charges have been paid.
(8) If an account is underbilled, or if no bill is sent for a particular tract
of developed land, regardless of cause, the Village of Fox Point
Stormwater Utility may back bill for a period of up to one year, but
shall not be entitled to any penalty or interest for any delinquency
during the back-billed period.
B. Delinquencies and collections.
(1) Delinquent stormwater service charges may be placed as a lien
upon the property as provided in §§ 66.0821(4)(d), 66.0627 and
66.0809, Wis. Stats.
(2) A 1% per month, compounded monthly, penalty will be added for all
stormwater service bills that are not paid when due. The additional
penalty provided by § 66.0809(3), Wisconsin Statutes, shall apply to
any delinquent amounts to which such statute applies.
A. Type I exemption. The following parcels shall be automatically exempt
from all stormwater utility service charges. Customers do not need to
apply for an exemption pursuant to § 288-10.
§ 288-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-9
1:199
(1) Railroad tracks and the rights-of-way shall be exempt from
stormwater service charges. However, railroad stations,
maintenance buildings or other developed land used for railroad
purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges.
(2) Public roadways, public pedestrianways, and private roadways, not
including driveways or parking lots, shall be exempt from
stormwater service charges.
B. Type II exemption. This subsection shall be referred to as the Village's
credit policy. This subsection is intended to provide credits and
incentives for parcels with on-site stormwater management and
treatment facilities that are designed to properly manage the
stormwater runoff in accordance with criteria established herein.
Credit determinations shall be made pursuant to the procedures
described in § 288-10.
(1) In order to receive Type II credit exemption a customer must meet
the following criteria:
(a) The customer must demonstrate that on-site stormwater
management controls, systems, activities or facilities are
constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the
standards established by the Village Manager.
(b) Customers must be in compliance with a current maintenance
plan that must be on file with the Village Department of Public
Works.
(c) With the exception of razed parcels, the change to the parcel
giving rise to the credit must be made to the parcel subsequent
to the date of adoption of this chapter.
(2) Single-family/duplex property credit. Single-family and duplex
parcel customers that install and properly maintain a rain garden
or a rain barrel may be eligible for a rebate. This rebate will not be
granted more than once for any customer. Rebate amounts shall be
established from time to time by separate resolution of the Village
Board.
(3) Porous pavement. Porous pavement that is designed and
constructed in accordance with design criteria acceptable to the
Village Manager may be eligible for a rebate. This rebate will not
be granted more than once for any parcel. Rebate amounts shall be
established on the basis of square footage of qualifying porous
pavement, by separate resolution of the Village Board.
(4) Stormwater quantity credit. Parcels with on-site facilities designed
to meet the then-current standards of the Village stormwater
management criteria may be eligible for up to a 30% reduction in
the stormwater service charge for the parcel, as follows. For
purposes of this subsection, the "twenty-five-year design storm,"
§ 288-9 FOX POINT CODE § 288-9
1:200
"ten-year design storm," "five-year design storm," and "two-year
design storm" shall be interpreted based upon twenty-four-hour
storm events with twenty-five-, ten-, five-, and two-year recurrence
intervals, based upon generally accepted engineering models, as
determined by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer.
(a) Facilities designed to reduce the discharge rates as follows and
as determined by the Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer may be eligible for a 10% reduction in the
stormwater service charge for the parcel:
[1] From the postdevelopment peak discharge rate of the
twenty-five-year design storm event to the
predevelopment peak discharge event from the ten-year
design storm event.
[2] From the postdevelopment peak discharge rate of the tenyear
design storm event to the predevelopment peak
discharge event from the five-year design storm event.
[3] From the postdevelopment peak discharge rate of the fiveyear
design storm event to the predevelopment peak
discharge event from the two-year design storm event.
(b) Facilities designed to reduce the discharge rates as follows and
as determined by the Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer may be eligible for a 20% reduction in the
stormwater service charge for the parcel:
[1] From the postdevelopment peak discharge rate of the
twenty-five-year design storm event to the
predevelopment peak discharge event from the five-year
design storm event.
[2] From the postdevelopment peak discharge rate of the tenyear
design storm event to the predevelopment peak
discharge event from the two-year design storm event.
(c) Facilities designed to reduce the discharge rates as follows and
as determined by the Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer may be eligible for a 30% reduction in the
stormwater service charge for the parcel:
[1] From the postdevelopment peak discharge rate of the
twenty-five-year design storm event to the
predevelopment peak discharge event from the two-year
design storm event.
(5) Stormwater quality credit. Parcels with on-site stormwater
management and treatment facilities that properly manage the
stormwater runoff in accordance with the stormwater quality
§ 288-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-9
1:201
criteria described below may be eligible for a percentage reduction
in the stormwater service charge for the property, as follows:
(a) Facilities designed to remove no less than 40% of the average
annual sediment load from stormwater runoff from the site as
determined by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
may be eligible for up to a 10% reduction in the stormwater
service charge for the parcel.
(b) Facilities designed to remove no less than 60% of the average
annual sediment load from stormwater runoff from the site as
determined by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
may be eligible for up to a 20% reduction in the stormwater
service charge for the parcel.
(c) Facilities designed to remove no less than 80% of the average
annual sediment load from stormwater runoff from the site as
determined by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
may be eligible for up to a 30% reduction of the stormwater
service charge for the parcel.
(6) Other special conditions.
(a) Customers that properly construct and maintain other facilities
that the customer believes provide equivalent levels of peak
control or pollutant reduction to those specified in this section
may submit an application for credit to the Village Manager for
consideration.
(b) Customers of developed property that has been razed of all of
the impervious area on the parcel, and has been restored to a
dust-free and erosion-free condition, may submit an
application for credit or special exemption to the Village
Manager for consideration. The customer shall have the
burden to show the extent to which the parcel replicates
predevelopment conditions. To the extent that the parcel
replicates predevelopment conditions regarding stormwater
quantity and quality, the Village Manager may grant a
corresponding credit or an exemption to the parcel.
C. Type III exemption. Developed property that does not drain into the
Village stormwater management systems or onto another Village
parcel, directly or indirectly (such a drainage pattern referred to in this
subsection as draining "away from Village systems"), or that drains
partially away from Village systems, may be eligible for a Type III
exemption. Credit determinations shall be made pursuant to the
procedures described in § 288-10. The Type III exemption may allow up
to a 50% reduction in the stormwater service charge for the parcel, as
follows:
(1) If 100% of the stormwater drains away from Village systems, as
determined by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer, the
§ 288-9 FOX POINT CODE § 288-9
1:202
§ 288-10. Service charge credits and adjustments.
customer may be eligible for up to a 50% reduction in the
stormwater service charge for the parcel.
(2) If 80% or more but less than 100% of the stormwater drains away
from Village systems as determined by the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer, the customer may be eligible for up to a
40% reduction in the stormwater service charge for the parcel.
(3) If 60% or more but less than 80% of the stormwater drains away
from Village systems as determined by the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer, the customer may be eligible for up to a
30% reduction in the stormwater service charge for the parcel.
(4) If 40% or more but less than 60% of the stormwater drains away
from Village systems as determined by the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer, the customer may be eligible for up to a
20% reduction in the stormwater service charge for the parcel.
(5) If 20% or more but less than 40% of the stormwater drains away
from Village systems as determined by the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer, the customer may be eligible for up to a
10% reduction in the stormwater service charge for the parcel.
A. A customer may apply for an adjustment to the ERUs assigned to his,
her or its property if the customer believes the impervious area
measurements on which the ERU calculation is based are inaccurate.
(1) All requests for adjustments shall be submitted to the Village
Manager, who shall have the authority to develop and administer
the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the impervious
surface area, and Tier classification for developed single-family and
duplex property, or ERU determination for developed non-singlefamily
property.
(2) Customers may seek an adjustment at any time by submitting the
request in writing and set forth in detail the grounds upon which
relief is sought. The application shall be submitted on forms as may
be required by the Village Manager, and shall include such
information as may be required on the form.
(3) The application shall include payment of an application fee as may
be established from time to time by separate resolution of the
Village Board.
(4) Customers requesting the adjustments may be required, at his, her
or its own expense, to provide supplemental information to the
Village Manager, including but not limited to survey data approved
by a registered land surveyor (RPLS) and engineering reports
approved by a professional engineer (PE). Failure to provide such
information within the time limits established by the Village
§ 288-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-10
1:203
Manager, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of
the adjustment request.
(5) Once a completed adjustment request and all required information
is received by the Village Manager, the Village Manager shall
endeavor to render a written decision within 30 calendar days.
Concurrent payment of any charges allocated to the property is not
required as a condition precedent to this request for review.
(6) In considering an adjustment request, the Village Manager shall
consider whether the calculation of the impervious surface area,
Tier classification for developed single-family and duplex property,
and ERU calculation for developed non-single-family property is
correct.
(7) The Village Manager's decision shall be mailed to the address
provided on the adjustments request and service shall be complete
upon mailing.
(8) The decision of the Village Manager is final except if the property
owner appeals the decision pursuant to § 288-11.
B. A customer may apply for a credit to their stormwater charge if the
property is eligible for a credit pursuant to the Village credit policy,
described in § 288-9B or C above. Applications shall be submitted and
processed as follows:
(1) All requests for credits shall be submitted to the Village Manager,
who shall have the authority to develop and administer the
procedures and standards for the credits in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) Customers must apply for any credits that they believe apply. The
Village will consider only such credits for the parcel as are
requested in the application.
(3) The application for any credit must be in writing and must include
the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit. The
application shall be submitted on forms as may be required by the
Village Manager, and shall include such information as may be
required on the form. Incomplete applications will not be accepted
by the Village Manager, or may be rejected on that basis.
(4) The application shall include payment of an application fee as may
be established from time to time by separate resolution of the
Village Board.
(5) Stormwater utility fees may be credited or adjusted retroactively to
the date the Village Manager received the completed application.
(6) When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the Village
Manager, the Village Manager shall endeavor to render a written
decision within 30 days from the date the complete application is
§ 288-10 FOX POINT CODE § 288-10
1:204
§ 288-11. Appeals process.
accepted of either: granting the credit in whole, granting the credit
in part, or denying the credit. Credits applied for by the customer
in the first year of the stormwater utility fee, and granted in whole
or in part, shall apply to all stormwater service charges accruing in
that first year. Beginning the second year, credits applied for by the
customer, and granted in whole or in part, shall apply from the first
day of the calendar month immediately following the date on which
a complete application for the credit has been filed with the Village
Manager. The customer may appeal such determination pursuant
to § 288-11.
(7) A customer shall not have to reapply annually for the credit
granted, but the Village Manager may review the credit and the
basis thereof, no more frequently than annually, and may terminate
the credit if the Village Manager finds grounds for doing so. If such
credit is terminated, the customer will be notified in writing and
may appeal such determination pursuant to § 288-11, or may, if
possible, correct the deficiencies which caused the termination and
reapply for the credit.
A. Within 30 calendar days after the date of the mailing of the Village
Manager's decision, the customer may appeal the Village Manager's
decision to the Board of Appeals by filing a written appeal with the
Village Clerk/Treasurer. The appeal must include payment of the
application fee as may be established from time to time by separate
resolution of the Village Board. The written appeal shall specify all
grounds for the challenge and shall state the amount of stormwater
service charge that the customer considers to be appropriate. The
appeal must specifically address the Village Manager's conclusions and
not merely repeat the bases for the initial request. Failure to timely and
properly appeal shall deprive the Board of Appeals of jurisdiction to
hear the appeal, and the appeal shall be dismissed.
B. The Board of Appeals shall conduct a formal hearing at such time and
place as designated in a hearing notice to the customer, providing a
minimum of five business days notice to the customer. In considering an
appeal, the Board of Appeals shall determine whether the stormwater
service charge is fair and reasonable. The decision shall be based upon
the evidence presented at the hearing. The Board of Appeals shall notify
the customer in writing of its determination by first class mail
addressed to the individual at the address listed within the appeal.
Service is conclusive upon mailing.
C. As a condition precedent to any adjustment or credit request, or of
bringing or continuing any appeal, a customer must have paid in full all
stormwater service charges to the Village, and failure of timely
payment shall deprive the Board of Appeals of jurisdiction, which is not
restored upon delinquent payment, and the appeal shall be dismissed.
§ 288-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-11
1:205
§ 288-12. Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund; budget.37
The stormwater utility finances shall be accounted for in a separate
Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund by the Village. Any excess of
stormwater utility revenues over expenditures in a year will be retained by
the Fund for subsequent years' needs of the stormwater utility.
§ 288-13. Interpretation.
This chapter shall be interpreted liberally to secure the ends sought hereby.
Chapter 292
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 738. Trees, shrubs and other plant material — See
Ch. 310.
§ 292-1. Events using Village streets.
Before any athletic event, run, walk, or related events using Village streets
can be held, sponsors shall obtain a permit from the Village Board. The
applicant shall pay a fee set by the Village Board from time to time and shall
obtain an insurance rider acceptable to the Village Attorney and shall name
the Village on the applicant waiver. Upon written request, the Village Board
may waive the fees and costs that would otherwise apply for a parade held
on or within seven days of the last Monday in May, if the Village Board finds
that the purpose of the parade is to recognize Memorial Day, and to honor
and remember those who have died in war and similar conflicts in service
to our Village and to our nation.
§ 292-2. Debris on streets and sidewalks.
D. If an appeal is granted, stormwater charges shall be adjusted on a
going-forward basis, commencing on the date of the decision that was
appealed. If as a result of the Board of Appeals decision, the customer is
due a refund, the refund shall be paid by a reduction of the next
stormwater service bill, or if the refund is larger than the next bill, then
such bill shall be reduced to zero and the subsequent bill shall also be
reduced, and so forth, until the full refund is credited to the parcel. Any
refund shall run with the parcel and not with any particular customer or
owner.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 288-11 FOX POINT CODE § 292-2
1:206
A. Littering. No person shall deposit, cast, or throw or permit to be blown
or fall onto any street, including the ditch and entire area of a street
between the lot lines, whether or not paved or improved in any manner,
or onto any pedestrian walk, public way or other public property, any
ashes, dirt, mud, paper, tin cans, bottles, glass, twigs, shrubs, leaves,
grass clippings, construction waste, garbage, or other rubbish, litter, or
offensive or nauseous materials. The operator of any vehicle shall cause
every person in the vehicle to comply with the provisions of this
subsection, and a violation of this subsection by any person in a vehicle
shall also constitute a violation by the operator thereof. In the event a
truck, automobile or other vehicle is parked the person who was the
operator thereof at the time it was parked shall for the purposes of this
section be considered the operator thereof while it is parked.
B. Cleaning and maintenance by abutting owner. If ownership, occupancy,
or use of any property contributes to an unsightly, unclean, or
unmaintained appearance or condition of abutting Village owned
property, or if an owner or occupant employs or uses abutting Village
property for the benefit of their property, it shall be the duty of both the
owner or occupant of any property to remove from the lot line to the
center of any street, pedestrian walk, or other public way on which
their property abuts, any ashes, dirt, mud, paper, tin cans, bottles,
glass, twigs, shrubs, leaves, construction waste, garbage, or other
rubbish, litter, or offensive or nauseous material.
C. Cleaning by Village at expense of owner. The Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer shall, from time to time, make personal inspection of
all streets, pedestrian walks and other public ways in the Village to see
that they are clean, and in case of the failure of any owner or occupant
to comply with the provisions of this section, the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer shall cause the material to be removed, keeping
an accurate record of the cost incurred by the Village in effecting such
removal, and shall then mail or deliver a bill for such work to the owner
and to the occupant of the premises, which bill shall carry thereon a
notation that unless the same is paid within 30 days from the end of the
month in which the bill is mailed or delivered, the amount thereof will
be certified and levied as a special tax against the premises in the next
succeeding tax roll, and collected as other taxes are collected.
D. Sand on icy streets. The provisions of this section do not apply in
respect to sand or ashes placed on any street, pedestrian walk or other
public way to make the same safe for vehicular or pedestrian travel
where necessary because of ice or snow.
E. Placing rubbish for collection. The provisions of this section do not
apply to the placing of materials for collection by the Department of
Public Works in its regular collection of rubbish, and in conformity with
such rules and regulations in respect thereto as may be issued by the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer from time to time.
§ 292-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 292-2
1:207
§ 292-3. Permit for gas lines in streets.
F. Construction materials. It shall not be a violation of this section if
materials are strewn, spilled or carried onto any street, pedestrian walk
or public way during the course of performing any work or labor on
property, provided that such materials are removed prior to 6:00 p.m. of
each day. It shall not be a violation of this section to leave any dirt piled
on a street, pedestrian walk or other public way during the course of
excavating for the installation of a sewer, water or gas main, or
underground electric wires or cables, and the similar piling of gravel or
material to be used in filling such excavation, provided such excavation
and materials are adequately marked by barricades and lights to warn
and protect the public, a proper permit for such excavation has been
obtained, the excavation is promptly made and filled and any such
materials so piled are removed from the street, pedestrian walk or
other public way prior to 6:00 p.m. of the day following the completion
of the filling of the excavation.
G. Responsibility for employees and subcontractors. Any person
performing any work or labor in the Village shall be responsible for any
violation of this section by him/her or by his/her agent or employee. A
subcontractor and the agents and employees of a subcontractor for the
purposes of this section shall be considered agents or employees of the
principal contractor.
A. Permit required. Prior to the installation of any mains, services or
equipment in the Village for the transmission or distribution of gas, a
permit shall be obtained, which permit is subject to and conditioned
upon observance of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Permit; gas mains. A permit for the installation of gas mains, services or
equipment in the streets of the Village, exclusive of house connections,
shall be obtained from the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer,
for which a fee as described in Chapter 63 of this Code shall be paid to
the Village prior to the issuance of the permit.
C. Permit; house connections. A permit for the installation of house
connections for gas service in the Village shall be obtained from the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer, for which a fee as described
in Chapter 63 of this Code shall be paid to the Village prior to the
issuance of the permit.
D. Conditions of permit. The permit shall, and by applying for and
receiving a permit, the applicant shall be deemed to have agreed to be
responsible for and save the Village harmless from any and all claims,
damage or expense incidental thereto resulting from damage or
expense on account of injury to person or property negligently caused
by the applicant in the prosecution of the work done under such permit.
All obstructions, openings and other hazards shall be suitably guarded
with barricades and red lights to protect the public. No street or walk
shall be blocked unless special permission in writing is granted by the
§ 292-2 FOX POINT CODE § 292-3
1:208
§ 292-4. Excavations for gas lines.
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer or his representative. No
driveway shall be blocked unless permission in writing is granted by
an occupant of the property served by the private driveway. In case
permission is granted thus temporarily to block a street or driveway,
the applicant shall notify the Police Department prior to actually
blocking the street or driveway.
E. Time limit; liability to Village. The Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer and the Plumbing Inspector shall specify in each permit the
time within which such work shall be completed, and the permittee
shall be liable for any damages incurred by the Village, including,
without limiting the type of damage by this enumeration, increased cost
to the Village due to inability to perform the necessary road work or to
install public improvements, whether to be performed by Village
employees or by independent contracts.38
F. Costs to Village; billing. The cost of road repairs made by the Village
road crew and the cost of inspection by the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer or his duly authorized representative will be billed to
the applicant at the end of each month.
G. Emergencies. A person may install a main, service or equipment in the
Village for the transmission or distribution of gas without having
obtained a permit in the case of an emergency, in which event a permit
shall be applied for within one week after commencement of such
installation.
A. Excavation. All gas mains, exclusive of house connections, shall be
located in accordance with the plans and specifications which shall
have been first submitted to and approved by the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer. Trenches shall be excavated to a sufficient
width to permit laying the main and placing the backfill in a satisfactory
manner, using care to avoid damage to conduits, pipes, trees, plantings
and other improvements which may be encountered. The work shall be
done in accordance with reasonable suggestions made from time to
time by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer or his
representative. Whenever obstructions are encountered, the applicant
shall do all work necessary to support and protect them, and shall
repair all damage that may result from the work.
B. Depth of main. So far as practicable, the main shall be laid to be a
uniform depth of two feet below the existing road surface, and to two
feet below the established grades across the full width of intersecting
streets. In all cases, a record shall be kept of the elevation of the main
at the center and sides of intersecting streets at one-hundred-foot
intervals between such points and at all changes in grade, including
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 292-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 292-4
1:209
§ 292-5. Roadway excavation restoration.
§ 292-5.1. Obstructions and encroachments. [Added 4-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-04]
dips or rises, obstructions, drainage ditches, etc. The main shall be laid
to a greater depth where, in the judgment of the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer or his representative, the road grade will be
lowered in the near future. Within 30 days after completion of the work,
a copy of this record shall be filed with the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer, and by him with the Village Clerk/Treasurer, as an
official Village record.
C. Refilling. Material for refilling trenches shall be limited to materials
that can be suitably compacted. Where the trench is in a road with
gravel or macadam surface, or in the shoulder of roads, the trench shall
be backfilled with sand or gravel approved by the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer or his representative. The backfill in the
shoulder of the roads may be made with the materials excavated where
suitable means are employed to consolidate it to the satisfaction of the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer.
D. Removal of refuse. All excess excavated materials and any refuse of any
kind resulting from the work shall be removed as the work progresses.
The areas affected by the work shall be left in as good condition as they
were before the work was commenced.
E. House connections. Installations of house connections for gas service
shall also conform to the regulations prescribed above for installation of
gas mains. References to the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
or his representative shall, with respect to house connections for gas
service, be deemed to refer to the Plumbing Inspector.
A. Backfill of roadway shall be No. 1 slurry, beneath any pavement,
horizontally to a maximum distance of five feet beyond the edge of the
pavement, and vertically to within four inches of the top of the
pavement; hot mix asphalt road patch, four-inch thickness; dirt
restoration with seed and mulch; and three-eighths inch granular TB
shoulder material. Restoration shall be completed before street deposit
is returned.
B. No permanent hot mix asphalt repair of asphalt pavement may be made
during the period October 1 through April 30 without permission of the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer. Absent that permission, a
temporary asphalt pavement repair is to be made and maintained, with
permanent repair completed during the following May 1 through May
31.
C. Contractor is responsible for notifying the Village when the restoration
is completed and ready for inspection.
§ 292-4 FOX POINT CODE § 292-5.1
1:210
A. Purpose and findings. In the exercise of governmental functions the
Village has priority over all other uses of the public rights-of-way. The
Village desires to anticipate and minimize the number of obstructions
and excavations taking place therein and to regulate the placement of
facilities in the rights-of-way to ensure that the rights-of-way remain
available for public services and safe for public use. The taxpayers of
the Village bear the financial burden for the upkeep of the rights-of-way
and a primary cause for the early and excessive deterioration of its
rights-of-way is the frequent excavation by persons who locate facilities
therein. The Village finds with increased use of the public rights-of-way
there are increased costs to the taxpayers of the Village and that these
costs are likely to continue into the foreseeable future. The Village finds
occupancy and excavation of its rights-of-way causes costs to be borne
by the Village and its taxpayers, including but not limited to:
(1) Administrative costs associated with public right-of-way projects,
such as registration, permitting, inspection and supervision,
supplies and materials.
(2) Management costs associated with ongoing management activities
necessitated by public right-of-way users.
(3) Repair or restoration costs to the roadway associated with the
actual excavation into the public right-of-way.
(4) Degradation costs defined as depreciation caused to the roadway in
terms of decreased useful life, due to excavations into the public
rights-of-way.
(5) In response to the foregoing facts, the Village hereby enacts this
section relating to administration of and permits to excavate,
obstruct and/or occupy the public rights-of-way which results in
above grade use of the right-of-way. This section imposes
reasonable regulations on the maintenance of obstructions above
grade currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at
some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles
of state and federal agencies.
(6) The purpose of this section is to provide the Village a legal
framework within which to regulate and manage the public rightsof-
way, and to provide for recovery of the costs incurred in doing so.
This section provides for the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Village as they use the right-of-way of the Village,
as well as to ensure the structural integrity of the public rights-ofway.
B. Prohibited. No person shall encroach upon or obstruct or encumber any
street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds or land dedicated to public use,
or any part thereof, or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be
placed or remain on any public way adjoining the premises of which he
is the owner or occupant, except as provided in Subsections C and D.
§ 292-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 292-5.1
1:211
C. Exceptions. The prohibition of Subsection B shall not apply to the
following:
(1) Signs and clocks attached to buildings which project not more than
six feet from the face of such building and which do not extend af
any point lower than 10 feet above the sidewalk, street or alley.
(2) Awnings which do not extend at any point lower than seven feet
above the sidewalk, street or alley.
(3) Official signage, official traffic control devices, and utilities owned
or leased by the Village.
(4) Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded
which do not extend more than three feet on a sidewalk, provided
that such goods, wares, etc., do not remain thereon for more than
three hours.
(5) Obstructions or encroachments lawfully existing prior to April 11,
2019.
(6) Temporary encroachments or obstructions authorized by permit
granted pursuant to § 66.0425, Wis. Stats.
D. Permit required. Any above grade use or installation, encroachment or
obstruction of the right-of-way requires a right-of-way permit from the
Village prior to such installation, use, encroachment or obstruction
being established.
(1) Application requirements.
(a) An above grade right-of-way permit application shall be filed
with the Village Engineer.
(b) The applicant shall pay the above grade right-of-way permit
fee. The above grade right-of-way permit fee shall be in the
amount as established by resolution of the Village Board, and
may be amended from time to time. Such fee shall not exceed a
reasonable approximation of actual costs incurred, shall be
limited to objectively reasonable costs, and shall be uniform for
similarly situated users of the right-of-way in similar situations.
In addition, a professional fee charge back agreement shall be
signed to ensure compliance with Village ordinances that
professional fees incurred by the Village to review said
applications are paid and the permit fee shall be established
with this actual professional fee cost recovery in mind, to avoid
excess cost recovery.
(c) The applicant shall provide a detailed plan with structural
engineering, scale drawings, visual rendering, and survey
showing the exact location, size, appurtances and or
attachments of the equipment or structure to be placed in the
right-of-way, along with the exact location of all streets,
§ 292-5.1 FOX POINT CODE § 292-5.1
1:212
sidewalks, utilities, trees, and any other obstructions in the
vicinity of the proposed installation, and the location of
structures on abutting properties.
(d) The applicant shall provide a detailed report describing
potential hazards to the public from said equipment, structure,
and impacts due to location on safety for the driving public,
pedestrians, and owners and users of adjacent property for
such things as, but not limited to: fall zone, fire, explosion,
chemical, environmental impacts, and vehicle crash impacts.
Said report shall indicate the risk of the safety hazard and the
proposed design element to address said safety hazard. The
Village Engineer may require the applicant's report to be
provided by a structural engineer or other expert approved by
the Village Engineer, if the Village Engineer deems it to be
necessary to have such an expert opinion in light of the
circumstances of the application, for the protection of public
health and safety, in which case the applicant shall provide
such an opinion at the applicant's cost.
(e) The plan must show how the installation and maintenance of
said above grade right-of-way use will not impact snow removal
or landscape maintenance activities from the terrace, sidewalk
or street, or conflict with the operation or maintenance of
vehicular travel and existing utilities above or below ground.
(f) An alternative analysis shall be provided to show what options
other than locating above grade in the right-of-way exists and
the approximate costs of such alternatives.
(2) Application process.
(a) The Village Engineer shall review said permit application and
determine if all application materials have been submitted
within 10 days of receipt of the initial application.
[1] If the application materials are not complete the Village
shall provide written notice to the person on the
application that said application is incomplete. The
applicant shall have up to 30 days from the date of initial
application to provide a complete application or the
application shall be deemed insufficient and denied. The
Village shall have 60 days to review and act on the permit
from the date that the Village determines the application is
complete and all fees paid.
(b) Existing uses. Village Staff shall determine whether to
approve, deny, or conditionally grant above grade right-of-way
permits for any new installation, use, encroachment,
obstruction or excavation added to either a previously
approved above grade use or one that was legally placed prior
to April 11, 2019, unless the Village Manager concludes the
§ 292-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 292-5.1
1:213
new installation, use, encroachment, obstruction, or
excavation may obstruct or incommode the public use in which
case the application shall be subject to the procedures of
Subsection D(2)(c).
(c) New uses. All above grade right-of-way permit applications
other than those described pursuant to Subsection D(2)(b),
shall be considered as follows.
[1] The Village Board shall hold a public hearing as soon as
reasonably possible after application materials have been
deemed complete by the Village Engineer and proper
notification period for a Class 1 notice and notice to all
properties within 200 feet of the proposed installation.
[2] The Village Board shall give consideration to the
application, the testimony received at the public hearing,
staff and expert reports, or other information as the
Village Board determines appropriate. The Village Board
shall consider public safety, alternative options, aesthetic
considerations as described in Subsection M, and the
public good when considering an above grade right-of-way
permit. The Village Board may grant the permit, grant the
permit with conditions, or deny the permit.
E. Right-of-way restoration. The work to be done under the permit, and the
repair and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
complated within the dates specified in the permit to the satisfaction of
the Village Engineer or his or her designee. In addition to repairing its
own work, the permittee must restore the general area of the work, and
the surrounding areas, including the paving and its foundations, to the
same condition that existed before the commencement of the work and
must inspect the area of the work and use reasonable care to maintain
the same condition for 36 months thereafter.
(1) The permittee shall perform repairs and restorations according to
the standards and with the materials specified by the Village
Engineer or his or her designee. The Village Engineer or his or her
designee shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and
extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of
general application or on a case-by-case basis. The Village
Engineer or his or her designee in exercising this authority shall be
guided by the following standards and considerations:
(a) The number, size, depth and duration of the excavations,
disruptions or damage to the right-of-way.
(b) The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way.
(c) The character of the neighborhood surrounding the right-ofway;
the preexcavation condition of the right-of-way.
§ 292-5.1 FOX POINT CODE § 292-5.1
1:214
(d) The remaining life-expectancy of the right-of-way affected by
the excavation.
(e) Whether the relative cost of the method of restoration to the
permittee is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an
accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way that would
otherwise result from the excavation, disturbance or damage
to the right-of-way.
(f) The likelihood that the particular method of restoration would
be effective in slowing the depreciation of the right-of-way that
would otherwise take place.
(2) Methods of restoration may include, but are not limited to,
patching, replacement of the right-of-way base, restoration of
landscaping, and milling and overlay of the entire area of the rightof-
way affected by the work. During this thirty-six-month period, it
shall, upon notification from the Village Engineer or his or her
designee, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary using
the method required by the Village Engineer or his or her designee.
Said work shall be completed within five calendar days of the
receipt of the notice from the Village Engineer or his or her
designee. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the
manner and to the condition required by the Village Engineer or his
or her designee, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all
repairs required by the Village Engineer or his or her designee, the
Village Engineer or his or her designee, at his or her option, may do
such work. In that event, the permittee shall pay to the Village,
within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way.
F. Bond. Prior to commencing the work, any permittee performing work
within the right-of-way shall post a financial guarantee in an amount
approved by the Village Engineer or his or her designee and in a form
approved by the Village Attorney, provided that the limitations of
Wisconsin Statutes § 66.0425(2) shall apply as applicable. If, 36 months
after completion of the restoration of the right-of-way, the Village
Engineer or his or her designee determines that the right-of-way has
been properly restored, the surety on the performance bond shall be
released.
G. Indemnification agreement. Before any person, entity, or utility
commences work pursuant to this section, such person, entity or utility
shall file an agreement with the Village Clerk to hold the Village
harmless, indemnify, and defend the Village from and against any all
injury and damage of any kind caused or occurring as a result of such
work. The agreement shall be in a form approved by the Village
Attorney, and shall have continuing effect during the course of such
work and for all time that the obstruction or facilities or installation
remain within the right-of-way, and thereafter until such obstruction is
removed and the site is fully restored to the satisfaction of the Village
Engineer or his or her designee.
§ 292-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 292-5.1
1:215
H. Reservation of rights. The Village retains all rights in Village right-ofway.
The grant of a right-of-way permit per this section does not
constitute a waiver of any Village rights and remedies regarding
ongoing compliance obligations toward such installations. All persons,
entities and utilities installing obstructions, encroachments or
conducting excavation in Village right-of-way shall remove or relocate
the obstruction, encroachment or excavation upon ten-day notice,
except as otherwise provided by law.
I. Compensation. The Village may require payment of compensation, in an
amount determined by the Village Board, for the grant of any permit
pursuant to this section, provided that compensation for more than
applicable fees and cost recovery shall not be required of utilities that
have the right to use the right-of-way by Wisconsin Statutes
§ 182.017(1r). The compensation required shall be fair and reasonable,
competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory and designed to recover
direct and actual costs in connection with the installation, such as the
cost for staff to review the siting application, costs associated with the
use of the right-of-way, costs associated with maintaining the right-ofway
itself or structures within the right-of-way to which the facilities
are attached, and these standards apply both to initial fees and any
recurring fees.
J. Waiver of deadlines. Timeline deadlines in this process may be waived
by written mutual agreement of the applicant and the Village.
K. Appeals. Any person who wishes to dispute actions taken by the Village
pursuant to this § 292-5.1 may contact the Village Clerk and request to
appear before the Village Board at an upcoming regular Village Board
meeting and may, at that time, present the matter to the Village Board
for resolution. Appeal from the decision of the Village Board shall be by
writ of certiorari to the Milwaukee County Circuit Court.
L. Compliance with laws. Approval of a permit pursuant to this section
does not waive the requirement to comply with all other applicable laws
and ordinances. All applicable federal, state, Milwaukee County, and
Village of Fox Point codes, statutes, regulations, administrative rules,
ordinances and other laws must be followed.
M. Aesthetic requirements. All users of the Village right-of-way shall
comply with the following aesthetic standards:
(1) In areas where facilities are currently nonexistent or underground,
undergrounding is required.
(2) No new aboveground structures, including colocations on existing
structures, shall be placed within 500 feet of an historic structure
recognized as a Historic Landmark by the U.S. Department of the
Interior, or the State of Wisconsin Historical Society. The 500-foot
separation is waived for installations that are completely concealed
from view, or are not visible from locations where the historic
structure can be observed.
§ 292-5.1 FOX POINT CODE § 292-5.1
1:216
§ 292-6. Housing numbering.
§ 292-7. Removal of snow and ice.
Persons engaged in snow and ice removal shall not push, plow, or blow
the same onto or across Village streets. Snow and ice shall be placed or
deposited upon the private property of the owner or resident causing such
placement or deposit, or upon the right-of-way abutting the same property
from which it was removed.
§ 292-8. Removal of leaves and yard waste.
Persons engaged in gathering leaves and yard waste shall not place or blow
the same onto or across Village streets. Leaves and yard waste shall be
placed or deposited upon the private property of the owner or resident
causing such placement or deposit, or upon the right-of-way abutting the
same property from which it was removed. This subsection shall not apply
(3) Attachments to existing structures shall be designed to be flush
with the existing structure as much as can reasonably be done,
shall be a color that matches the existing structure and shall be the
smallest size possible to reasonably accommodate the intended
purpose. If the structure to which the attachment is made changes
color due to repainting, resurfacing or other means, the attachment
shall be modified to match the new color.
(4) Any party objecting to the requirements of this Subsection M shall
have an opportunity to demonstrate that the requirement
constitutes an effective prohibition in violation of state or federal
law, in an appeal made pursuant to Subsection K.
N. Debris. Any debris arising from the permittee's use, whether arising
from construction or at any time thereafter, must be promptly removed
by the permittee. Debris remaining for more than five business days
constitutes a violation of this section subject to the violations and
penalties provisions of § 1-12 of this Code. Each day that the debris
remains after such time constitutes a separate offense.
A. Issuing numbers. The Village Clerk/Treasurer, upon request, shall
advise as to the numbers available for any given home site in the Village
of Fox Point.
B. New buildings. The form of application for a building permit for a
residence in the Village shall contain an agreement to be entered into
by the applicant whereby he agrees that there will be provided for the
residence an appropriate house number plate or sign, readily
observable from the public highway, which will be installed not less
than 15 days after the residence is occupied.39
39.Editor's Note: Original Section 5.12(3), Penalty, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08.
§ 292-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 292-8
1:217
when leaves and yard waste are blown from the originating property of
placement or deposited by wind.
§ 292-9. Permits; required deposits.
§ 292-10. Enforcement.
Violations of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement or prosecution as
provided in § 1-4 of the Village Code.
Chapter 310
TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER PLANT MATERIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 738. Property maintenance — See Ch. 681.
A. Deposits required. The following deposits are required prior to the
issuance of any permit required for performance of such work in the
right-of-way, or upon a Village street or sidewalk, unless the work to be
performed is exempted from permits under superseding state law; the
work to be done in the right-of-way or upon Village streets or sidewalks
does not require a permit under any applicable statute, regulation, or
ordinance; or the work is to be performed by a utility or other similar
entity referred to within § 66.0425(6), Wis. Stats., or on behalf of such a
utility or entity by its contractor:
(1) For street excavation, pavement: $1,000.
(2) For street excavation, not in roadway: $500.
(3) For excavating through a public sidewalk: $500.
(4) For crossing storm sewers, underground stormwater drains or
concrete-inverted ditches: $1,000.
B. All listed deposits are minimum requirements and can be increased at
the discretion of the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer when, in
his opinion, extra hazard is involved.
C. Not less than 180 days after proper completion of the work (which
includes restoration of the excavated area to its prior condition) for
which the permit was issued, the deposit shall be returned unless, in
the opinion of the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer or
designate, it shall be necessary to correct, complete, or supplement the
work, in which event said deposit or any part thereof may be retained to
pay the cost of the correction, completion or supplement of the work
without prejudice to any right or remedy which the Village of Fox Point
may have against the person or persons doing such work.
§ 292-8 FOX POINT CODE § 292-10
1:218
ARTICLE I
Vegetation in Right-of-Way
[Adopted as §§ 5.01 to 5.04, 5.06 and 5.16 of the 1961 Code]
§ 310-1. Purpose.
§ 310-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC AREA or PUBLIC WAY — Includes all public parks, facilities, streets
and roadways and sidewalks and abutting ROW owned, maintained, or
controlled by the Village.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Without limitation, any tree, shrub or other plant
vegetation or part thereof which by reason of its condition interferes with
the use of any public area, is infected with a plant disease, or is infested
with injurious insects or pests; or any such plant vegetation or other
obstruction that is injurious to public improvements or endangers the life,
health, safety or welfare of persons or property.
PUBLIC OR VILLAGE TREES OR SHRUBS — All trees and shrubs,
regardless of origin, located or planted in or upon public areas.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW) — The paved public street or roadway and sidewalk,
and shall include that area between such pavement and the private property
line.
SHRUB — Any woody vegetation or a woody plant having multiple stems
and bearing foliage from the ground level up.
TREE — Any woody plant, normally having one stem or trunk bearing its
foliage or crown well above ground level to heights of 16 feet or more.
A. The Village Board finds that abundant vegetation, especially trees, on
public property throughout the Village is a benefit and an asset to all
residents. The Village Board has further determined that the Village of
Fox Point and its landowners share a responsibility to maintain all
vegetation on the right-of-way (ROW) of all Village streets, sidewalks
and pathways in a manner as to reasonably insure the safe passage of
all vehicles and pedestrians, and to maintain this vegetation in a
manner that it does not adversely affect the maintenance of the
roadway, its shoulders and drainage areas, and that such vegetation
does not consist of undesirable species or harbor plant disease, insect
or pest infestations.
B. The Village Board has further determined that private property owners
are responsible to maintain all vegetation or other objects on their
property in such a manner as to reasonably insure the safe passage of
all vehicles and pedestrians, and to maintain such vegetation or objects
in such a manner as to insure the general health, safety and welfare of
the public.
§ 310-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2
1:219
UNDESIRABLE SPECIES — Includes all buckthorn species and all tree
or shrub species that might block water flow in drainage ditches on the
ROW; as well as trees in proximity of publicly owned storm sewer lines,
sanitary sewer lines, water lines or water hydrants that have been declared
a nuisance; and any other tree/shrub species deemed undesirable by the
Tree Commission.
VEGETATION — Including all plant material such as trees, shrubs,
herbaceous perennials and annuals, and grasses, whether in a cultivated or
wild state.
§ 310-3. Authority for planting or cutting trees in the public way.
A. Except as provided in Subsection E herein, no person shall plant, cut,
prune, or harm in any physical or chemical way, or remove any living
tree or shrub on the ROW; or cut, disturb or interfere in any way with
the roots of any tree or shrub on the ROW, without written permission of
the Village Manager or his/her designee. In the event the Village
Manager or her/his designee approves any such action, she/he may
impose reasonable conditions, which may include the following, without
limitation by reason of enumeration:
(1) Possible site plan condition. A site plan showing property lines and
providing a written description of the work including trees and
shrubs to be added and removed is required, which shall be subject
to the approval of the Village Forester.
(2) Possible tree protection zone condition. Except as to any tree that
is being removed, the "tree protection zone" of all trees shall be
preserved and protected from any disturbance, by the exclusion of
all heavy equipment and heavy machinery. The tree protection zone
shall be suitably marked on the property. The tree protection zone
shall mean that area around a tree trunk that extends vertically
from the top of the tree canopy to 36 inches below ground level and
horizontally in all directions from the outer edge of the tree trunk
one foot for every inch of the tree's diameter at breast height (dbh).
(3) Possible financial guarantee condition. A cash deposit is required,
to guarantee compliance with the conditions of approval, which
shall be forfeited upon breach of any such conditions.
B. No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with Village employees or
agents of the Village in the planting, pruning, spraying or removing of
any trees or shrubs, living or dead, in any public way.
C. No person shall place any stone, concrete, lumber or any other
substance about any tree, shrub or any other structure in the public
way. No person shall place soil more than two inches over the root
systems of any tree or shrub in the public right-of-way. This section shall
not apply to the use of organic mulches around the base of trees and
shrubs.
§ 310-2 FOX POINT CODE § 310-3
1:220
D. No person shall place or cause to be located any stone, concrete,
lumber, yard waste, brush, or any other substance on the paved portion
of the ROW.
E. Exemptions. No permission from the Village Manager or his/her
designee shall be required by an abutting private property owner to
maintain the ROW as specifically described in the following § 310-4.
F. Reimbursement obligation. In addition to, and not to the exclusion or
prejudice of, such other penalties and remedies as may be available to
the Village, any person or entity violating this section by causing the
removal of a tree in the ROW without permission shall be subject to the
following reimbursement obligation. The person or entity responsible
shall reimburse the Village for all costs and expenses of any type that
the Village incurs in connection with the violation, including the cost of
professional services incurred by the Village (including forestry,
engineering, legal, planning and other services) or other related
professional services in the matter, as well as for any actions the Village
is required to take to enforce these requirements, to replace the tree(s),
and to restore the site, due to a violation of this section. Costs of outside
consultants and contractors shall be reimbursed at 100% of the costs
incurred by the Village. Costs of Village staff shall be reimbursed at
actual hourly rates of pay, for all time incurred, plus 40% for
reimbursement of benefits. This obligation is further subject to the
following:
(1) The Village Forester shall determine what replacement tree(s) is
required. The replacement tree(s) shall have a total diameter at
breast height (dbh) which is approximately equivalent to the total
dbh of the removed tree(s). If the dbh of the removed tree(s) cannot
be measured, because of the tree's removal, the diameter of the
tree shall be measured at the stump (if there is a stump remaining)
or the Village Forester shall estimate the dbh of the removed
tree(s) based upon such other information as may be available,
which determination shall be final. No replacement tree shall have
a dbh of less than 1.5 inches.
(2) Replacement tree(s) shall be planted within the Village ROW
adjacent to the property where the tree was removed, as
determined by the Village Forester, except as follows. If the Village
Forester finds that the location adjacent to such property is not in
the best interests of the Village, the replacement tree(s) may be
planted in any public place to be determined by the Village
Forester.
(3) Every person and entity concerned in the commission of an act
prohibited by this section, whether committed directly by such
person or entity, or hired, counseled, aided, or abetted by such
person or entity, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
reimbursement obligation described herein.
§ 310-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-3
1:221
§ 310-4. Maintenance of vegetation in the public way.
(4) Damage to a tree in violation of this section can give rise to a
reimbursement obligation under this section as follows. If the
Village Forester determines that the damaged tree creates a safety
hazard, or that the damage to the tree is likely to cause all or a
significant portion of the tree to die, the Village Forester can
require the tree to be removed. The obligations of this section shall
then apply the same as though the tree were removed by the
violator directly, with the additional obligation to reimburse the
Village for removal costs.
(5) When trees are removed or replaced pursuant to this section, such
work is a service rendered for the benefit of the abutting property
owner, and the reimbursement obligation described herein shall be
collectable as a special charge pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.,
in addition to any other collection method provided by law.
(6) The exclusive means to appeal determinations made by the Village
Forester under this section, and the reimbursement obligations
imposed, shall be to the Village of Fox Point Village Board. Such
appeal must be filed in writing with the Village Clerk/Treasurer no
later than 30 days after the date of the determination or charge
that is to be appealed.
A. The Village maintains trees on the ROW whether they were planted by
the Village, an abutting private property owner, or occur as part of a
naturalized area. Any additional vegetation on the ROW such as shrubs,
vines, grass, and other perennial or annual plants is the responsibility
of the abutting private property owner.
B. The Village reserves the right to prune or remove other trees, shrubs or
any other vegetation on the ROW, whether planted by the Village, an
abutting private property owner or those which have existed in a
natural state since the development of the property, for safety reasons,
to sustain drainage patterns and maintain underground facilities; or to
provide clearance for a street or walkway; or to remove hazardous
branches or to remove hazardous trees; or to remove an undesirable or
invasive species. Such needs will be determined by the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer or his/her designee.
C. The Village will prune trees and maintain the fourteen-foot height
standard over the public street. Any additional vegetation on the ROW,
and upon private land abutting to ROW, shall be maintained so that the
lowest branches projecting over the public street provide a clearance of
not less than 14 feet in height. The public street shall include at a
minimum the pavement as well as a four-foot-wide unobstructed
corridor of ROW on each side of and abutting to the pavement. Any
additional vegetation on the ROW abutting to private property (other
than maintained lawn, specified ground cover, or naturalized vegetation
not over five inches in height) that exists within a minimum of four feet
§ 310-3 FOX POINT CODE § 310-4
1:222
from the pavement's edge shall be pruned by the abutting property
owner in such a manner as to provide and maintain a clear corridor of
not more than five inches in height from ground level to a clearance
of not less than 14 feet in height. The Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer or designee may waive the provisions of this section if he/
she determines that such waiver will not interfere with public travel or
endanger public health, welfare, or safety. The determination of a need
to prune as required by this section will be made by the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer and reviewed by the Village Manager or
his/her designee. Upon such determination, written notification will be
given to the property owner, who shall do and complete such pruning.
D. Clearance from a public walkway to lower branches of a tree or shrub
shall not be less than eight feet in height; or less than one foot in width
from the walkway's edge, and clearance from ground level shall be no
higher than five inches. Where it is determined that these dimensions
are within the ROW, the Department of Public Works shall prune to
these specifications. Where a walkway is directly bordered by private
property (as along the west border of the Lake Drive sidewalk), the
abutting private property owner is responsible for maintaining the
same clearance abutting to the walkway, that is an area beginning no
more than five inches from ground level to a minimum width of one foot
from the walkway's paved edge to a minimum height of eight feet.
Determination of such need to prune will be made by the Village
Manager or his/her designee, after which written notification will be
given to the property owner, who shall do and complete such pruning.
E. Private roadways in the Village are defined as follows and listed to be:
Merrie Lane; a portion of Coleman Lane; portions of Goodrich and
Barnett Lanes; a portion of North Beach Drive; and a portion of East
Lilac Lane. Vegetation abutting to private roadways (other than
maintained lawn, specific ground cover, or naturalized vegetation not
over five inches in height) that exists within a minimum of two feet from
the private roadway pavement's edge shall be pruned by the abutting
property owner in such a manner as to provide and maintain a clear
corridor of not more than five inches in height from ground level to a
clearance of not less than 14 feet in height.
F. Notice to do and complete such pruning mandated by any of the
foregoing sections shall be given either by delivering written notice to
the owner or a member of his/her household of suitable age and
discretion, or by mailing the notice to the last known address of the
property owner. The notice shall refer to this section and shall advise
the property owner to prune the vegetation within 30 days from the
date of the mailing of the notice. If the property owner of this property
or real estate does not prune the vegetation as described in the notice
within the time provided by the notice, the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer or designee shall have such pruning done by the
Department of Public Works or by agents of the Village hired for such
purpose. Records of the cost of pruning such vegetation in the area
§ 310-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4
1:223
§ 310-5. Obstructions; nuisances; safety standards.
§ 310-6. Cutting grass on streets.
abutting each parcel of real estate shall be maintained and a bill thereof
shall be sent to the owner of the parcel of real estate. Payment of such
bill shall be due 15 days after it has been sent, and if not paid within
said time, shall be delinquent and shall thereupon become a lien upon
the property as of such date and shall be extended upon the current or
next tax roll as a delinquent tax, as provided by the Wisconsin Statutes,
and shall be collected as therein provided.
A. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of §§ 310-1, 310-2,
310-3 and 310-4, any vegetation growing on or present upon the ROW,
or any other obstruction of the ROW, at or near an intersection of public
streets, sidewalks, and railroad crossings, may be declared a public
nuisance by the Village Manager or his/her designee, if it is determined
that the sight distance is insufficient and that there is an obstruction of
view, or an otherwise dangerous condition exists for vehicular or
pedestrian traffic. If it is determined that vegetation or some other
obstruction limits the necessary sight distance, the Village Manager or
his/her designee will declare the obstruction a public nuisance and will
so notify the property owner(s). The obstruction/vegetation may be
removed by the abutting private property owner within 30 days of
receipt of notification. After such time, if the obstruction/vegetation is
not removed, it will be removed by the Department of Public Works or
its agents. The requirement for notice and the opportunity for removal
by the private property owner shall not apply to conditions deemed to
present an imminent threat to public safety as determined by the
Village Manager, Director of Public Works/Village Engineer, Chief of
Police, or Chief of the North Shore Fire Department.
B. Vegetation on the ROW that is interfering with the clear sight of traffic
signs or street name signs, as determined by the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer or designee, will be pruned or removed by the
Department of Public Works, or its agents. No notification for such
safety removals will be given to abutting private property owners.
A. Where the property owner has a maintained lawn between his lot line
and the shoulder of any street or private roadway or private ROW, the
property owner shall cut the grass in this area as often as the grass
shall need cutting, such that it does not exceed a height of four inches,
in order to maintain the area in a neat, safe and attractive manner.
[Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
B. Any owner of the private property that abuts Lake Drive shall maintain
the ROW between the sidewalk and the roadway as a grass lawn, and
such private property owner shall cut the grass in this area as often as
the grass shall need cutting such that it does not exceed a height of four
§ 310-4 FOX POINT CODE § 310-6
1:224
§ 310-7. Enforcement.
Violations of this article shall be subject to enforcement or prosecution as
provided in § 1-4 of the Village Code.
inches, in order to maintain the area in a safe, neat and attractive
manner.
C. In the event that any such grass in the ROW has not been cut, the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer or designee shall deliver
written notice to cut the grass to the owner or member of the household
of suitable age and discretion, or by mailing the notice to the last known
address of the owner. The notice shall refer to this section and shall
advise the owner to cut the grass within one week from the date of
delivery or mailing of the notice.
D. If the owner does not cut the grass within the time provided by the
notice, the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer or designee shall
have such grass cut by the Department of Public Works or by agents
hired by the Village. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer or
designee shall keep an accurate record of the cost of cutting the grass
in the area abutting each parcel of real estate and a bill will be sent to
the owner of such parcel of real estate with payment due 15 days after
it has been sent, and if not paid within said time, shall become
delinquent and shall thereupon become a lien upon the property as of
such date and shall be extended upon the current or next tax roll as a
delinquent tax, as provided by the Wisconsin Statutes, and shall be
collected as therein provided.
§ 310-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-7
1:225

ARTICLE II
Diseased Trees and Shrubs
[Adopted as Ch. 26 of the 1961 Code]
§ 310-8. Purpose. [Amended 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
Many trees and shrubs growing on private as well as public property in
the Village are threatened by injurious insects and disease; the loss of
these trees and shrubs would substantially depreciate the market value
of property in the Village; the Village is engaged in a program to protect
such trees and shrubs on public property; and in order to be effective, it
is necessary that a similar program be carried out on private property;
therefore, this article is adopted for the purpose of preventing the spread
of these injurious insects and diseases and the resulting loss of trees and
shrubs in order to protect and preserve the market value of property in
the Village and to protect and preserve public health and safety. The terms
"tree" and "shrub" as used in this article shall have the meanings defined in
§ 310-2 in Article I of this chapter.
§ 310-9. Public nuisance declaration.
The Village of Fox Point hereby declares any of the following to be a public
nuisance and therefore subject to abatement pursuant to § 310-11 of this
article.
A. Any tree or shrub or part thereof located upon any public or private
property which is infected with an infectious plant disease, or is
infested with injurious insects or pests, so as to threaten the health of
other trees or shrubs in the Village, including but not limited to the
following disease and infestation conditions:
(1) Dutch elm disease, defined as follows: any elm tree or part thereof
infected with the Dutch elm disease fungus Ceratocystis ulmi
(Buisman), or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus
multistriatus (Eichh.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.). Also, any
dead elm tree or parts thereof, including logs, branches, stumps,
firewood or other elm material not buried or burned or from which
the bark has not been removed.
(2) Asian long-horned beetle infestation, defined as follows: any tree or
shrub or part thereof, or logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other
tree or shrub material, which harbors the Asian long-horned beetle
(Anoplophora glabripennis).
(3) Emerald ash borer infestation, defined as follows: any tree or shrub
or part thereof, or logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other tree or
shrub material, which harbors the emerald ash borer (EAB)
(Agrilus planipennis)
§ 310-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-10
1:227
§ 310-10. Public nuisance prohibited.
No person shall permit any public nuisance as defined in § 310-9 of this
article to remain in or upon any premises owned or leased by that person
within the Village of Fox Point.
§ 310-11. Abatement of public nuisance.
A. Public areas. Whenever the Village Forester, or in his/her absence, the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer, shall find on examination
that a public nuisance as defined in § 310-9 exists upon any Villageowned
land, Village park or Village right-of-way, he/she shall take steps
to abate such nuisance tree, shrub or part thereof in such manner as to
destroy or prevent the spread or continuance of a nuisance. The
manner in which the nuisances shall be abated shall be determined by
the Village Forester.
B. Private premises.
(1) Entry on premises. Every owner and person in possession of real
estate in the Village shall permit employees of the Department of
Public Works, the Forestry Department, persons authorized by the
Village Forester, and contractors or employees of contractors under
contract with the Village to enter upon the real estate for the
purpose of examining trees and shrubs, logs, branches, stumps,
and firewood. If it shall appear to any such person that a tree or
shrub or any part thereof, or log, branch, stump, or firewood, may
be diseased or infested with a pest, any such person shall be
permitted to take the necessary sample of wood, bark, branch, or
leaves from the tree, shrub, log, branch, stump, or firewood to have
an examination made.
(2) Removing declared nuisances. If an examination made as above
provided, or made at the request of the owner of the real estate,
discloses that the tree, shrub, log, branch, stump or firewood is
infected/infested with a plant disease or injurious pest as described
in § 310-9 above, the Village Forester shall give notice to the owner
of the real estate, at the owner's last known address, and to the
person in possession of the real estate to have such declared
nuisance lawfully removed from the Village within 30 days of giving
such notice. All such shrubs, wood chips, non-chipped wood,
branches, stumps and logs shall be disposed of by the owner
outside Village limits and in accordance with best management
practices so as to avoid the spread of destructive insects or
pathogens. Such notice shall also indicate that the owner or person
in charge of the premises may, within 14 days, request a hearing
before the Village Tree Commission on the issue. [Amended
8-14-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07; 11-13-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-10]
§ 310-10 FOX POINT CODE § 310-12
1:228
§ 310-12. Hearing.
Upon timely request made by the owner or person in charge of the
premises, following receipt of a direction to abate a public nuisance, the
Village Tree Commission shall hold a public hearing on the matter. After the
public hearing, the Village Tree Commission shall determine whether the
best interests of the public require that the directive be upheld, modified
or rescinded, and the Village Tree Commission shall issue its decision in
writing. The action of the Village Tree Commission may be appealed to
the Village Board of Appeals within 30 days of the date of the Village
Tree Commission's written decision, pursuant to Chapter 7, Administrative
Review, of this Code.
§ 310-13. Summary abatement.
If the owner or person in possession of such real estate does not lawfully
remove the declared nuisance from the Village within 30 days after such
notice is given, or if a hearing is timely requested and the order of the
Tree Commission is not obeyed, or if the Tree Commission decision is
timely appealed and the order of the Board of Appeals is not obeyed,
then such declared nuisance shall be removed on order of the Village
Forester. Accurate record of the expenses of removal, including all costs
associated with the physical cutting, excavating, transporting and disposing
of such declared nuisance, and the cost of professional services (including
engineering, legal, planning, horticultural, forestry and other consulting
fees), for the review and preparation of required documents or attendance
at meetings or other related services in the matter, as well as to enforce
these requirements, shall be made and a report thereof given to the Village
Clerk/Treasurer. Such costs shall be billed to, and collected from the owner
of the property where the nuisance was situated as a special charge,
pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats. If such costs are not paid within 30 days
of billing, then the cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special
charge pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., and the same shall be collected
in all respects like other Village taxes upon real estate.
§ 310-14. Persons who may perform duties.
Any and all acts to be done by the Department of Public Works, Forestry
Department, or Village Forester, pursuant to the provisions of this article,
may be done by such Village employees, or by any other person duly
authorized by the Village Forester, or by any contractor or the employees
of any contractor with whom the Village may from time to time enter into a
contract for the removal of the declared nuisance; provided that the method
to be used by any such other person or contractor in performing any of said
work shall be approved by the Village Forester.
§ 310-15. No interference.
No person shall prevent, interfere with or hinder, or attempt to prevent,
interfere with or hinder, any person performing any acts authorized or
§ 310-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-15
1:229
directed to be performed pursuant to the provisions of this article. A person
does not violate this section by requesting identification from any person
performing acts authorized or directed under this article.
§ 310-16. Violations and penalties.
In addition to, and not to the exclusion or prejudice of, all other remedies
available to the Village, the penalties described in § 1-4 of this Code shall
apply for violation of this article. Each and every day for which a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 310-15 FOX POINT CODE § 310-16
1:230
ARTICLE III
Trees Interfering with Utilities
[Adopted as § 5.05 of the 1961 Code]
§ 310-17. Nuisance prohibited.
The preserving or maintaining of trees in proximity of publicly owned storm
sewer lines, sanitary sewer lines, water lines or water hydrants within the
Village, which trees cause damage, blockage or interference with such lines
or hydrants, is a nuisance and prohibited.
§ 310-18. Notice; removal.
It is hereby made the duty of the Village Forester to give notice to the
owner or the agent of the owner of land in the Village whereon there
is a tree, which tree is, or is believed to be, through its root system or
otherwise, interfering with, blocking or damaging any of the aforelisted
public property. The owner shall then cause the tree to be removed, or such
damage, blockage or interference as is occurring to be corrected, as soon
as reasonably practical thereafter, but in no event more than three months
from the date of the notice.
§ 310-19. Noncompliance; violations and penalties; nuisances.
In the event of noncompliance, the Forester shall refer the matter to the
Village Attorney, who may cause the matter to be prosecuted as a civil
forfeiture in the Municipal Court, subject to § 1-4 of this Code, in which
case each day of continued violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
Alternately, the Village Attorney may refer the matter to the Village
Manager, who may cause the damage, blockage or interference to be
corrected at Village expense, but shall thereafter treat the matter as a
special assessment against the parcel of land upon which such tree is
located, in like manner in which other special taxes are levied in the
Village. Alternately, the Village shall have the right to seek abatement in
the Circuit Court as a public nuisance, including any claim for monetary
damages as may have resulted from such damage, blockage or interference.
The remedies as set forth in this section shall be deemed alternative and
cumulative, and pursuit of one remedy shall not be deemed a waiver of the
Village's right to pursue another.
§ 310-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-19
1:231

ARTICLE IV
Clear-Cutting
[Adopted 12-9-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-10 (Ch. 39 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 310-20. Findings and intent.
To protect the quality of life in the Village of Fox Point and to help sustain
the property values of all Village homes, it is in the best interest of
landowners to protect and nurture the trees, shrubs and other vegetation
that grow on their land. This article recognizes that woods, hedgerows and
other natural areas that remain in the Village of Fox Point after more than
seven decades of intensive land development are still there because our
residents have deemed them to be an important community asset. It is the
intent of this article to protect those limited natural resources that remain
within the Village in a manner such that Fox Point will continue to be an
attractive, highly valued community in which to live.
§ 310-21. Permit required.
A landowner, tenant, or person in possession or control of a lot or property
within the Village of Fox Point shall not severely cut back more than 50% of
the healthy trees upon any such lot or property without having first received
a permit from the Village Manager.
§ 310-22. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to cutting by or on behalf of the Village, county,
or public utility engaged in a public works project or repair.
§ 310-23. Violations and penalties.40
In addition to all other penalties as provided by § 1-4 of the Village Code,
a person found guilty of violating this article shall be fined not less than
$1,000 nor more than $5,000. Each act of violation and every day upon
which a violation occurs or exists constitutes a separate offense.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 310-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-23
1:233
Chapter 325
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 260.
§ 310-23 FOX POINT CODE § 310-23
1:234
ARTICLE I
Rates and Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 4 of the 1961 Code]
§ 325-1. Fox Point Water Code.
This article is the Water Code of the Village of Fox Point and is hereby made
Chapter 325, Article I, of the Fox Point Village Code.
§ 325-2. Rates.
Charge for water or service furnished by the Fox Point Water Utility will
be in accordance with the most recent rate schedule of the Fox Point
Water Utility approved by and on file with the Public Service Commission of
Wisconsin and shall be paid by the person receiving water or service from
the utility. Any such rate schedule is in effect from the time it is filed in
the office of the Fox Point Water Utility. Such rate schedule is incorporated
herein as though herein set forth at length. Additional charges may be
incurred pursuant to the Fox Point Water Utility Rules and Regulations.
§ 325-3. Rules and regulations.
A. All persons now receiving a water supply from the Fox Point Water
Utility, or who may hereafter make application therefor, shall be
considered as having agreed to be bound by the Fox Point Water Utility
Rules and Regulations as filed with the Public Service Commission of
Wisconsin, and all applicable State Statues and State Administrative
Code provisions. All such rules and regulations of the Fox Point Water
Utility are in effect from the time they are filed in the office of the Fox
Point Water Utility. Such Rules and Regulations are incorporated herein
as though fully set forth.
B. The following regulations apply pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes
§ 196.171 and the Wisconsin Administrative Code § PSC 185.37(2)(d).
The following is intended to comply with such statute and
administrative rule, including such amendments, revisions and
renumbering as may be made thereto from time to time in the future.
(1) The Superintendent of the Fox Point Water Utility and/or his or her
designee may enter, at any reasonable time, any place supplied
with water by the public utility, for the purpose of inspecting,
examining, repairing, installing or removing water meters and
remote recorders (ROMs), pipes, fittings, wires and works for
supplying or regulating the supply of water and for the purpose of
ascertaining the quantity of water supplied.
(2) No officer or agent may enter any premises under this section
unless the officer or agent was duly appointed by the public utility
for purposes of acting under this section and exhibits written
authority signed by the Superintendent of the public utility or by
any other official in charge of the public utility.
§ 325-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-3
1:235
§ 325-4. Superintendent.
The Village Manager is the Superintendent of the Fox Point Water Utility.
§ 325-5. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or of the rate
schedule or rules and regulations incorporated herein by reference shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of the Fox Point Village Code, in
addition to the specific penalties provided in this article. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(3) Refusal or failure to permit authorized utility personnel to enter a
premises for a purpose described in this section shall be a proper
basis to disconnect the utility service, which shall be in addition to,
and not to the exclusion or prejudice of such other penalties and
remedies that may apply. Disconnection of utility service shall
proceed in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code Section
PSC 185.37. Failure to respond to a written demand to enter the
premises that is mailed to the property owner or occupant of the
premises or posted on the front door of the premises, by contacting
the Utility Superintendent or agent as directed in such notice, shall
constitute refusal or failure to permit entry.
(4) Each day that entry is refused after the expiration of the time
allowed by the proper notice constitutes a separate offense.
§ 325-3 FOX POINT CODE § 325-5
1:236
ARTICLE II
Cross-Connections
[Adopted as § 12.22 of the 1961 Code]
§ 325-6. Definition.
A cross-connection shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which
contains potable water from the Village of Fox Point Water Utility Water
System, and the other, water from a private source, water of unknown or
questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby there may be a
flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the
pressure differential between the two systems.
§ 325-7. Cross-connections prohibited.
No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross-connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private,
auxiliary, or emergency water supply other than the regular public water
supply of the Village of Fox Point may enter the supply or distribution
system of said municipality, unless such private, auxiliary, or emergency
water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall
have been approved by the Village of Fox Point and by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources in accordance with § NR 812.25(3),
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
§ 325-8. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Fox Point Building Inspector to cause inspections
to be made of all properties served by the public water system where crossconnection
with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency
of inspections and reinspection based on potential health hazards involved
shall be as established by the Fox Point Building Inspector and as approved
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
§ 325-9. Right of entry; warrant.
Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the Fox Point
Building Inspector shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable
time to examine any property served by a connection to the public water
system of the Village of Fox Point for cross-connections. If entry is refused,
such representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant under
§ 66.0119, Wis. Stats. On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any
property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent
information regarding the piping system or systems on such property.
§ 325-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-10
1:237
§ 325-10. Violations; discontinuance of service.
The Fox Point Water Utility is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this
article exists and to take such other precautionary measures deemed
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and
opportunity for hearing under Chapter 68, Wisconsin Statutes, except as
provided in § 325-11. Water service to such property shall not be restored
until the cross-connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 325-11. Emergency discontinuance of service.
If it is determined by the Fox Point Water Utility that a cross-connection
or an emergency endangers public health, safety, or welfare, and requires
immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the
Clerk/Treasurer of the Village of Fox Point and delivered to the customer's
premises, service may be immediately discontinued. The customer shall
have an opportunity for hearing under Chapter 68, Wisconsin Statutes,
within 10 days of such emergency discontinuance.
§ 325-12. Adoption of State Plumbing Code.
The Village of Fox Point adopts by reference the State Plumbing Code of
Wisconsin, being Chapters SPS 381 through 387, Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
§ 325-13. Supplementary regulations.
This article does not supersede the State Plumbing Code and the Village of
Fox Point's plumbing ordinances but is supplementary to them.
§ 325-10 FOX POINT CODE § 325-13
1:238
ARTICLE III
Well Abandonment
[Adopted as § 12.23 of the 1961 Code]
§ 325-14. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect public health, safety, and welfare
and to prevent contamination of groundwater by assuring that unused,
unsafe, or noncomplying wells or wells which may act as conduits for
contamination of groundwater or wells which may be illegally crossconnected
to the municipal water system are properly maintained or
abandoned.
§ 325-15. Applicability.
This article applies to all wells located on premises served by the Village of
Fox Point municipal water system. Utility customers outside the jurisdiction
of the municipal system may be required under contract agreement or
utility rule to adopt and enforce equivalent ordinances within their
jurisdictions for the purpose stated above.
§ 325-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM — A community water system owned by the
Village of Fox Point.
NONCOMPLYING — A well or pump installation which does not comply
with § NR 812.42, Wisconsin Administrative Code, Standards for Existing
Installations, and which has not been granted a variance pursuant to § NR
812.43, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
PUMP INSTALLATION — The pump and related equipment used for
withdrawing water from a well, including the discharge piping, the
underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling
faucets, and well seals or caps.
UNSAFE WELL OR PUMP INSTALLATION — One which produces water
which is bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with substances
which exceeds the drinking water standards of Chapter NR 140 or 809,
Wisconsin Administrative Code, or for which a Health Advisory has been
issued by the Department of Natural Resources.
UNUSED WELL OR PUMP INSTALLATION — One which is not used or does
not have a functional pumping system.
WELL — A drillhole or other excavation or opening deeper than it is wide
that extends more than 10 feet below the ground surface constructed for
the purpose of obtaining groundwater.
WELL ABANDONMENT — The proper filling and sealing of a well according
to the provisions of § NR 812.26, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
§ 325-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-17
1:239
§ 325-17. Proper abandonment; valid permit.
When required, all wells on premises served by the municipal water system
shall be properly abandoned in accordance with § 325-19 of this article
not later than 90 days from the date of connection to the municipal water
system, unless a valid well operation permit has been issued to the well
owner by the Village of Fox Point under the terms of § 325-18 of this article.
§ 325-18. Well operation permit.41
Owners of wells on premises served by the municipal water system wishing
to retain their wells for any use shall make application for a well operation
permit for each well no later than 90 days after connection to the municipal
water system. The Village of Fox Point shall grant a permit to a well
owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed five years, providing
all conditions of this section are met. A well operation permit may be
renewed by submitting an application verifying that the conditions of this
section are met. The Village or its agent may conduct inspections and water
quality tests or require inspections and water quality tests to be conducted
at the applicant's expense to obtain or verify information necessary for
consideration of a permit application or renewal. Permit applications and
renewals shall be made on forms provided by the Clerk/Treasurer. All initial
and renewal applications must be accompanied by a fee as provided in
Chapter 63, Fees. The following conditions must be met for issuance or
renewal of a well operation permit:
§ 325-19. Abandonment procedures.
A. The well and pump installation shall meet the Standards for Existing
Installations described in § NR 812.42, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
B. The well and pump shall have a history of producing safe water
evidenced by at least two coliform bacteria samples taken a minimum of
two weeks apart. In areas where the Department of Natural Resources
has determined that groundwater aquifers are contaminated with
substances other than bacteria, additional chemical tests may be
required to document the safety of the water.
C. There shall be no cross-connections between the well's pump
installation or distribution piping and the municipal water system.
D. The water from the private well shall not discharge into a drain leading
directly to a public sewer unless properly metered and authorized by
the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer.
E. The private well shall have a functional pumping system.
F. The proposed use of the private well shall be justified as reasonable in
addition to water provided by the municipal water system.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 325-17 FOX POINT CODE § 325-19
1:240
§ 325-20. Violations and penalties.43
In addition to all other penalties as provided by § 1-4 of the Village Code,
any well owner violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished by forfeiture of not less than $100 nor more than $400 and the
cost of prosecution. Each day of violation is a separate offense. If any person
fails to comply with this article for more than 30 days after receiving written
notice of the violation, the municipality may impose a penalty and cause the
well abandonment to be performed, and the expense to be assessed as a
special tax against the property.
A. All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this article shall be
abandoned according to the procedures and methods of § NR 812.26,
Wisconsin Administrative Code. All debris, pumps, piping, unsealed
liners, and any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing
operations shall be removed prior to abandonment.42
B. An abandonment report form, supplied by the Department of Natural
Resources, shall be submitted by the well owner to the Clerk/Treasurer
and the Department of Natural Resources within 30 days of the
completion of the well abandonment.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 325-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-20
1:241

ARTICLE IV
Water Lateral Construction
[Adopted as § 12.24 of the 1961 Code]
§ 325-21. Service lines.
When installing service lines, the following specifications and requirements
must be met:
§ 325-22. Water main tapping.
The following specifications must be adhered to when tapping a water main:
A. HDPE service lines, up to two-inch size, must be installed according to
the following specifications:
(1) All HDPE service lines shall be 200 psi rated, SDR-9, copper tube
size/poly tubing ASTM, D-2737, NSF-14, AWWA C-901.
(2) HDPE shall use compression fittings with properly sized stainless
steel sleeve insert, Mueller or Ford.
(3) The entire laying length shall be carefully inspected before
placement into the trench for cuts or gouges or kinks.
(a) If a cut or gouge is found to be deeper than 10% of the
minimum standard wall thickness of the pipe, the entire
affected length shall be removed and discarded.
(b) The pipe to be placed shall not be kinked, cut or gouged during
installation, or the preceding requirements shall be applied.
(c) Pipe wall "cores" shall be retrieved from the main as part of
tapping procedure and presented to the Construction
Inspector or Water Utility representative.
B. All fittings used in copper or HDPE service lines shall:
(1) Be wrapped in a plastic baggy; and
(2) Maintain one foot on each side of the fitting.
C. Copper service shall use flared fittings. Use Teflon-based pipe dope in
making up the flare, Mueller or Ford brands acceptable.
D. Curb stop riser shall be:
(1) Minneapolis pattern 1 1/4 inch upper section brought up to finish
grade. Contractor is to supply extensions if curb stop is below
finished grade.
(2) Installed one foot on either side of the property line.
E. Curb stop shall be keyable using an eight-foot curb stop key.
§ 325-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-22
1:243
A. Stainless steel tapped repair clamp, Smith Blaire Model No. 264 or
equal, three-hundred-sixty-degree gasket coverage, shall be installed
and all bolts shall be finger-tightened for uniform gap. Apply pipe joint
lubricant (lube that is used on push-on pipe joints) to the inside of
gasket and to the pipe surface. Tighten all bolts working from the ends
to the center using torque wrenches in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications. After allowing the gasket to fully compress for
approximately 10 minutes, all bolts shall be retightened to
manufacturer's specifications, but not exceeding 150 foot-pounds
torque. Make sure the tapping device and tapping machine are fully
supported and all cutting edges sharpened. Teflon tape or Teflon pipe
dope shall be used on the corporation stop and all other pipe threads.
All bolts and nuts are to be stainless steel.
B. If tapping device is for a three-inch or larger branch line:
(1) The sleeve shall have a test port and be tested at 100 psi for five
minutes by the contractor before the actual tap proceeds; and
(2) A Water Utility representative shall witness the tapping device
installation, pressure test and tapping procedure.
C. Tapping shall take place under full system pressure with the main full of
water. No taps may be made on an inactive or nonpressurized main. All
curb stops shall be installed under full system pressure prior to
hydrostatic testing for acceptance of installation.
D. Location of all taps, tapping devices or fittings/valves for all water pipes
shall be in accordance with the following:
(1) The minimum distance from the beginning/end of the Bell or MJ of
a water pipe, fitting or another tap shall be:
(a) For corporation tapping saddle, up to two-inch size, two feet.
(b) For branch tapping sleeve, not less than four feet.
(2) All taps to existing and new mains shall be "live" or "wet" taps,
utilizing a tapping machine with appropriate cutting tools and
sharp cutting heads. All tap cutouts shall be given to the
Construction Inspector or Water Utility representative witnessing
the tap.
E. No taps will be permitted to begin after 2:00 p.m. Additionally,
preapproval by the Water Utility is required for tapping on a Friday or
any day preceding a holiday.
F. Notice. The following notice requirements must be met:
(1) Two business days prior notice to Water Utility is required to be
given prior to installation of new taps.
§ 325-22 FOX POINT CODE § 325-22
1:244
§ 325-23. Tracer wire.
Tracer wire is required to be installed atop all HDPE pipe. When installing
tracer wire, the following specifications apply:
§ 325-24. Restoration.
The restoration phase must be completed to the following specifications:
(2) Two business days prior notice shall also be given to the Building
Inspector for new taps on existing mains.
A. A solid copper No. 10 AWG, THWN coating is required on all plastic
mains and services. Wire shall be laid parallel with and above center
line of the main, fitting and service line, and taped at maximum of tenfoot
intervals.
B. Branch or connections with the tracer wire shall require 10 full turns of
exposed and undamaged copper-to-copper contact, soldered and
watertight wrap to prevent corrosion or any deterioration of electrical
conductivity (i.e., Western Union splice).
C. Tracer wire shall be terminated outside the curb stop, with a 1.5 foot
pigtail. The tracer wire shall be run from each curb stop box and
terminate at the meter or meter horn location within the building.
D. Prior to installation, tracer wire shall be tested by contractor. The Water
Utility has the option to spot-check the continuity of the tracer wires.
A. Backfill of roadway shall be: No. 1 slurry, beneath any pavement,
horizontally to a maximum distance of five feet beyond the edge of the
pavement, and vertically to within four inches of the top of the
pavement; hot mix asphalt road patch, four-inch thickness; dirt
restoration with seed and mulch; and three-eighths-inch granular TB
shoulder material. Restoration shall be completed before street deposit
is returned.
B. No permanent hot mix asphalt repair of asphalt pavement may be made
during the period October 1 through April 30 without permission of the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer. Absent that permission, a
temporary asphalt pavement repair is to be made and maintained, with
permanent repair completed during the following May 1 through May
31.
C. Contractor is responsible for notifying the Village when the restoration
is completed and ready for inspection.
§ 325-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-24
1:245
Part III: Business Regulations
Chapter 340
BUSINESS REGULATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 745.
§ 325-24 FOX POINT CODE § 325-24
1:246
ARTICLE I
Soliciting for Business Activity
[Adopted as § 29.03 of the 1961 Code]
§ 340-1. Solicitation on privately owned property.
No person shall solicit for any business or commercial activity or enterprise
upon any privately owned property in the Village used for business or
commercial activity other than a commercial or business activity conducted
on said premises.
§ 340-2. Solicitation.
Solicitation includes, without limitation, entry upon said lands and
advertising by word of mouth, display of sign, distribution or offer of
handbills, coupons, or other printed matter, or sale or attempt or offer to
sell any merchandise or service.
§ 340-3. Privately owned property.
Privately owned property used for business or commercial activity includes
a building in which a business or commercial activity is conducted, and all
walks and parking areas used or offered to or available for use by customers
or prospective customers of such business or commercial activity to which
the title is in one or more individuals or corporations other than this Village.
§ 340-4. Exemption.
The prohibition herein set forth does not apply if the express consent of the
owner of the property has been given for the solicitation conducted thereon.
§ 340-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-4
1:247

ARTICLE II
Display of Merchandise in Outdoor Areas
[Adopted 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 89-566 (§ 29.11 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 340-5. Approval required.
No goods, wares, or merchandise shall be sold, rented or leased, or shall
be exposed for sale, rental or leasing, or otherwise displayed for any other
commercial reason, on any streets, sidewalks, or in any other public or
private outdoor area without the approval of the Village Manager, except as
otherwise provided in the Village Code.
§ 340-6. Criteria for approval.
In determining whether or not to approve applications received under this
article, the Village Manager shall consider:
§ 340-7. Exceptions. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
Excepted from the provisions of this article shall be goods, wares or
merchandise on display and sold at rummage sales, yard sales, garage
sales, estate sales, sales of motor vehicles by nondealers, and sales by
institutions in the F Institutional District as established by Chapter 745,
Zoning, of this Code.
A. The type of merchandise to be displayed;
B. Location of the display;
C. Proposed duration of the display;
D. Whether or not the display will have an adverse effect upon the
appearance of the neighborhood or area where located;
E. Whether or not the display will have an adverse effect on adjacent
property values;
F. Whether or not the display will impede or interfere with the safe
passage of pedestrians or motor vehicles;
G. Whether or not the display will create a public nuisance in the area;
H. Such other matters as may be deemed relevant and material.
§ 340-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-7
1:249

ARTICLE III
Business Hours
[Adopted 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-567 (§ 29.09 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 340-8. Legislative findings.
The Village Board of the Village of Fox Point hereby finds as a fact that the
conducting of retail business between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. increases
the likelihood of robbery and other criminal activity and that the mandatory
closing of such business establishments between such hours will promote
public safety and therefore legislation to this effect is necessary and in the
public interest.
§ 340-9. Prohibited hours.
No person, firm, corporation or other organization shall conduct retail
business between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 340-10. Exceptions. [Amended 3-9-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
A. This article shall not be applicable to restaurants, movie theaters, nor
any business where other specific hour restrictions are either imposed
or allowed by state law.
B. The regulation of § 340-9 does not apply to the Friday immediately
following Thanksgiving Day in individual cases, where allowed for
particular operations by conditional use and operational plans. For
purposes of this subsection, "Thanksgiving" shall be as defined in
§ 995.20, Wis. Stats. [Amended 9-10-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-09]
§ 340-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-10
1:251

ARTICLE IV
Minimum Staffing Requirements
[Adopted 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-636 (§ 29.095 of the 1961
Code)]
§ 340-11. Legislative findings.
The Village Board of the Village of Fox Point hereby finds as a fact that a
minimum staffing requirement for retail stores at night decreases the risk
of homicide in the workplace and makes retail stores unattractive for armed
robbery.
§ 340-12. Staffing.
A. All retail stores, except as described in Subsection B below, open to the
public after the hour of 9:00 p.m. shall have a minimum staff of two
employees, including one employee over 18 years of age, on duty until
the store is closed.
B. Retail stores in excess of 35,000 square feet open to the public after the
hour of 9:00 p.m. shall have a minimum staff of three employees,
including one employee over 18 years of age, on duty until the store is
closed.
C. The term "retail store" is defined as any store or shop in which retail
sales is the principal business conducted and includes, but is not limited
to, restaurants, gasoline service stations, movie theaters, laundries,
and dry cleaners.
§ 340-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-12
1:253

ARTICLE V
Weights and Measures
[Adopted 4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
§ 340-13. Appointment of Sealer; reports and records.
The Village Sealer shall be the State Department of Agriculture, Trade and
Consumer Protection. The Sealer shall have all of the authority described in
§ 98.05, Wis. Stats.
§ 340-14. Adoption of state and federal standards.
The following federal standards, Wisconsin Statutes and state rules are
adopted by reference and shall be enforced under this chapter, with
violations of such provisions subject to the penalties set forth in § 1-4 of the
Village Code:
A. Chapter 98, Weights and Measures, Wis. Stats.
B. Chapter ATCP 90, Fair Packaging and Labeling, Wis. Adm. Code.
C. Chapter ATCP 91, Selling Commodities by Weight, Measure or Count,
Wis. Adm. Code.
D. Chapter ATCP 109, Freezer Meat and Food Service Plans, Wis. Adm.
Code.
E. Chapter ATCP 92, Weights and Measures, Wis. Adm. Code.
F. Sections of Ch. 97, Wis. Stats., pertaining to product labeling,
specifically including the following:
(1) Section 97.03, Standards; misbranding.
(2) Section 97.07, Interpretation.
(3) Section 97.09, Rules.
(4) Section 97.12, Enforcement.
G. Sections of Ch. 100, Wis. Stats., pertaining to advertising, specifically
including § 100.18, Fraudulent representations, and § 100.183, Fraud,
advertising foods.
H. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Handbook 44,
United States Department of Commerce, Specifications, Tolerances and
Other Technical Requirements and Commercial Weighing and
Measuring Devices.
I. Chapter ATCP 124, Price Comparison Advertising, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 340-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-15
1:255
§ 340-15. Violations.
Whoever does any of the following acts shall be subject to the penalty
provided in § 1-4 of the Village Code:
§ 340-16. Cost recovery.
The Village Sealer is professional staff of the Village, and costs incurred by
the Village pursuant to this Chapter 340, Article V, may be charged to the
owner of the property subject to inspection, per Chapter 67, Article III, of
the Village Code.
A. Hinders, obstructs or impersonates the Sealer.
B. Uses or has in possession for use in buying or selling any commodity or
service or sells any incorrect weight or measure.
C. Represents in any manner a false quantity or price in connection with
the purchase or sale, or any advertising thereof, of any commodity,
thing or service.
D. Uses or disposes of any rejected weight or measure commodity or
removes therefrom any official tag, seal, stamp or mark without written
authority from the Sealer.
E. Uses any weighing or measuring device in determining the quantity of
any commodity or service to be sold or purchased without having the
device approved and sealed by the Sealer and the proper certificate
obtained in accordance with § 27.08, Wis. Stats.
F. Violates any other provision of this chapter.
§ 340-15 FOX POINT CODE § 340-16
1:256
Chapter 362
FARMERS MARKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation licenses and
permits — See Ch. 375.
§ 362-1. License required.
No person shall, directly or indirectly, offer for sale, distribute, or sell
produce or value-added products as defined in this chapter unless such
activity is conducted within a duly licensed farmers market pursuant to this
chapter. The foregoing notwithstanding, a farmers market license is not
required for restaurants, grocery stores or other retail operations where
the principal use of the property includes sale of produce, food and/or
value added products, provided that such operations are properly zoned and
operated in compliance with applicable laws.
§ 362-2. Application for license.
The application for a farmers market license shall be made in writing on a
form provided for such purpose by the Village, on which shall be stated:
§ 362-3. License prohibited for delinquent taxes.
No farmers market license as defined in this chapter shall be:
A. The name or names and address of the applicant, and if a corporation or
association, the names and addresses of the officers and managers, and
if a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners, and the
location of the principal office or residence of the applicant;
B. The location and type of proposed food service establishment in the
Village of Fox Point; and
C. Such other information as the Village of Fox Point shall require.
A. Approved for any applicant who is:
(1) Delinquent in the payment of any real property taxes, assessments,
special assessments, sanitary sewer assessments, personal
property taxes, special charges, professional fee reimbursements,
or other claim owed to the Village of Fox Point.
(2) Delinquent in the payment of a forfeiture resulting from the
violation of any ordinance of the Village of Fox Point.
B. Issued for any premises or property for which real property taxes,
assessments, special assessments, sanitary sewer assessments,
§ 340-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-3
1:257
§ 362-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD — Includes all items used for food, drink, or condiment, whether
simple, mixed, or compounded, and items used or intended for use as
ingredients in the composition or preparation of food and shall include meat
and meat products, poultry and poultry products and dairy products. "Food"
shall include fruits and vegetables, commonly known as produce, only to the
extent such products have been processed, canned, packaged, or otherwise
prepared for sale other than in their natural grown state.
PRODUCE — Includes fruits and vegetables in an unprocessed form, offered
for sale in the same condition and state as harvested, excepting any
wrapping, or packaging which does not alter their naturally grown state or
condition.
VALUE-ADDED PRODUCTS — Bakery goods, beverages, cheese, dog
biscuits, eggs, flowers, herbs, herb products, honey, maple syrup, meat,
plants, popcorn, poultry, soap and sorghum.
§ 362-5. Farmers market restrictions.
Farmers market operations are subject to the following restrictions:
personal property taxes, special charges, professional fee
reimbursements or other claims of the Village of Fox Point are
delinquent and unpaid.
A. Location. A farmers market may be conducted at such places as
designated by the Village Board, including Village property.
B. Vendors. Vendors at a farmers market must rent or own the land on
which the products are grown.
C. Produce. Produce sold at a farmers market must be planted,
maintained, harvested, and marketed by the vendor, or the vendor's
family member(s) or the vendor's paid employee(s).
D. License. A farmers market will be conducted under a license issued to a
single individual or entity conducting the market. The farmers market
licensee may allow additional vendors to operate within the farmers
market, provided that the licensee is responsible for ensuring that the
vendors comply with the requirements of this Code and all applicable
laws.
E. Term. Farmers market licenses shall have a one-year duration
commencing January 1 and terminating December 31. The rules and
regulations of the farmers market may further limit the commencement
and termination of the farmers market operation.
§ 362-3 FOX POINT CODE § 362-5
1:258
§ 362-6. Prohibited activities.
No person shall manufacture, prepare for sale, expose for sale, transfer,
sell, or deliver food or produce unless such is securely protected from
filth, flies, dust, or contamination or unclean, unhealthful, or unsanitary
conditions. No person shall keep for sale, offer for sale, sell, transfer,
or deliver any drugs not conforming to the rules and standards of the
United States Pharmacopoeia. No person shall manufacture, prepare for
sale, expose for sale, transfer, sell, or deliver any water, liquids, ice, or food
or produce which shall be impure, unwholesome, adulterated, or to which
any harmful or injurious foreign substance has been added.
§ 362-7. Display of license.
All persons licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall immediately
post the license in some conspicuous part of the premises on which the
F. Fees. The Village Board, from time to time, may establish a fee that
applies for the issuance of a farmers market license. No farmers market
license shall be issued until the applicable fee is paid.
G. Rules and regulations. The licensee shall submit to the Village Manager
the licensee's rules and regulations that the licensee will enforce
regarding the operation of the farmers market. The farmers market
operation shall not commence unless and until the rules and regulations
are approved in writing by the Village Manager. If approved, no
revisions shall be made thereto absent the written approval of the
Village Manager. The rules and regulations shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following requirements:
(1) Persons selling must be family members, paid employees, or paid
independent contractors. No brokers, agents or commissioned
sellers may sell produce at the market.
(2) All vendors must hold and display required local and state licenses.
(3) Vendors, prior to participation, shall agree in writing to protect,
indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the Village of Fox Point, its
boards, commissions, officers, employees and agents, from and
against any causes of action, claims, demands, suits, liability, or
expense by reason of loss or damage to any property or bodily
injury to any person, including death, as a direct or indirect result
of use of any rented or occupied market space or in connection with
any action or omission of the vendor. This written document shall
be in a form approved by the Village Manager, and shall be
provided to the Village Clerk/Treasurer prior to the vendor's
participation at the farmers market.
(4) Such additional rules and regulations as may be required by the
Village Manager.
§ 362-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-7
1:259
business is carried on, and such license shall remain posted during the
period for which the license is in force.
§ 362-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in § 1-4 of the Municipal Code.
Chapter 375
FOOD, LODGING AND RECREATIONAL SAFETY AND
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Farmers markets — See Ch. 362.
§ 375-1. North Shore Health Department; authority and
organization.
A. Authority and purpose. This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority
provided by § 97.41, Wis. Stats., which authorizes local health
departments to become the designated agent of the State Department
of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection (ATCP) for the purpose
of issuing permits, making investigations or inspections and enforcing
the applicable state administrative codes for the operations of retail
food establishments, restaurants, hotels and motels, tourist rooming
houses, bed-and-breakfast establishments, campgrounds, recreational
and educational camps, tattoo and body piercing establishments, public
swimming pools, and establishments possessing Class A, Class B, or
Class C alcohol beverage licenses (for sanitation and health purposes
and not alcohol licensing purposes); and in making investigations and
inspections of food vending machines, their operators, vending machine
commissaries, and the National School Lunch and School Breakfast
Program and establishing permit and inspection fees related to the
inspections and issuance of such permits. The local health department,
acting through the environmental health consortium, will be required to
enter into a contract with the ATCP regarding the powers and duties
that it will be authorized to perform under the applicable statutes, this
chapter and the contract.
B. North Shore Health Department authorized. The North Shore Health
Department shall provide public health services for the Village of Fox
Point pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement between the Village
of Fox Point and other North Shore municipalities, as such agreement
may be amended from time to time, and it shall be the Village of Fox
Point Health Department.
C. Board of Health.
§ 362-7 FOX POINT CODE § 375-1
1:260
(1) Creation. The North Shore Health Department Board of Health
shall be the Board of Health for the Village of Fox Point.
(2) Composition.
(a) The Board of Health shall consist of one representative from
the Villages of Bayside, Brown Deer, Fox Point, River Hills,
Shorewood and Whitefish Bay and the City of Glendale. Each
community's representative to the Board of Health shall serve
for a term of two years. The medical officer shall be a member
of the North Shore Health Department Board and be appointed
by the Board of Health for a two-year term. The health officer
to the North Shore Health Department shall be staff
representative to the board.
(b) Each person appointed to represent a municipality shall have
demonstrated interest or competence in the field of public
health or community health. Appointments made to the Board
of Health shall consist of no more than eight members, and at
least three of these members shall be persons who are not
elected officials or employees of the governing bodies. A good
faith effort shall be made to appoint a registered nurse and a
physician. The Board of Health should reflect the diversity of
constituents served.
(3) Appointment of Village representative. The Village of Fox Point's
representative shall be appointed by the Village President for a
two-year term, subject to confirmation by the Village Board of
Trustees.
(4) Selection of officers. The Board of Health shall annually elect a
chair and clerk at its first meeting of each calendar year. The
director of the North Shore Health Department or his/her designee
shall record minutes for Board of Health meetings.
(5) Meetings. All meetings of the North Shore Health Department
Board of Health shall be properly posted and notice given in
accordance with Wisconsin's Open Meeting Law.44 Meetings shall
be held at least quarterly. The Board of Health may meet more
often, on an as-needed basis, at the call of the chair, so long as the
meeting is properly posted and notice given in accordance with
§ 19.84, Wis. Stats.
(6) Jurisdiction and duties.
(a) The Board of Health shall govern the North Shore Health
Department and ensure the enforcement of state public health
statutes and public health rules of the department, subject to
the Agreement for Public Health Services, North Shore Health
44.Editor's Note: See §§ 19.81 to 19.98, Wis. Stats.
§ 375-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-1
1:261
§ 375-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the owner, operator or agents
thereof of any hotels, motel, tourist rooming house, restaurant, food
establishment, bed-and-breakfast establishment, campground, recreational
and educational camp, public swimming pool, tattoo and body piercing
establishment, establishment possessing Class A, Class B, or Class C alcohol
beverage licenses, vending machine commissaries or vending machines and
the National School Lunch and School Breakfast Program in the Village.
§ 375-3. Regulations, rules and laws adopted by reference.
The applicable laws, rules, definitions and regulations as sets forth in
Chs. 97, 125, 251, and 254, Wis. Stats; Chs. ATCP 72, 73, 74, 75, 76,
78, and 79 Wis. Admin. Code, and SPS 390, Wis. Admin. Code, and any
future amendments thereof, are hereby incorporated herein and adopted by
reference and shall be made available for public inspection.
§ 375-4. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DEPARTMENT or LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The North Shore
Health Department.
Department and applicable ordinances of each participating
municipality.
(b) Specifically, the Board of Health shall:
[1] Assist in determining public health needs and advocate for
the provision of reasonable and necessary public health
services.
[2] Develop policy and provide leadership that fosters local
involvement and commitment, that emphasizes public
health needs and that advocates equitable distribution of
public health resources and complementary private
activities commensurate with public health needs.
[3] Ensure conformance with the Agreement for Public Health
Services, North Shore Health Department.
[4] Assure that measures are taken to provide an environment
in which individuals can be healthy.
[5] Assure that the North Shore Health Department is a Level
II or III health department, as specified in § 251.04(1) and
(2), Wis. Stats.
§ 375-1 FOX POINT CODE § 375-4
1:262
DUPLICATE PERMIT FEE — A fee for the replacement of the original
permit.
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH CONSORTIUM — The North Shore Health
Department, for the purposes set forth in § 375-1A.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Director of the North Shore Health Department,
which is the health department for the Village.
INSPECTION FEE — A fee charged for inspection services required or
a fee charged for inspecting a mobile food establishment or temporary
food establishment that has a valid license from another jurisdiction or the
Department.
LATE FEE — A fee for failure to pay established fees by June 30 or the due
date, if different.
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment that has a current and
valid license that is required under this chapter.
PERMIT or LICENSE — The document issued by the Department that
authorizes a person to operate an establishment. The terms "permit" and
"license," as used throughout this chapter, shall be interchangeable.
PREINSPECTION FEE — A fee paid for an inspection made before issuance
of an initial permit or when there is a change of operator.
REINSPECTION — A mandatory inspection to ensure that priority, critical
or recurring violations have been corrected, including:
REINSPECTION FEE — A fee for this chapter and subsequent reinspections
needed to address compliance issues with the statutes and administrative
codes.
ROUTINE INSPECTION — The annual evaluation of a licensee's operation
of its establishment.
§ 375-5. Enforcement and right to enter premises.
After the regulatory authority presents official credentials and provides
notice of the purpose of, and an intent to, conduct an inspection, the
person in charge shall allow the regulatory authority to determine if the
establishment is in compliance with applicable codes by allowing access
to the establishment, allowing inspection, and providing information and
An observed violation of immediate danger to public health (priority or
critical) that is not corrected during the inspection;
A.
B. Six or more priority (critical) violations observed and noted;
Repeat violations noted during two previous inspections (three
consecutive times); or
C.
With consultation from a supervisor, an excessive number of violations
that show a lack of managerial control observed during an inspection.
D.
§ 375-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-5
1:263
records to which the regulatory authority is entitled according to law,
during the establishments hours of operation and other reasonable times.
§ 375-6. Obstruction of Health Department employees.
No person may assault, restrain, threaten, intimidate, impede, interfere
with or otherwise obstruct the Department or authorized agent in the
performance of his duties under this chapter, and the operator shall not give
false information with the intent to mislead the Department or authorized
agent.
A. If the person in charge denies access to the regulatory authority, the
regulatory authority shall:
(1) Inform the person in charge that:
(a) The permit holder is required to allow access to the regulatory
authority as specified under § 375-5 of this chapter.
(b) Access is a condition of the acceptance and retention of an
establishment's permit to operate as specified under § 375-11.
(c) If access is denied, an order issued by the appropriate
authority allowing access, hereinafter referred to as an
"inspection order," may be obtained according to law.
(2) Make a final request for access.
B. If denied access to an establishment for an authorized purpose and
after complying with Subsection A(2) of this section, the regulatory
authority may apply for the issuance of an inspection order to gain
access as provided in law.
C. The regulatory authority may order access for one or more of the
following purposes, subject to law for gaining access:
(1) If admission to the premises of an establishment is denied or other
circumstances exist that would justify an inspection order under
law, to make an inspection, including taking photographs;
(2) To examine and take samples of the food; and
(3) To examine the records on the premises relating to food purchased,
received, or used by the establishment.
D. The regulatory authority's inspection order shall:
(1) Stipulate that access be allowed on or to the described premises,
food, or records under the order's provision;
(2) Provide a description that specifies the premises, food or records
subject to the order; and
(3) Specify areas to be accessed and activities to be performed.
§ 375-5 FOX POINT CODE § 375-7
1:264
§ 375-7. Licensing.
§ 375-8. Sanitation regulations applicable regardless of license
exemption.
Statutory exemptions from the requirement to obtain a food license do not
exclude any person handling food for public consumption from inspection
and compliance with all sanitation requirements of this chapter, and said
person shall pay all necessary fees as they pertain to the fee schedule
associated with such action.
§ 375-9. Application.
All applicants must apply on forms furnished by the Department. All
applications for permits shall be made in writing to the Department where
the business is located. All applications shall list the true, legal names of
the owners or operators of the business, including partners and managing
members of limited-liability companies and the addresses. All corporations
and limited-liability companies applying for licensure shall be registered
with the state, and the name of the registered agent shall be placed on
the application. The agent's name and address shall be kept current. The
applicant shall provide documents which reflect the aforementioned
registration to the Department. The Department shall either approve the
application or deny the permit within 30 days after receipt of a complete
application.
§ 375-10. Construction or alteration of food establishments.
A. No person may operate or provide the services, food or other products
that require a license under this chapter without first having obtained a
current and valid license.
B. No permit shall be granted to any person under this chapter without a
preinspection by the Department of the premises for which the permit
shall be granted.
C. No permit shall be issued until all application fees have been paid.
D. A food vendor may be exempt from licensing if the vendor has obtained
a valid mobile retail food license from the Department of Agriculture,
Trade and Consumer Protection and is able to provide a copy of the
license to the North Shore Health Department.
E. A food vendor may be exempt from licensing if the vendor has obtained
a valid processing plant license for nonpotentially hazardous,
prepackaged food which pertains specifically to the items that are to be
sold and is able to provide a copy of the license to the North Shore
Health Department.
A. No person shall erect, construct, enlarge or alter a food establishment
without first submitting to the Department or its designee plans
(drawings) which clearly show and describe the amount and character
§ 375-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-10
1:265
§ 375-11. Inspection and reinspection.
of the work proposed and without first receiving approval of submitted
plans. Such plans shall include a floor plan, equipment plan and
specifications, wall, floor and ceiling finishes, and plans and
specifications for food service kitchen ventilation and plumbing, an
intended menu, anticipated volume of food to be stored, prepared, and
sold or served, HACCP (hazard analysis critical control points) plans,
variance requests and standard procedures that ensure compliance
with the Wisconsin Food Code. Submitted plans shall give all
information necessary to show compliance with applicable health
codes. Submitted plans shall be retained by the Department or its
designee and shall treat as confidential, in accordance with law,
information that meets the criteria specified in law for a trade secret
and is contained on inspection report forms and in plans and
specifications submitted.
B. At the option of the Department or its designee, plans need not be
submitted to execute minor alterations to a food establishment.
Approved plans shall not be changed or modified unless approval of
such changes or modifications shall have first been obtained from the
Department or its designee.
A. Except as specified in Subsection B of this section, a permit holder shall
at the time of the inspection correct a violation of a priority item or
priority foundation item of the Food Code, or any item of critical nature
within the applicable code associated with license held by that
establishment, or if deemed critical by the regulatory authority and
implement corrective actions.
B. Considering the nature of the potential hazard involved and the
complexity of the corrective action needed, the regulatory authority
may agree to or specify a longer time frame as specified in policy for
critical, priority, priority foundation, and core items.
C. At the conclusion of the inspection, the regulatory authority shall
provide a copy of the completed inspection report and the notice to
correct violations to the permit holder or to the person in charge and
request a signed acknowledgement of receipt. If the permit holder or
the person in charge refuses to sign acknowledgment the regulatory
authority shall:
(1) Inform the person who declines to sign an acknowledgement of
receipt of inspectional findings that a signature does not represent
agreement with findings;
(2) Refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt will not affect the
permit holder's obligation to correct the violations noted in the
inspection report within the time frames specified; and
§ 375-10 FOX POINT CODE § 375-11
1:266
§ 375-12. Hold order, warning or hearing not required.
The regulatory authority may issue a hold order, according to policy, to a
permit holder or to a person who owns or controls the food, as specified
previously in this chapter, without prior warning, notice of a hearing, or a
hearing on the hold order.
§ 375-13. Procedure for issuing new or renewal license.
(3) Make a final request that the permit holder or the person in charge
sign an acknowledgment receipt of inspectional findings.
D. As a condition of license renewal, all establishments licensed under this
chapter shall consent to an annual inspection and reinspection. License
renewal may be withheld pending inspection, reinspection and
compliance with these regulations.
E. Whenever an order or directive is issued on a health code violation
which requires a reinspection to determine compliance, one
reinspection shall be made without charge in a timely manner as
determined by local policy and documented by the Department
following the time period given in the order or directive. If, upon the
first reinspection, the order or directive is found not to have been
complied with and additional reinspections are required, a fee shall be
assessed to the responsible party for each additional reinspection to
compensate for the costs of such reinspections. Payment is due on
written demand from the Department.
A. According to time limits imposed by § 97.12, Wis. Stats., the regulatory
authority may place a hold order on a food that:
(1) Originated from an unapproved source;
(2) May be unsafe, adulterated, or not honestly presented;
(3) Is not labeled according to law or, if raw molluscan shellfish, is not
tagged or labeled according to law; or
(4) Is otherwise not in compliance with this chapter.
B. If the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to believe that the hold
order will be violated, or finds that the order is violated, the regulatory
authority may remove the food that is subject to the order to a place of
safekeeping.
A. The Department shall issue a license to each applicant for a new or
renewal license that meets all the requirements of this chapter and has
paid to the Department all applicable fees.
B. If an applicant for a permit to operate is denied, the regulatory
authority shall provide the applicant with a notice that includes:
(1) The specific reasons and code citations for the permit denial;
§ 375-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-13
1:267
§ 375-14. Nonpayment of fees.
§ 375-15. Changes to be reported.
§ 375-16. Ceasing operations and reporting.
Whenever the Department or permit holder finds a condition in a licensed
establishment which is determined to be a direct and immediate hazard
to public health such as fire, flood, extended interruption of electrical or
water service, sewage backup, misuse of poisonous or toxic materials, onset
of an apparent foodborne illness outbreak, gross insanitary occurrence
or condition, or other circumstances that may endanger public health,
the permit may be suspended without notice or warning or the permit
holder shall immediately discontinue operations and notify the regulatory
authority.
(2) The actions, if any, that the applicant must take to qualify for a
permit; and
(3) Advisement of the applicant's right of appeal and the process and
time frames for appeal that are provided in law.
A. A license will not be issued until all applicable fees, late fees and
processing charges are paid.
B. No license shall be issued to any person who owes the Village for
overdue forfeitures, unpaid real or personal property taxes,
assessments or special charges, late fees, or license fees relating to a
current or previous licensed establishment until all such outstanding
amounts are paid.
C. No license shall be issued for any premises or property for which there
are outstanding real or personal property taxes, assessments or special
charges, late fees, or license fees relating to a current or previous
licensed establishment until all such outstanding amounts are paid.
A. A licensee shall notify the Department whenever there is a change in
any information that is reported in the application form. The licensee
shall make this notification, in writing, within five days after the change
occurs.
B. The owner of any premises for which a license has been granted shall
promptly notify the Departments, in writing, of their intention to cease
operations.
A. If operations are discontinued, the permit holder shall obtain approval
from the regulatory authority before resuming operations.
B. A permit holder need not discontinue operations in an area of an
establishment that is unaffected by the imminent health hazard as
deemed so by the regulatory authority.
§ 375-13 FOX POINT CODE § 375-17
1:268
§ 375-17. Suspension of permit or license.
Whenever the Department has reasonable grounds to believe there are
violations that constitute a health hazard that are serious but not an
immediate threat to the public health, or for recurring or repeated
violations, a permit may be suspended if the Department: serves a written
notice of the violations and corrective actions required to the licensee, the
agent or employee in charge of the licensed premises, which shall specify
a reasonable time limit for any corrective action required and indicate an
inspection shall be made to certify that reasons for the suspension have
been eliminated and that the permit holder may request an appeal hearing
by submitting a timely request as specified in § 375-21.
§ 375-18. Reinstatement of a suspended license.
The license holder whose license has been suspended may at any time
request reinstatement of the license. Accompanied by a signed statement
by the applicant that the violations have been corrected, within seven
days after the request for reinspection, the Department or its designee
shall make a reinspection and thereafter as many additional reinspections
deemed necessary to assure that the applicant has complied with the
requirements. If the findings indicate compliance, the Department may
reinstate the license.
§ 375-19. Revocation of license.
For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this chapter,
or for interference with the health officer or his designee in the
performance of their duties, the health officer or his designee may
permanently revoke the license issued under this chapter. Prior to such
actions, the health officer shall notify the license holder, in writing, stating
the reasons for which the license is revoked. When a license is revoked, the
owner or operator shall turn over the license to the health officer or his
designee and cease operations immediately.
§ 375-20. Reapplication of a revoked license.
A person whose license has been revoked may, at any time, make
reapplication for a revoked license. Within seven days after the receipt
of satisfactory application, accompanied by a signed statement by the
applicant that the violations have been corrected, the Department or its
designee shall make a reinspection and thereafter as many additional
A. Upon notification of suspension, the permit must be surrendered to the
Department until the time of reissuance.
B. The Department may suspend any permit or license issued under this
chapter upon failure to pay any fees due under this chapter. The
Department will notify the permit holder, in writing, that the permit has
been suspended and the reason why. The suspension will continue until
payment of all past due fees.
§ 375-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-20
1:269
reinspections as deemed necessary to assure that the applicant has
complied with the requirements. If the findings indicate compliance, the
Department may reinstate the license.
§ 375-21. Appeal.
Any person refused or denied a license or who has had a license revoked or
suspended or wishes to dispute any order issued by the regulatory authority
may appeal through the appeal procedure provided under the provisions of
§§ 68.07 through 68.16, Wis. Stats.
§ 375-22. Rights of recipients of orders or decisions.
A recipient of an order or decision may file a petition for judicial review
in a court of competent jurisdiction after available administrative appeal
remedies are exhausted.
§ 375-23. Conditions warranting remedy.
§ 375-24. Violation of this chapter.
A. The regulatory authority may seek administrative or judicial remedy to
achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter if an
establishment:
(1) Fails to have a valid permit to operate;
(2) Violates any term or condition of a permit as specified within this
chapter;
(3) Allows serious or repeated code violations to remain uncorrected
beyond time frames for correction approved, directed, or ordered
by the regulatory authority;
(4) Fails to comply with a regulatory authority order issued concerning
an employee or conditional employee suspected of having a disease
transmissible through food by infected persons;
(5) Fails to comply with a hold order;
(6) Fails to comply with an order issued as of a hearing for an
administrative remedy;
(7) Fails to comply with a summary of suspension order issued by the
regulatory authority.
A. No person shall violate any provisions of this chapter.
B. The Department or its designee shall enforce any provision of this
chapter, and the enforcement provisions of the statutes or state
administrative code sections adopted by this chapter and Ch. 93, Wis.
Stats., Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
which are hereby incorporated herein as though fully set forth
§ 375-20 FOX POINT CODE § 375-24
1:270
§ 375-25. Compliance and enforcement.
§ 375-26. Fees.
pertaining to the authority for compliance and enforcement of these
provisions: Ch. ATCP 75, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. If, upon inspection, the Department or its designee finds that any
licensed or unlicensed establishment is conducted or managed in
violation of the ordinances or regulations of the Village, laws of the
state, or regulation of any agency of the state prescribing standards of
health or sanitation, the Department or its designee shall serve a
written order upon the licensee, his agent or employee in charge of the
licensed premises or the person responsible for the violation, notifying
him of such violations.
B. In extreme cases where a violation poses an immediate health hazard as
determined by the Department or its designee or in the case of
repeating occurrences of the same violation by the same person, the
actions specified in Subsection C of this section may be initiated
immediately.
C. If a person does not comply with a written order from the Department
or its designee, the person may be subject to one or more of the
following actions and/or penalties:
(1) Issuance of a citation. The Department's health officer or any other
person duly authorized by the health officer is authorized pursuant
to § 800.02, Wis. Stats., to issue municipal citations for any
violations of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) A reinspection fee.
(3) Suspension of license.
(4) Revocation of license.
(5) Commencement of legal action against the person seeking a courtimposed
forfeiture.
(6) Commencement of legal action against the person seeking an
injunction to stop, abate the violation and/or correct the damage
created by the violation.
(7) Any other action authorized by this chapter or by other applicable
laws as deemed necessary by the Department or its designee.
(8) The initiation of one action or penalty under this section does not
exempt the apparent violator from any additional actions and/or
penalties listed in this section.
A. Established; location. The fees for licenses, inspections, services and
activities performed by the Department in carrying out its
§ 375-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-26
1:271
§ 375-27. Expiration dates.
§ 375-28. Renewal.
The Department, prior to the expiration date, shall furnish renewal notices.
It is the responsibility of the owner or operator to complete the application
form and pay the appropriate fee before the expiration date of such license.
§ 375-29. Conflicts.
Whenever conflicts between this chapter and other Village ordinances or
state and federal regulations occur, the more stringent rule shall apply.
Chapter 417
responsibilities under the chapter shall be reviewed and approved by
the Village Board and shall be on file and open to the public in the
Department's office and the office of the Village Clerk.
B. Fees to accompany application. License fees imposed under this
chapter shall accompany the license application. The Department shall
issue the applicant a receipt for the license fee.
C. Refunds. No fee paid may be refunded, unless a refund is requested
prior to receiving a completed application or for work not yet
completed.
D. Fees kept separate. All fees shall be accounted for separately and
applied to the expenses under this chapter.
A. All licenses issued under provisions of this chapter shall expire, unless
otherwise ordered by the Department or authorized agent, as follows:
(1) Food/drink: June 30.
(2) Hotel/motel: June 30.
(3) Public swimming pool: June 30.
(4) Boardinghouse/rooming house: December 31.
(5) Bed-and-breakfast: June 30.
(6) Recreational and educational camps: June 30.
(7) Campgrounds: June 30.
(8) Tattoo or body piercing establishment: June 30.
(9) Vending machines: June 30.
B. The licenses shall expire at 12:00 midnight of the last effective day of
the license, unless otherwise provided by this chapter or applicable
provisions of state law.
§ 375-26 FOX POINT CODE § 375-29
1:272
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
§ 375-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-29
1:273

ARTICLE I
Solicitors to Quit Premises
[Adopted by Ord. No. 307 (§ 29.04 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 417-1. Compliance with request to leave; applicability.
No peddler, hawker, trucker, or solicitor, canvasser or transient merchant
shall refuse or fail to leave any private residence, business establishment
or office or other premises in the Village when requested to do so by the
owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises. This
applies not only to a residence or other building but also to all portions of a
lot or parcel of land not occupied by a building.
§ 417-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 417-1
1:275

ARTICLE II
Registration and Permit
[Adopted 9-14-1993 (§§ 31.01 to 31.12 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 417-2. Registration and permit required.
§ 417-3. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Includes any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic, or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation,
or one purporting to be such.
CLERK/TREASURER — The Village of Fox Point Clerk/Treasurer.
MERCHANDISE — Includes personal property of any kind, and shall include
merchandise, goods, or materials provided incidental to services offered
or sold. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the seller
for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer. The sale of
services includes donations required by the seller for obtaining of services
by a donor or prospective customer.
PERMANENT MERCHANT — Any person who for at least one year prior to
the consideration of the application of this article to said merchant:
SOLICITOR — Any person who distributes literature, who is obtaining
information or opinions, who is seeking to obtain contributions of money,
services, property, or financial assistance of any kind, or who is attempting
to promote any cause or conviction.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person who engages in the retail sale of
merchandise or services at any place in this state temporarily, and who does
not intend to become and does not become a permanent occupant of such
place.
A. It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in sales or
sales activities within the Village of Fox Point without first registering
and obtaining a permit as provided herein.
B. A solicitor is not required to register and to obtain a permit but must
observe the regulations of activities as provided in § 417-9, Subsections
A(1) through (5) and B(1).
Has continuously operated an established place of business in this
Village or in the local trade area among the communities bordering the
Village of Fox Point; or
A.
Has continuously resided in this Village and now does business from
his/her residence.
B.
§ 417-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 417-4
1:277
§ 417-4. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from registration and permit under §§ 417-2A
and 417-5 of this article:
A. Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products, laundry, or
bakery goods, or other goods or services requested by regular
customers on established routes. A person under this exemption shall
be free of the time restrictions in § 417-9A(1);
B. Any person selling merchandise wholesale to dealers in such
merchandise. A person under this exemption shall be free of the time
restrictions in § 417-9A(1);
C. Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away
from the established place of business for merchandise regularly
offered for sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers
such merchandise in his/her regular course of business;
D. Any person who has an established place of business where the
merchandise being sold is offered for sale on a regular basis, and in
which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested a
home visit by, said person;
E. Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has
had, a prior business transaction for the same or similar goods or
services, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the
prospective customer;
F. Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court
and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law;
G. Any employee, officer, or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for or on behalf of said organization, provided
that there is submitted to the Fox Point Police Department proof that
such charitable organization is registered under § 440.42, Wisconsin
Statutes. Any charitable organization engaging in the sale of
merchandise or services and not registered under § 440.41, Wisconsin
Statutes, or which is exempt from that statute's registration
requirements, shall be required to register and obtain permits under
this article;
H. Any person holding an occasional rummage, household or estate sale on
his or her own property;
I. Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant but against whom
complaint has been made to the Village Clerk/Treasurer that such
person is a transient merchant; provided that there is submitted to the
Village Clerk/Treasurer proof that such person has leased for at least
one year, or purchased, the premises from which he/she has conducted
business in the Village for at least one year prior to the date the
complaint was made;
§ 417-4 FOX POINT CODE § 417-4
1:278
§ 417-5. Registration. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08;
3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
J. Any person selling or offering for sale on behalf of a nonprofit
organization sponsored by or affiliated with any public, private, or
parochial school located within the Village or immediately adjacent
municipalities;
K. Any person selling or offering for sale on behalf of a civic nonprofit
organization sponsored by or affiliated with an athletic sport, if such
organization has members who are residents of Fox Point.
L. Transient merchants may be exempt from this article upon specific
authorization of the Village Board only for special events sponsored by
the Village of Fox Point or sponsored for its behalf.
A. Applicants for registration must complete and return a registration
form furnished by the Village of Fox Point Village Clerk, which shall
require the following information:
(1) Name, permanent address, telephone number, and temporary
address, if any.
(2) Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and date of birth.
(3) Name, address, and phone number of the person, firm, association
or corporation that the transient merchant represents or is
employed by, or whose merchandise or services are being sold.
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will
be conducted, if any.
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
merchandise offered and any services offered.
(6) Proposed method of delivery of merchandise, if applicable.
(7) Make, model, and license number of any vehicle to be used by the
applicant in the conduct of his/her business.
(8) Most recent cities, villages, and towns, not to exceed three, where
the applicant conducted similar business just prior to making this
registration.
(9) Place where applicant may be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving this Village.
(10) Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime
or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchant
business within the last five years, and the nature of the offense
and the place of conviction.
(11) Such additional information as the Fox Point Police Department
shall require for the effective enforcement of this article and the
§ 417-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 417-5
1:279
§ 417-6. Investigation.
safeguarding of the residents of the Village from fraud, misconduct,
or abuse.
B. Applicants shall present to the Village Clerk for examination:
(1) A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required to verify the applicant's identity.
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the Sealer of
Weights and Measures where the applicant's business requires use
of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities.
(3) A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business
involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be
certified under state law; such certificate to state that the applicant
is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated
not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for permit is
made.
C. At the time the registration is returned, a fee, as provided in Chapter
63, Fees, shall be paid to the Village Clerk to cover the cost of
processing said registration.
D. The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the Clerk/Treasurer or
his/her agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought
against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the
applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant,
in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served
personally.
A. Upon receipt of each application, the Police Department shall make and
complete an investigation of the statements made in such registration.
The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall endorse approval or
disapproval upon said application within 72 hours after the
investigation has been completed.
B. The Police Department shall refuse to register the applicant if it is
determined, pursuant to the investigation above, that: the application
contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement; any
complaint of a material nature has been received against the applicant
by authorities in any of the most recent cites, villages and towns, not
exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business; the
applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance
violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly
related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or the
applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of § 417-5
above.
§ 417-5 FOX POINT CODE § 417-6
1:280
§ 417-7. Appeal.
Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal
procedure provided by the Fox Point Board of Appeals.
§ 417-8. Permit.
§ 417-9. Regulation of transient merchants and solicitors.
C. If the applicant's registration is approved, the Police Department shall
immediately register the applicant. Registration is valid from date of
issuance to the following May 31.
A. If the applicant is successfully registered, a permit shall be issued upon
payment of the permit fee, as provided in Chapter 63, Fees, and shall
expire on the following May 31.45
B. Permits shall be consecutively numbered, shall bear the name of the
Village, the words "Transient Merchant's Permit," the name and
address of the permit holder, and if said permit holder is employed by
another, the name and address of the employer, the date of expiration of
the permit, and such further information as the Police Department shall
require for the effective enforcement of this article.
C. Every person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this article
shall at all times while engaging within the Village in the activities
permitted have such permit upon his/her person, and on request of any
police officer or any person contacted within the Village in the course of
conducting the permitted activity shall exhibit the permit to whomever
person making a request therefor.
D. No permit holder shall in any respect alter or mutilate the permit or
allow the same nor use the same.
E. No permit holder shall loan his permit to another person or permit any
other person to make any use whatsoever of his/her permit.
F. No person shall use a permit not issued to him/her, nor shall any person
use a permit after the expiration date or revocation.
G. No permit holder whose permit has been revoked shall make
application for a permit until a period of at least six months has elapsed
since the last previous revocation unless he or she can show that the
reason for such rejection or revocation no longer exists.
A. Prohibited practices.
(1) A transient merchant and a solicitor shall be prohibited from:
calling at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by appointment; calling at any time at
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 417-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 417-9
1:281
any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the
words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," "No Trespass," or words of
a similar meaning; calling at any time at any door other than the
front door of any dwelling place; or remaining on any premises
after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant, or other person
having authority over such premises.
(2) A transient merchant and a solicitor shall not misrepresent or make
false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality,
quantity, or characteristics of any merchandise or services offered
for sale, the purpose of his/her visit, his/her identity or the identity
of the organization he/she represents. A charitable organization
transient merchant shall specifically disclose what portion of the
sale price of merchandise or services being offered will actually be
used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is
soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the
sale price of the merchandise or services.
(3) No transient merchant or solicitor shall impede the free use of
sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. All traffic and
parking regulations shall be observed.
(4) No transient merchant or solicitor shall make any loud noises or
use any sound-amplifying device to attract customers or attention if
the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a onehundred-
foot radius of the source.
(5) No transient merchant or solicitor shall allow rubbish or litter to
accumulate in or around the area in which he/she is visiting.
B. Disclosure requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to
a prospect, a transient merchant and a solicitor shall expressly
disclose his/her name, the name of the company or organization he/
she is affiliated with, if any, and the reason or nature of solicitation
and/or the product or service for sale.
(2) If any sale of merchandise is made by a transient merchant or any
sales order for the later delivery of merchandise is taken by the
seller, the buyer, shall have the right to cancel said transaction if it
involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more
than $25, in accordance with the procedure as set forth in
§ 423.203, Wisconsin Statutes; the seller shall give the buyer two
copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall
conform to the requirements of § 423.203(1)(a), (b), and (c), (2) and
(3), Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) If the transient merchant takes a sales order for the later delivery
of merchandise or services, he/she shall, at the time the order is
taken, provide the buyer with a written statement containing the
terms of the agreement, the amount paid in advance, whether full,
§ 417-9 FOX POINT CODE § 417-9
1:282
§ 417-10. Records.
The Chief of Police shall report to the Clerk/Treasurer all complaints and
convictions for violation of this article and the Clerk/Treasurer shall note
such complaints and convictions on the record of the permit holder.
§ 417-11. Revocation.
§ 417-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person adjudged in violation of any provision of this article shall forfeit
not less than $25 nor more than $1,500 for each violation, per day, plus
costs of prosecution. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
partial or no advance payment is made, the balance owing, the
name, address and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or
performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided
and, if so, the terms thereof.
A. Registration and the permit may be revoked by the Chief of Police after
notice and a hearing, if the permit holder made any material omission
or materially inaccurate statements in the application for registration,
made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or
representation in the course of engaging in transient sales, violated any
provision of this article, or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or
statutory violation which is directly related to the permit holder's
fitness to engage in selling.
B. Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally upon the permit
holder or pursuant to § 417-5D above on the permit holder at least 72
hours prior to the time set for the hearing; such notice shall contain the
time and place of hearing and a statement of the acts upon which the
hearing will be based. Appeal may be taken to the Fox Point Board of
Appeals.
§ 417-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 417-12
1:283
Part IV: General Regulations
Chapter 441
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 781.
§ 441-1. Findings.
The installation of electrical or mechanical systems known as burglar
alarms or fire alarms in buildings in the Village is increasing. Through
carelessness, improper maintenance, or other causes, a large number of
false alarms are being received from such alarm systems. Each false alarm
requires police response and in some cases fire apparatus response; this
involves unnecessary expense to the Village, increases the risk of damage
to property or injury to persons, and dilutes the police and fire protection
to the rest of the Village. Such false alarms therefore constitute a public
nuisance which must be abated.
§ 441-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device designed for the detection of an
unauthorized entry on premises or for alerting others of the commission of
an unlawful act, or both, or for the detection of a fire, and when actuated
gives a signal, visual or audible or both, or transmits or causes to be
transmitted a signal or message, or both.
FALSE ALARM — A signal from an alarm system, a telephone call to or other
contact with the Police Department resulting in response by the Fox Point
Police Department, when an emergency situation does not exist.[Amended
by Ord. No. 408]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity.
§ 441-3. Permits.
A. Permit required. A permit shall be required for each alarm system on
premises within the Village on the effective date of this chapter or
installed after such effective date.
B. Permit fee. A permit fee, as provided in Chapter 63, Fees, shall be paid
at the time of filing an application for a permit.46
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 417-12 FOX POINT CODE § 441-3
1:284
§ 441-4. Permit application, issuance and appeal.
§ 441-5. Requirements and duties.
§ 441-6. Prohibited activities.
C. Time to acquire. As to those alarm systems now on the premises in the
Village, a permit shall be obtained within 90 days after the effective
date of this chapter. As to any alarm system installed after the effective
date of this chapter, a permit shall be received before the system is
installed.
D. Interior alarms. A permit under this chapter is not required for an alarm
system which gives a signal, visual or audible or both, solely within the
interior of the building in which it is located.
A. Issuing authority. The issuing authority shall be the Chief of Police.
B. Applications. Applications for all permits required under this chapter
shall be filed with the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall prescribe
the form of the application and request such information as is necessary
to evaluate and act upon the permit application. The Chief of Police
shall deny a permit if the alarm system for which it is sought does not
comply with this chapter.
C. Appeal. Any person required by this chapter to have a permit who has
been denied such a permit by the Chief of Police shall have a right to
appeal that decision to the Village Board. The procedure for this appeal
shall be the same as set forth in § 441-7C.
A. Alarm system standards. All alarm systems installed within the Village
shall have the Underwriters Laboratories approval.
B. The Chief of Police may grant an exception to this requirement when
the alarm system is under testing by the Underwriters Laboratories, in
which case the alarm system may be installed for a period of not to
exceed six months and shall then be removed or disconnected, unless
an extension of time is granted by the Chief of Police or Underwriters
Laboratories approval has been received.
A. Alarm system permits. No person shall install an alarm system or use or
possess an operative alarm system without having a permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. False alarm. No person owning, using or possessing an alarm system
shall cause or permit the giving of a false alarm, whether intentional,
accidental or otherwise.
C. False alarm response service charge. In addition to, and not to the
prejudice or exclusion of, such other penalties and remedies as may be
available to the Village, a false alarm response service charge may be
imposed on real property in the Village where a false alarm occurs, as
§ 441-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-6
1:285
§ 441-7. Revocation of permits.
described in this subsection. [Added 4-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-05]
(1) Each false alarm after the first one occurring within any twelvemonth
period shall be subject to a false alarm service charge as
established by the Village Board by separate resolution from time
to time.
(2) A false alarm service charge may be waived upon presentation by
the applicant responsible for the same of evidence which satisfies
the Village Manager or his designee that the false alarm was
occasioned by causes other than negligence, carelessness or
inadequate or improper maintenance.
(3) Each false alarm service response charge shall be a special charge
pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., subject to the notice and appeal
provisions of §§ 67-17 and 67-18 of this Code.
A. Hearing. Before a permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be
revoked, a hearing must be held before the Chief of Police. Notice
setting forth the time, place and nature of the hearing shall be sent by
mail or delivered to the permittee at the address shown on the permit
application not less than seven days prior to said hearing.
B. Grounds for revocation. The Chief of Police may revoke a permit on the
following grounds:
(1) The application for a permit contains a statement of a material fact,
which statement is false.
(2) A permittee has repeatedly failed to comply with the provisions of
this chapter.
(3) An alarm system repeatedly actuates false alarms.
C. Appeals. Any permittee may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police by
filing a written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk/Treasurer within
10 days after the decision.
(1) Such appeal shall be heard by the Board of Trustees within 30 days
after the filing of the appeal and that body may affirm, amend or
reverse the decision or take other action deemed appropriate.
(2) An appeal timely taken suspends the revocation until the Board of
Trustees gives its decision.
(3) The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall give written notice of the time
and place of the hearing to the appellant. Such notice shall be given
by registered or certified mail or personal delivery not less than
seven days before the hearing.
§ 441-6 FOX POINT CODE § 441-7
1:286
§ 441-8. Certain systems prohibited. [Amended 12-10-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-539]
§ 441-9. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08]
§ 441-10. More than one owner.
When any premises located in the Village of Fox Point are owned, leased,
or occupied by two or more persons as joint tenants, tenants in common,
or joint lessees, or in any other manner, it is the responsibility of each of
such persons to see that the provisions of this chapter are complied with
and each of such persons may be subjected to a penalty on violation of this
chapter as provided by § 441-9.
Chapter 445
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES
§ 445-1. State liquor laws adopted.
(4) In conducting the hearing, the Village Board shall not be limited by
the technical rules of evidence.
A. Need. Certain alarm systems include a dialer so that when the system is
actuated, the dialer automatically dials the police station using the
regular telephone lines and repeatedly giving its recorded message.
This ties up incoming lines to the police station, thus interfering with
other emergency calls and the proper and orderly operation of the Fire
and Police Departments.
B. Automatic dialers. No person, firm or corporation except the North
Shore Water Commission shall use or cause to be used any telephone or
electronic device or attachment that automatically selects a public
telephone trunk line of the Police Department, Fire Department, or any
other department, bureau, office, officer or employee of the Village of
Fox Point and then reproduces a prerecorded message to report a
burglary, fire, or other emergency.
A. Violations of this chapter are subject to the penalties described in § 1-4
of this Code. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Repeated violations. In the event that within the period of one year any
person has been found guilty of two violations of § 441-6B and is
charged with another violation of said section, the defendant shall have
the burden of proof to establish that a violation did not occur.
A. Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes relating to the use and sale of
alcohol beverages, exclusive of any provisions providing for a fine or
imprisonment for violating the same, is hereby adopted and by
§ 441-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 445-1
1:287
§ 445-2. License required.
§ 445-3. Classes of licenses.48
There shall be the following classes of licenses which, when issued by
the Village Clerk/Treasurer under the authority of the Village Board after
payment of the fee specified in § 445-4, shall permit the holder to sell, deal
or traffic in alcohol beverages as follows:
reference made a part of this chapter with the same force and effect as
though set forth herein verbatim.47
B. Any action required to be performed or prohibited by Ch. 125, Wis.
Stats., is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future
amendments, revisions or modifications of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., are
intended to be made a part of this chapter. A copy of Ch. 125, Wis.
Stats., and any future amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the
office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer or elsewhere in the Village offices
in the Village Hall.
A. Subject to the exceptions stated in § 125.06, Wis. Stats., no person shall
vend, sell, deal or traffic in alcohol beverages in any quantity, or cause
the same to be done, without having procured a license as provided in
this chapter, nor without complying with all the provisions of this
chapter, and all statutes, ordinances and regulations applicable thereto,
except where the Wisconsin Statutes provide that a license is not
necessary.
B. A license is required for each stand, place, room or enclosure or for
each suite of rooms or enclosures which are in direct connection or
communication to each other where alcohol beverages are kept, sold or
offered for sale. No license shall be issued to any person for the purpose
of possessing, selling or offering for sale any alcohol beverage in any
dwelling house, flat or residential apartment.
C. No person shall give away any alcohol beverage for the purpose of
evading any law or ordinance.
A. Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. A Class "A"
fermented malt beverage retailer's license shall entitle the holder
thereof to possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt beverages only
for consumption away from the premises where sold and in the original
packages, containers or bottles.
B. Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. A Class "B"
fermented malt beverage retailer's license shall entitle the holder
thereof to possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt beverages
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 445-1 FOX POINT CODE § 445-3
1:288
whether to be consumed upon the premises where sold or away from
such premises. The holder may also sell beverages containing less than
1/2 of a percentum of alcohol by volume without obtaining a special
license to sell such beverages.
C. "Class A" retail intoxicating liquor license. A "Class A" retail
intoxicating liquor license shall permit its holder to sell, deal and traffic
in intoxicating liquors only in original packages or containers to be
consumed off the premises so licensed.
D. "Class B" retail intoxicating liquor license. A "Class B" retail
intoxicating liquor license shall permit its holder to sell, deal and traffic
in intoxicating liquors to be consumed by the glass only on the premises
so licensed, and in the original package or container in multiples not to
exceed four liters at any one time to be consumed off the premises,
except that wine may be sold in the original package or otherwise in any
other quantity to be consumed off the premises.
E. Reserve "Class B" liquor license. Reserve "Class B" liquor licenses are
those licenses available under the quota system existing before
December 1, 1997, that were not granted or issued by the Village as of
December 1, 1997. A reserve "Class B" liquor license shall permit its
holder to sell, deal and traffic in intoxicating liquors to be consumed by
the glass only on the premises so licensed, and in the original package
or container in multiples not to exceed four liters at any one time to be
consumed off the premises, except that wine may be sold in the original
package or otherwise in any other quantity to be consumed off the
premises.
F. Temporary Class "B" (picnic) fermented malt beverage license. A
temporary Class "B" (picnic) fermented malt beverage license shall
permit the holder thereof to sell fermented malt beverages (including
wine coolers with a fermented malt beverage base) to consumers at a
picnic or similar gathering of limited duration for only those dates
approved by the Village Board. Such licenses may be issued only to
bona fide clubs, to county or local fair associations or agricultural
societies, to churches, lodges or societies that have been in existence
for at least six months and to veterans' organizations pursuant to
§ 125.26(6), Wis. Stats.
G. "Class C" wine license. A "Class C" wine license shall permit the holder
thereof to sell wine by the glass or in an opened original container for
consumption on the premises where sold.
(1) A "Class C" wine license may be granted to an applicant only if:
(a) The applicant meets the qualifications set forth in § 125.04(5),
Wis. Stats., for other retail licenses;
(b) The license is for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol
beverages accounts for less than 50% of gross receipts;
§ 445-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 445-3
1:289
§ 445-4. Provisional retail license.51
The Village Clerk/Treasurer or Village Manager may issue a provisional
retail license to a person who has applied for a Class "A," Class "B," "Class
A," "Class B" or "Class C" license which authorizes only the activities
that the type of retail license applied for authorizes, in accordance with
§ 125.185, Wis. Stats., for a nonrefundable fee per license issued, as
provided in Chapter 63, Fees. The provisional retail license shall expire 60
days after its issuance or when a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A" or "Class
B" license is issued to the holder, whichever is sooner. The Village Clerk/
Treasurer or Village Manager may revoke a provisional retail license if it
is determined that the holder of the license made a false statement on the
application. The Village Clerk/Treasurer or Village Manager may not issue
a provisional "Class B" license if the Village's quota under § 125.51(4), Wis.
Stats., prohibits the issuance of a "Class B" license. No person may hold
more than one provisional retail license for each type of license applied for
by the holder, per year.
§ 445-5. Operator's license; provisional operator's license.52
(c) The restaurant does not have a barroom; or
(d) The restaurant has a barroom in which wine is the only
intoxicating liquor sold.
(2) A "Class C" license may not be issued to a foreign corporation, a
foreign limited liability company or a person acting as agent for or
in the employ of another.49,50
A. The Village Clerk/Treasurer or the Village Manager may issue an
operator's license if the applicant applies, in writing, meets the
requirements of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., and after payment of a
nonproratable fee in an amount to be determined by the Village Board
from time to time for a two-year period to end on June 30. If an
applicant is denied an operator's license, said applicant has the option
to appeal the denial to the Village Board of the Village of Fox Point. All
written applications for an operator's license shall be filed with the
Village Clerk/Treasurer at least 10 days prior to the granting of said
license.
B. Provisional operator's license. The Village Clerk/Treasurer or Village
Manager may issue a provisional operator's license in accordance with
49.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 125.81(h)(vi), providing a fee for a "Class C" wine license, as
added 1-8-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-01, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
50.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 125.810, Retail license fees, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 445-3 FOX POINT CODE § 445-5
1:290
§ 445-6. Liquor license quotas.
§ 445-7. Conditions for "Class B" license.
No retail "Class B" or reserve "Class B" license shall be issued unless
the premises to be licensed conforms to the sanitary, safety and health
§ 125.17(5), Wis. Stats., for a nonrefundable fee per license issued,
as provided in Chapter 63, Fees. The provisional operator's license
shall expire 60 days after its issuance or when an operator's license
is issued to the holder, whichever is sooner. A provisional operator's
license may not be issued to any person who has been denied an
operator's license by the Village Board or who has had an operator's
license revoked or suspended within the preceding 12 months. The
Village Clerk/Treasurer or Village Manager may revoke a provisional
operator's license if it is determined that the holder of the license made
a false statement on the application.
A. The number of liquor licenses that have been or may be granted shall be
determined as to "Class A" retail intoxicating liquor licenses and "Class
B" retail intoxicating liquor licenses as provided from time to time by
governing state law. In addition thereto, such licenses may be granted
to restaurants as defined in § 125.02(18), Wis. Stats., and clubs as
defined in § 124.02(4), Wis. Stats. There shall be no advertising or
display of alcohol beverages or that the licensee has the right to serve
the same on the exterior of the licensed premises, or in the interior of
the licensed premises located in such a place that it is visible from a
public street or any adjoining premises.
B. The number of Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's licenses
and Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's licenses and reserve
"Class B" intoxicating liquor licenses shall be as from time to time
allowed by state law, except that in addition thereto, such licenses may
be granted to restaurants and clubs as provided in Subsection A above.
C. Reserve "Class B" intoxicating liquor license: four. If the Village has
reached its quota as to regular "Class B" liquor licenses or reserve
"Class B" liquor licenses, the Village may still grant a regular "Class B"
liquor license to:
(1) A full-service restaurant that has a seating capacity of 300 or more
persons; or
(2) A hotel that has 50 or more rooms of sleeping accommodations and
that has either an attached restaurant with a seating capacity of
150 or more persons or a banquet room in which banquets
attended by 400 or more persons may be held. [See § 125.51(4)(v),
Wis. Stats.]53
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 445-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 445-7
1:291
requirements of the State Building Code, the State Plumbing Code, and the
rules and regulations of the State Department of Health Services applicable
to restaurants as contemplated in § 125.68(5), Wis. Stats., and also
conforms to all ordinances and regulations adopted by the Village.
§ 445-8. Right of entry for inspection.
Every Village police officer, Building Inspector, Health Officer, and fire
fighter serving the Village shall at all times have the right to enter and
inspect the premises for which a retail "Class B" license has been applied
for or is in effect to determine whether or not the premises complies with
the provisions of this chapter. Refusal or failure to admit any such officer,
employee or agent of the Village to enter and inspect the premises shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 445-9. Closing hours.54
Closing hours shall be as prescribed by § 125.68(4), Wis. Stats., for the sale
of intoxicating liquor and as prescribed by § 125.32(3), Wis. Stats., for the
sale of fermented malt beverages.
§ 445-10. License restrictions.
No initial or renewal alcohol beverage license shall be granted for any
premises for which taxes, assessments, utility bills or other claims of the
Village are delinquent and unpaid. No initial or renewal of a liquor license
shall be granted to any person who is delinquent in payment of any taxes,
assessments, utility bills or other claims owed to the Village and/or is
delinquent in payment of a forfeiture resulting from a violation of any
ordinance of the Village.
§ 445-11. Violations and penalties.
A. Forfeitures for violations of §§ 125.07(1) to (4) and 125.09(2), Wis.
Stats., adopted by reference in § 445-1 of this chapter, shall conform to
the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for violations of the
comparable state statute, including any variations or increases for
subsequent offenses.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, except as
otherwise provided in Subsection A above, or who shall conduct any
activity or make any sale for which a license is required without a
license shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in § 1-4 of this Code.
C. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing
court to exercise additional authorities granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 445-7 FOX POINT CODE § 445-11
1:292
Chapter 450
AMUSEMENTS
§ 445-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 445-11
1:293

ARTICLE I
Carnivals
[Adopted as § 29.05 of the 1961 Code]
§ 450-1. Definition.
Carnival includes, but is not limited to, the temporary setting up,
maintaining and operating of mechanical devices, acts (whether by humans
or animals), displays, rides on animals or in vehicles propelled by animals
for the enjoyment and entertainment of persons, whether or not a fee is
charged therefor.
§ 450-2. Adoption by reference.55
The Village adopts by reference the provisions of Ch. SPS 334, Wis. Adm.
Code (Amusement Rides).
§ 450-3. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall maintain or operate any carnival in the
Village of Fox Point without having a license therefor in effect.
§ 450-4. Applications.
Written application for such license shall be made by the applicant to the
Village Manager. Such application shall set forth the name and address
of the applicant, and the qualifications, character and reputation of said
applicant, and the nature of the activities said carnival desires to conduct.
The Village Manager may prepare a form of application.
§ 450-5. Certificates of Insurance; indemnification.
A. The Village Manager shall examine said application and may insist on
additional information in writing. If it appears to the Village Manager
that the applicant is of good character and reputation and qualified to
operate said carnival and that the same will not adversely affect
residents of the Village, then he shall issue such license conditioned
upon compliance with the requirements hereinafter set forth.
B. If it appears to the Village Manager that the above requirements are not
met, he shall refuse to issue such license. In the event of such refusal
the applicant may appeal to the Village Board, which Board shall review
the application and action of the Village Manager and direct or refuse
the issuance of a license as to said Board appears proper.
A. No license shall be issued unless the applicant shall file with the Village
Manager a certificate of insurance establishing that the operator of said
carnival has in force and effect a public liability insurance policy with
limits of not less than $100,000 for any one person, and $500,000 for
55.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 450-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-5
1:295
§ 450-6. Fees.
§ 450-7. Display of license.
The license shall be prominently displayed at all times during which the
carnival is in operation.
§ 450-8. Noise.
No noisemaking device or barking to attract customers or solicit business
or to advertise the activities shall be permitted after 10:00 p.m.
§ 450-9. Prohibition of food or drink sales.
The license to conduct such carnival does not include the sale or giving
away of any food or drink of any kind, and none shall be sold or given away.
§ 450-10. Revocation of license.
Any license which has been granted may be revoked by the Village Manager
if the carnival is not maintained or operated in an orderly manner or if
persons of bad reputation are permitted therein, or if the person who is
in control of or operates the carnival permits the violation of any Village
ordinance or law of the State of Wisconsin.
any one accident, and property damage of $25,000, provided that a
deductible clause not to exceed $50 may be contained in such policy.
B. The applicant shall agree to indemnify and save harmless the Village of
Fox Point, its officers, agents and citizens against any and all injuries
and damages or claims therefor resulting or arising out of the conduct
of such carnival.
A. No license shall be issued until the applicant shall have paid a fee based
on a consecutive seven-day period or any fraction thereof as provided in
Chapter 63, Fees.56
B. No fee shall be paid when the operator of the carnival is a charitable,
educational, or religious organization. This does not relieve such
organization from the need to obtain a license.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-5 FOX POINT CODE § 450-10
1:296
ARTICLE II
Theaters and Movies
[Adopted by Ord. No. 402 (§ 29.10 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 450-11. License required.
No person, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent, shall keep,
maintain, conduct or operate any theater or moving picture show house
in the Village of Fox Point without first obtaining a license therefor in the
manner hereinafter provided.
§ 450-12. Definitions.
The term "theater or moving picture show house," as used in this article,
is defined as any edifice, hall, building or part of building regularly or
generally used or wholly devoted to the purposes of dramatic, operatic,
vaudeville or other exhibition plays or performances for admission to which
an entrance fee is paid, charged, or received, or regularly or generally
used or wholly devoted to the purpose of exhibiting moving pictures of any
kind for admission to which an entrance fee is paid, charged or received,
and shall exclude churches, schools, and other halls used only occasionally
for moving picture exhibitions, illustrated or other lectures, concerts or
amateur theatricals or exhibitions.
§ 450-13. Application for license.
Applications for said licenses stating the location and the seating capacity
of the premises shall be made to the Village Board, which may grant any
such license, as in its judgment will promote the good order and welfare of
the Village, but no such license shall be granted for any edifice which does
not conform in all respects to the laws of this state and the ordinances of
the Village applying to such edifice, and unless the same shall be safe and
proper for the purposes for which it is to be used. Licenses granted shall be
signed by the Village Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 450-14. Revocation of license.
The Village Board shall have power and authority to revoke or annul for
cause, or refuse to renew, any license granted according to the provisions
of this article whenever in its judgment the good order and welfare of the
Village will be promoted thereby, and whenever the licensed building or the
manner of conducting business therein does not conform in all respects to
the laws of this state and the ordinances of the Village applying to such
edifice and to its maintenance, use, or operation of business therein, or
whenever the same shall be unsafe and improper for the purposes for which
it is used.
§ 450-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-15
1:297
§ 450-15. Hearing.
Before refusing to grant or renew a license or revoking or annulling a
license that has been granted, the Village Board shall cause notice of its
contemplated action to be given in writing to the applicant or licensee and
shall set a time and place at which the applicant or licensee may appear
before the Village Board and be heard. Such notice shall be given not less
than 10 days before the hearing and may be given by personal service or by
registered or certified mail. The time of such hearing may be adjourned or
continued from time to time at the discretion of the Village Board. After the
conclusion of such hearing, the Village Board shall take such action as to it
appears warranted.
§ 450-16. Posting of license in conspicuous place.
Every such license shall, while the same is in force, be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the principal entrance to the premises for
which it is issued so that the same may be easily seen and read by any
person passing in or out of such entrance.
§ 450-17. License fee.57
The schedule of annual license fees under this article is fixed as provided in
Chapter 63, Fees.
§ 450-18. License period.
The license period is from July 1 to June 30, both inclusive and pro rata for
any part of such year, the first such period commencing July 1, 1972.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-15 FOX POINT CODE § 450-18
1:298
Chapter 455
ANTENNAS, SIGNAL-RECEIVING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 745.
§ 455-1. Purpose.
This chapter regulating the placement and installation of signal-receiving
antennas is adopted to:
§ 455-2. Permit required.
No persons shall mount or affix any type of signal-receiving antenna until a
permit shall have first been obtained from the Building Inspector.
§ 455-3. Definition.
For purposes of this chapter, "signal-receiving antenna" is defined as any
mounted or affixed apparatus capable of receiving communications from a
transmitter or from a transmitter relay located in a planetary orbit. This
definition includes all types of signal-receiving antennas, including, without
limitation, parabolic antennas, home earth stations, satellite television
disks, UHF and VHF television antennas, and AM, FM, ham and short-wave
radio antennas, regardless of the method of mounting or affixing.
§ 455-4. Application.
Application for a signal-receiving antenna permit shall be made in writing
to the Building Inspector, together with the appropriate fee and a sufficient
set of mounting plans and specifications, including a general plot plan
showing the location of the proposed signal-receiving antenna with respect
to streets, lot lines, and buildings. If such application meets all
requirements of this chapter, the application shall be approved. Issues
under this chapter shall not be referred to the Building Board unless
specifically provided for.
A. Provide uniform regulation of signal-receiving antenna devices;
B. Secure placement of such antennas in an aesthetically sensitive manner
while allowing users reasonable reception of signals; and
C. Protect the public from injury from antennas that are inadequately
mounted, unduly susceptible to wind pressure, improperly installed and
wired, or are placed on structures insufficiently designed or
constructed to safely support the antenna.
§ 450-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-5
1:299
§ 455-5. Installation standards.
Signal-receiving antennas shall comply with the following provisions:
A. Setbacks. Any signal-receiving antenna and its mounting shall comply
with the appropriate setbacks required under Chapter 745, Zoning, of
the Code of the Village of Fox Point.
B. Placement.
(1) If reasonable reception of signals is possible, the signal-receiving
antenna shall first be located in the following descending order:
(a) In either the rear yard or on the rear of the home or on the rear
of its roof.
(b) In either the side yard or on the side of the home or on the side
of its roof.
(c) In either the front yard or on the front of the home or on the
front of its roof, but only upon certification to the satisfaction of
the Village Manager that reasonable reception is not possible
at any other location.
(2) The Building Inspector shall determine where reasonable reception
is possible, based on evidence provided by the person seeking to
mount or affix the antenna.
C. Mounting. Signal-receiving antennas attached to the wall or roof of any
principal or accessory structure shall be permitted only if the structure
is properly constructed to carry all imposed loading and complies with
applicable state and local building code requirements. The Building
Inspector may require engineering calculations.
D. Width. The width of the signal-receiving antenna shall not exceed 10
feet. If reasonable reception is not possible anywhere on the lot, the
Village Board may grant a variance to the width restriction in order to
achieve reasonable reception in preference to permitting placement in
the front yard.
E. Height. Any signal-receiving antenna, whether ground- or roofmounted,
including any platform or structure upon which said antenna
is mounted or affixed, may not exceed 10 feet in height above the
highest point on the principal building on the lot, as measured from the
base of the antenna, including any platform or structure upon which
said antenna is mounted or affixed, to the highest point of the antenna.
If reasonable reception is not possible anywhere on the lot and a
variance on the width restriction does not achieve reasonable
reception, the Village Board may grant a variance to the height
restriction in order to achieve reasonable reception in preference to
permitting placement in the front yard.
§ 455-5 FOX POINT CODE § 455-5
1:300
F. Wind pressure. All signal-receiving antennas shall be permanently
mounted in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for
installation. All such installations shall meet a minimum wind load
design velocity of 80 miles per hour.
G. Electrical installations. Electrical installations in connection with
signal-receiving antennas, including grounding of the system, shall be
in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code, Wisconsin State
Electrical Code and the instructions of the manufacturer. In cases of
conflict, the stricter requirements shall govern. All cable used to
conduct current or signals from the signal-receiving antenna to the
receivers shall be installed underground unless installation site
conditions preclude underground installation. The location of all such
underground lines, cables, and conduits shall be shown on the
application for a permit. All signal-receiving antennas shall be
grounded against direct lightning strikes.
H. Temporary placement. No portable or trailer-mounted signal-receiving
antenna shall be allowed, except for temporary installation for on-site
testing and demonstration purposes for periods not exceeding five days.
However, such trial placement shall be in accordance with all provisions
of this chapter. Any person making such temporary placement shall first
give written notice to the Building Inspector of the date when such
placement shall begin and end.
I. Advertising. No form or advertising or identification, sign or mural is
allowed on the signal-receiving antenna other than the customary
manufacturer's identification plates. The color of the signal-receiving
antenna shall be such that it blends into its surroundings. If the
Building Inspector desires guidance, he may refer this issue to the
Building Board.
J. Interference with broadcasting. Signal-receiving antennas shall be
filtered and/or shielding so as to prevent the emission or reflection of
any electromagnetic radiation that would cause any harmful
interference with the radio and/or television broadcasting or reception
on adjacent properties. In the event that harmful interference is caused
subsequent to its installation, the owner of the signal-receiving antenna
shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in
accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations.
K. Aesthetic considerations. Signal-receiving antennas shall be located
and designed to reasonably reduce visual impact upon surrounding
properties at street level. The Building Inspector may require
appropriate screening that does not interfere with reception. If the
Building Inspector desires guidance, he may refer this issue to the
Building Board.
§ 455-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-6
1:301
§ 455-6. Effective date.
This chapter shall apply to signal-receiving antennas mounted or affixed
after April 9, 1996.
Chapter 469
CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
§ 469-1. Licensing and sale.
Section 134.65 of the Wisconsin Statutes relating to the sale and disposition
of cigarettes, exclusive of any provisions thereof relating to the penalty
to be imposed or the punishment for violation of said statute, is hereby
adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter with the same force
and effect as though set forth herein verbatim.
§ 469-2. License fees.58
The fee for a retail license for the sale of cigarettes shall be as provided in
Chapter 63, Fees..
Chapter 482
ESTATE SALES
§ 482-1. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a residential district to engage in an
estate sale activity within the Village of Fox Point without first obtaining a
permit as herein provided.
§ 482-2. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meaning:
ESTATE SALE — Any sale occurring on residential premises wherein the
personal property of the resident or property owner is held out for
liquidation or public sale with the assistance of a paid, professional,
commissioned, or in any other way compensated agent, or alternately which
sale with or without an agent will occur over a total period of time greater
than 72 hours.
§ 482-3. Permit application.
A. Applicants for a permit must complete and return a permit application
to the Village of Fox Point through the Village Clerk/Treasurer or such
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 455-6 FOX POINT CODE § 482-3
1:302
§ 482-4. Permit.59
The fee for an estate sale permit shall be as provided in Chapter 63, Fees.
The permit will expire upon the time period as set forth therein having
lapsed. The permit shall not be transferable and shall be only for the
premises and times described in the permit.
§ 482-5. Conditions and indemnification against damages.
The applicant shall post with the Village Clerk/Treasurer the sum of $500 or
such other bond or proof of insurance in the discretion of the Village against
damages to the Village right-of-way or Village property as may occur. Upon
completion of the sale, the sum shall be refundable to the applicant less any
sum retained for purposes of restoring or repairing any damage to Village
right-of-way or Village property. Any dispute as to the damage amount in
the event any sum is retained may be appealed to the Fox Point Board of
Appeals and thereafter shall be subject to the review of the Circuit Court by
certiorari.
§ 482-6. Revocation.
The permit may be revoked by the Chief of Police or the Village Manager or
her designate in the event of any violation of any provisions of this chapter
or any conditions of the permit.
other person as from time to time designated by the Village Board or
the Village Manager. The permit shall include the following information:
(1) The name of the applicant and the address of the sale location, as
well as the applicant's telephone number.
(2) A description of the sale which will occur, including the date(s) and
the hours of the sale.
(3) Whether or not an agent will be involved in the conduct of the sale
and the name of the agent.
(4) A statement that the sale does relate to the assets of a resident or
property owner and is for the purpose of liquidating all or a portion
of his/her estate.
B. The authority to grant such a permit shall be with the Village Manager.
Any person denied a permit by the Village Manager may appeal to the
Village Board. Denial of a permit by the Village Board shall be subject to
review by the Circuit Court through certiorari.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 482-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-7
1:303
§ 482-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person adjudged in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to prosecution and forfeiture or such other remedies as provided for
in § 1-4 of the Fox Point Code.
Chapter 540
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Board — See Ch. 19, Art. II.
Zoning — See Ch. 745.
Building construction — See Ch. 756.
§ 540-1. Purpose and findings.
A. The Village is enacting this chapter to establish reasonable regulations
for the posting of permanent or temporary signs on public and private
property. The Village Board finds that signs provide an important
medium through which individuals may convey a variety of
noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely
unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic
hazard and detriment to property values and the Village's overall public
welfare as an aesthetic nuisance.
B. By enacting this chapter, the Village Board intends to:
(1) Balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through
signs and the right of the public to be protected against the
unrestricted proliferation of signs;
(2) Further the objectives of any such Village Master Plan as may from
time to time be adopted and in effect;
(3) Protect the public health, safety, and welfare;
(4) Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards;
(5) Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects
and visual blight caused by temporary signs;
(6) Promote economic development; and
(7) Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations
specified herein.
§ 482-7 FOX POINT CODE § 540-2
1:304
§ 540-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
CONTRACTOR SIGN — Any sign giving the name or names of principal
contractors, subcontractors, architects and lending institutions responsible
for repair or remodeling on the site of an existing structure where the sign
is placed, together with other pertinent information included thereon.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN — Any sign designed to identify a future residential
development or a future nonresidential development or redevelopment
project currently under construction.
DIRECTIONAL AND INSTRUCTIONAL NONELECTRIC SIGN — A sign that
provides instruction or direction and does not advertise a business. This
includes, without limitation, signs identifying telephones, house numbers,
nameplates, no trespassing and warning signs, alarm signs, memorial signs,
and rummage sale signs.
ESTATE SALE SIGN — Any sign advertising or providing information which
relates to any sale or liquidation occurring on residential premises wherein
personal property of the resident or property owner is held out for public
sale with the assistance of a paid, professional, commissioned, or in any
other way compensated agent.[Added 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-07]
GRAND OPENING SIGN — A sign that calls attention to a new business or
announces a change of ownership of a business.
POLITICAL SIGN — A sign containing a political message.60
POST — To erect, attach, or affix in any manner, including without limitation
nailing, tacking, tying, gluing, pasting, painting, staking, marking, or
writing.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire area between property boundaries
which is owned by a government, dedicated to public use, or impressed
with an easement for public use; which is primarily used for pedestrian or
vehicular travel; and which is publicly maintained, in whole or in part, for
such use, and includes without limitation the street, gutter, curb, shoulder,
sidewalk, sidewalk area, pathway, parking or parking strip, planting strip,
and any public way.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign indicating the availability for sale, rent, or
lease of the specific lot, building, or portion of a building upon which the
sign is posted.
SIGN — Any writing, pictorial representation, illustration, decoration
(including any material used to differentiate sign copy from its background),
landscaping form, emblem, symbol, design, trademark, banner, flag,
pennant, captive balloon, streamer, spinner, ribbon, sculpture, statute, or
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 540-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 540-2
1:305
any other figure or character that is a structure or any part thereof
(including the roof or wall of a building) or is written, printed, projected,
painted, constructed, or otherwise placed or displayed upon or designed
into landscaping or a structure or a board, plate, canopy, awning, marquee,
or vehicle, or upon any material object or device whatsoever, and by reason
of its form, color, wording, symbol, design, illumination, or motion attracts
or is designed to attract attention to the subject thereof or as a means
of identification, advertisement, or announcement or political or artistic
expression or decoration, but landscaping constitutes a sign only to the
extent that it is planted, trimmed, graded, arranged or installed in such a
manner as to convey an explicit commercial message.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign that:
WINDOW SIGN — Any nonelectric sign painted upon or attached to or
displayed in a window in such a manner as to permit viewing from the
exterior of the building or structure.
§ 540-3. Signs not requiring a permit.
Is intended for a temporary period of posting on public or private
property;
A.
Is typically constructed from nondurable materials, including paper,
cardboard, cloth, plastic, and/or wallboard; and
B.
Does not constitute a structure subject to Chapter 756, Building
Construction, and Chapter 745, Zoning.
C.
A. Political signs. Signs containing a political message shall be permitted
under the following conditions:
(1) The display of any such signs shall be limited to a period beginning
on the first day for circulation of nomination papers by candidates
and ending on the day of the election.
(2) Political signs shall not exceed six square feet if such size limitation
is necessary to ensure traffic or pedestrian safety.
(3) The candidate, party or parties responsible for the erection or
distribution of any such signs shall be jointly and severally liable for
the removal of the sign(s) within three days after the primary,
general, or special election to which they refer.
(4) No permit shall be required for such a sign.
(5) Political signs are not permitted on public property, rights-of-way,
or within 100 feet from a polling place entrance. [Added
8-13-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-12]
B. Directional and instructional nonelectric signs. Directional and
instructional nonelectric signs shall be located entirely on the property
to which they pertain and shall not exceed three square feet in area.
§ 540-2 FOX POINT CODE § 540-3
1:306
§ 540-4. Regulation of all other signs.
No person shall erect or construct any sign, nor add to, enlarge, move,
alter, convert or extend any sign not exempt under § 540-3, without first
obtaining a building permit from the Building Inspector. Before the Building
Inspector shall issue a building permit, plans showing all details shall be
submitted to him and be referred by him to the Building Board. The Building
Board may request such further descriptive detail or engineering detail
as it may deem necessary. The Building Board may impose reasonable
conditions for approval, including but not limited to limitation on hours of
illumination. Upon approval of an application for a sign by the Building
Board, a permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector. Any person
aggrieved by a decision of the Building Board may appeal to the Village
Board of Trustees if written notice is filed with the Village Board within 45
days of the decision of the Building Board.
§ 540-5. Consideration in granting permit.
Rummage sale signs shall not exceed two on-premises signs and shall
be displayed for no more than 72 hours.
C. Government signs. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prevent the erection, construction, alteration, placement, maintenance,
or location of signs, devices and markings of the state, Village or other
governmental authority, or the posting of notices required by law.
D. Window signs. Such signs not occupying more than 50% of the window
area shall be permitted for not more than 90 days.
E. Religious proclamation signs. Signs proclaiming a religious message,
and which do not announce a specific activity, shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter to the extent such signs communicate a
religious message without any adverse impact on public health, welfare
or safety, and provided such sign is placed upon the religious
institutional grounds.
A. The Building Board shall follow Chapter 19, Article II of the Fox Point
Village Code.
B. Freestanding signs in excess of 15 feet in height above normal grade
level to the top of the sign may only be permitted subject to the
approval of the Village Board after recommendation of the Building
Board.
C. All signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 756, Building
Construction, and the National Electrical Code.
D. All signs shall be constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less
than 30 pounds per square foot of area.
E. Signs pertaining to nonresidential buildings shall be in accordance with
a uniform sign format with uniform casements. Such uniform sign
§ 540-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 540-5
1:307
§ 540-6. Temporary signs.
format shall be submitted by the owner of the nonresidential building
to the Building Board and must be approved by the Building Board.
Such uniform sign format shall be submitted to the Building Board
within 12 months of the effective date of this chapter or before any
sign under § 540-4 is approved by the Building Board. In the event that
a request for additional or amended signage occurs as to a property
subject to PDO zoning and as to which the Village Board has in granting
Planned Development Overlay Zoning regulated signage in any way,
the Building Board shall conduct its review in the capacity of a
recommending body. Any change or addition to signage which is in
deviation from a prior approval of the Village Board shall then be
reviewed by the Village Board for final approval after recommendation
of the Building Board. Review and recommendation by the Building
Board as to signage shall be deemed to fulfill the function of the Plan
Commission as to amendments in a PDO district. No building permit
shall be issued for additions to or changes to signage in the PDO
district without the approval of both the Building and Village Boards.
[Amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-09]
A. Permit required. The Village Manager may grant a permit for the
erection of a temporary sign of any kind in the Village when he/she has
determined that the sign is of a size and type and will be posted in a
location that does not pose a safety hazard; that the sign is compatible
with other property in the neighborhood and the zoning district in
which the sign will be located; and that the sign will not cause
substantial depreciation of the property values in the neighborhood.
The permit issued shall be written, shall not be for a period exceeding
90 days, shall set forth the date of termination, and shall be subject to
the following limitations and restrictions.
B. Temporary sign limitations and restrictions.
(1) The total square footage for temporary signs posted on a lot in a
single-family residential zoning district, or on a lot used for any
residential purpose, in the aggregate, shall not exceed 12 square
feet, with no individual sign exceeding six square feet. The total
square footage for temporary signs posted on a building lot in all
other zones, in the aggregate, shall not exceed 30 square feet, with
no individual sign exceeding 15 square feet. The total square
footage of a sign is measured to include all of the visible display
area of one side of the sign.
(2) No temporary sign shall obstruct or impair access to a public
sidewalk, public or private street or driveway, traffic control sign,
bus stop, fire hydrant, or any other type of street furniture, or
otherwise create a hazard, including a tripping hazard.
(3) A temporary sign shall be designed to be stable under all weather
conditions, including high winds.
§ 540-5 FOX POINT CODE § 540-6
1:308
(4) No temporary sign shall be illuminated or painted with lightreflecting
paint.
(5) A temporary sign shall only be posted with the consent of the
property owner or occupant.
(6) A temporary sign may be posted for a period of up to 90 days, at
which time the sign shall be removed or replaced.
(7) A temporary sign shall not advertise or promote any commercial
enterprise or event not conducted on the same lot.
(8) There shall not be more than two temporary signs located on any
single lot at any one time.
C. Removal or replacement requirements for temporary signs. In addition
to the requirements stated above, temporary signs shall comply with
the following requirements:
(1) All commercial temporary signs, including those announcing
special events to occur on one or more particular dates, shall be
removed within three days of the conclusion of the sale or event
that the sign is promoting.
(2) The person who has posted or directed the posting of a temporary
sign is responsible for the removal or replacement of that sign in
accordance with this chapter.
(3) If that person does not remove or replace the temporary sign in
accordance with this chapter, then the property owner or occupant
of the building lot where the sign is posted is responsible for the
sign's removal or replacement.
(4) The Village Manager, or the Village Manager's designee, is
authorized to remove any temporary signs posted in violation of
this chapter that are not removed or replaced in accordance with
the provisions herein. Temporary signs posted on private property
in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance, and
the Village Manager, or the Village Manager's designee, may abate
that nuisance by removing such sign, and any expenses incurred
shall be billed to the person who has posted or directed the posting
of the temporary sign, or the property owner.
(5) The Village Manager, or the Village Manager's designee, may
immediately remove temporary signs posted on public property or
rights-of-way in violation of this chapter and, in addition to any
other penalties provided herein, may bill the person who has
posted or directed the posting of the temporary sign for the cost of
removing the sign, or the property owner.
D. Real estate signs. Such signs shall be permitted under the following
conditions:
§ 540-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 540-6
1:309
(1) One sign pertaining to the sale or lease of real estate shall be
permitted on each fronting public street of the property itself. The
sign may be one- or two-sided, shall not be illuminated, and shall
not exceed six square feet in area. Said sign(s) shall be removed
within 10 days after an offer is accepted.
(2) One residential sign pertaining to internal viewing of real estate,
known as "open house," shall be permitted on each fronting public
street of the property itself. Two additional such signs shall be
permitted in the Village with the consent of those property owners.
The signs may be one- or two-sided, shall not be illuminated or
adorned, and shall not exceed six square feet in area. Such signs
shall set upon or be staked in the ground. All such signs shall be
permitted only on the day(s) of an open house and shall be removed
daily.
(3) Permitted sign area for nonresidential sale, lease or rent signs is
only as follows:
(a) Parcels containing less than 10 acres are allowed sign(s) not
exceeding 12 square feet in area each.
(b) Parcels containing 10 acres or more are allowed sign(s) not
exceeding 16 square feet in area each.
(c) The height of each nonresidential sale, lease or rent sign may
not exceed five feet.
E. Development signs. Such signs shall be permitted under the following
conditions:
(1) A development project may have one development sign on each
street that the development abuts. Each sign must be placed on the
property being developed.
(2) No development sign may exceed six feet in height or 15 square
feet in area. This sign may be single- or double-faced and may be
perpendicular or parallel to the street.
(3) All development signs shall be removed upon the earlier of:
(a) The expiration of the permit;
(b) Ten days after the completion of a nonresidential development;
or
(c) When 90% of the units of a residential development having
been sold or rented.
F. Contractor signs. Such signs shall be permitted under the following
conditions:
(1) Except as otherwise provided herein, contractor signs shall comply
with the requirements of Subsection B of this section.
§ 540-6 FOX POINT CODE § 540-6
1:310
(2) Contractor signs may not be placed until procurement of any
requisite building or remodeling permits or prior to
commencement of the project, whichever is earlier.
(a) Contractor signs must be removed upon the earliest of the
following:
[1] Seven days after the initial occupancy of new premises;
[2] Completion of the work by the contractor, subcontractor or
architect referenced in the sign; or
[3] Completion of the work financed by the lending institution
referenced in the sign.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of Subsection
F(2)(a)[1], [2] or [3], in no event shall a contractor sign be
posted longer than 90 days in a residential zoning district,
whether or not such days are continuous, as to any given
project.
(3) Not more than one sign shall be allowed on a lot zoned singlefamily
residential or on a lot used for residential purposes.
(4) The contractor shall advise the Village Building Inspector of the
intent to post any such sign, and the owner of any residential
property shall procure a permit for the posting of such sign, which
permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector upon his
determination that the sign as intended will not violate the
provisions of this subsection, and which permit shall require
payment of a fee set in accordance with § 540-9.
G. Grand opening signs. Such signs shall be permitted under the following
conditions:
(1) Except as otherwise provided herein, grand opening signs shall
comply with the requirements of Subsection B of this section.61
(2) Grand opening signs shall not be displayed more than 10 days.
(3) Only one grand opening sign shall be allowed per business.
H. Residential family announcement signs. A sign on a residential property
may be permitted subject to all other provisions of this section, which
sign announces a personal or family event such as a birthday or
wedding, and which shall be placed for a period not to exceed 48 hours.
I. Estate sale signs. Such signs shall be permitted under the following
conditions: [Added 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-07]
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 540-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 540-6
1:311
§ 540-7. Fire lane signs.
The Village of Fox Point may establish a system of fire lanes for the purpose
of permitting access by the North Shore Fire Department to buildings,
improvements and sources of water supply. The Village shall be permitted
to erect and post signs and paint lines indicating that parking is prohibited
in said fire lanes.
§ 540-8. Prohibited signs.
The following types of signs are prohibited in the Village of Fox Point:
(1) No estate sale signs shall be placed in or upon Village right-of-way
or publicly owned property. Estate sale signs shall be placed only
upon private residential property, and then only with the written
permission of the owner.
(2) One sign per side of the lot fronting on a street may be permitted
on the subject property at which the estate sale is occurring. Not
more than two additional signs may be placed upon private
property; however, not more than one sign per property, as set
forth in Subsection I(1). Such signs shall not exceed six square feet
in area per side. In no event shall there be greater than a total of
three signs.
(3) Estate sale signs shall be portable and shall not be displayed other
than during the hours of sale and in no event earlier than 10:00
a.m. or later than 5:00 p.m.
(4) Signage relating to estate sales other than as defined in § 540-2
shall be treated as temporary signs and subject to the regulations
of temporary signage as set forth in the provisions of this chapter.
Only one sign fee shall be required for the signage allowed under
Subsection I(2) herein.
A. All moving, rotating and flashing signs are prohibited except those
signs which give information of time and temperature and which are
not closer than 750 feet to another time and/or temperature sign.
B. All mobile signs including but not limited to signs on wheels, trailers or
motor vehicles and parked on a street or property for the purpose of
advertising shall be prohibited.
C. All abandoned signs shall be prohibited. An abandoned sign is one
which no longer correctly advertises a bona fide business, lessor,
lessee, owner, product or activity conducted or product available on the
premises where the sign is displayed, or a sign which has not been
maintained in a safe, presentable, and good structural condition at all
times, including replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting,
cleaning and other acts required for the maintenance of the sign. The
owner shall be responsible for the repair or removal of any sign within
30 days after written notice from the Building Inspector of the
§ 540-6 FOX POINT CODE § 540-8
1:312
§ 540-9. Fees.
All sign permits issued under §§ 540-4 and 540-6 shall be subject to such
fees as from time to time established by the Village Board.
§ 540-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate, neglect or refuse to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties as provided in
§ 1-4 of the Fox Point Village Code.
Chapter 546
SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 546-1. Purpose.
The Village Board of the Village of Fox Point finds that there occur on
occasion in the residential zoning districts certain special events that may
be viewed as ancillary to the permitted use(s) but which may result in
special needs to accommodate parking, the orderly flow of traffic, public
safety, and peaceful enjoyment of the surrounding residential
neighborhood. It is the intent of the Board to balance the interests and
needs of the property owner or occupant in case of an occasional special
event with the interests of the surrounding property owners and the general
public health, welfare, and safety. It is further the intent of the Board to
balance the right of the property owners to the fullest use and enjoyment
of their premises with the interest of the Village in precluding the use
of residential premises for retail or commercial use. The Village Board
therefore establishes the following process for the occurrence and conduct
of special events.
§ 546-2. Definition.
abandonment of the sign. If any such sign is not repaired or removed
within such time, the Building Inspector shall give the owner written
notification to remove said sign within 15 days, after which time the
Building Inspector shall be authorized to remove such sign and any
expenses incurred shall be billed to the owner. Except as allowed by
§ 540-3D, no signs shall be allowed in public right-of-way.
A. A special event is any event in which the use of the residential premises
is employed by a nonresident person or entity for a benefit to such
person or entity separate and apart from the beneficial use and
enjoyment of the premises by the resident. By way of illustration,
without limitation by enumeration, the Village Board notes the
historical occurrence of contractor's shows, remodeler's or other home
shows, fund-raisers, or commissioned sales events commonly
conducted in the residential home or institution.
§ 540-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 546-2
1:313
§ 546-3. Permit required.
For any special event conducted for or on behalf of and to the benefit of a
nonresident or occupant, a special event permit is required.
§ 546-4. Permit optional.
For any event conducted by the resident occupant which is a special event
due only to either the number of persons expected to attend or atypical
traffic conditions due to vehicles anticipated, a permit may be procured
at the option of the resident or occupant of the residential premises. In
the course of such an event for which no permit was initially required or
obtained but which is or has, in the determination of the Village Manager or
his/her designee, given rise to a traffic, noise, or safety problem, a special
event permit may be required. Such permits as directed to be obtained by
the Village Manager or his/her designee shall be subject to the application
process set forth in § 546-5 below.
§ 546-5. Application.
A written application for a special event permit may be made by persons or
groups desiring the same on a form provided by the Village. The application
shall set forth the following information regarding the proposed use:
§ 546-6. Fee.
Each application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by a fee
as from time to time set by the Village Board.
B. In addition to special events benefiting a nonresident, a special event is
also defined as any gathering which due to its size results in crowds or
traffic conditions atypical to the general use in the surrounding area.
A. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant(s).
B. Name, address, and telephone number of the resident or occupant
person(s) who will be responsible for the conduct of the proposed use.
C. Date(s), duration for each day, and location during which or at which
the requested use is proposed to occur.
D. The approximate number of persons for whom the use is requested or
who are anticipated to attend and over what period of time.
E. Details regarding the proposed use, including impact on traffic and the
surrounding property owners.
F. Such other information as required by the Village Manager or his/her
designee.
§ 546-2 FOX POINT CODE § 546-7
1:314
§ 546-7. Grant.
The Village Manager shall have the authority to grant or deny a special
event permit. In the absence of the Village Manager, such authority shall be
vested in his/her designee.
§ 546-8. Conditions.
The Village Manager, or his/her designee, may require, without limitation,
any of the following conditions:
§ 546-9. Applicability of other provisions.
Nothing in this chapter, or the grant of a special event permit, shall be
deemed to allow any special exceptions to any other applicable Code
provisions, including, without limitation by enumeration herein, those
pertaining to parking, signage, noise, property maintenance, or any other
Code provisions applicable to the subject premises.
§ 546-10. Termination of permit.
A special event permit, for an event in progress, may be terminated by the
Chief of Police, or the Village Manager, or his/her designee, if the health,
safety and welfare of the public appear to be endangered or materially
impeded, threatened, or diminished by activities occurring as a result of the
special event.
Chapter 567
WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 7.
Charges for professional fees — See Ch. 67,
Art. III.
Zoning — See Ch. 745.
A. The restriction or modification of the times or duration of the special
event.
B. Suitable arrangements for on- or off-premises parking, or any other
conditions that relate to compatibility with the interests of the
surrounding property owners.
C. The assessment of the direct cost of additional police or Village services
necessitated by the special event.
D. Any other conditions as shall reasonably balance the interests of the
person(s) or occupant(s) conducting the special event and the interests
of the surrounding owners, and the public health, welfare and safety.
§ 546-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 546-10
1:315
§ 567-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the intended purpose of the Village to regulate wind energy systems to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Village
and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations for the operation
thereof so as to minimize potentially dangerous effects of these systems
on the community, pursuant to the authority granted by §§ 66.0401 and
66.0403, Wis. Stats., and other applicable laws.
§ 567-2. Definitions.
The following terms have the meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — The individual or business entity that seeks to secure a
license under this chapter of the Village Code.
BOARD — The Village Board for the Village of Fox Point, Milwaukee County,
Wisconsin.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including but not limited to "operators,"
who work in or at or render any services directly related to operation of
wind energy systems.
GOOD UTILITY PRACTICE — Any of the practices, methods and acts with
respect to the safe operation of the wind energy system facility engaged
in or approved by a significant portion of the electric utility industry and,
in particular, those portions of the industry with experience in the
construction, operation and maintenance of wind turbines during the
relevant time period; or any of the practices, methods and acts which,
in the exercise of reasonable judgment in light of the facts known at the
time the decision was made, could have been expected to accomplish the
desired result at a reasonable cost consistent with good business practices,
reliability, safety and expedition. Good utility practice is not intended to be
limited to the optimum practice, method, or act to the exclusion of all others
but rather to be acceptable practices, methods or acts generally accepted
in the region.
NONPARTICIPATING RESIDENT — All residences which are not subject to
an agreement, authorization or lease with the wind energy system facility
developer.
OPERATOR — The person who is designated on the license application to
be the person in charge of the daily operation of the premises and who is to
be the wind energy systems contact person for the municipality.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, corporation, association,
partnership, limited liability entity, or other legal entity.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system that has a
nameplate capacity of 100 kilowatts or less and a total height of 170 feet or
less.
§ 546-10 FOX POINT CODE § 567-2
1:316
STRAY VOLTAGE — Neutral-to-earth voltage measured from the electrical
system neutral and/or any structure bonded to this neutral to earth that
adversely affects humans or animals.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM TOWER — Any structure that is designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting the wind turbine.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM TOWER SITE — The land area encompassing a
tower and all related equipment, structures, paved or graveled areas, safe
clearance areas, fencing and other items used in connection with said tower.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — Equipment that converts and then stores or
transfers energy from the wind into usable forms of energy.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM FACILITY or FACILITY — All of the land and
equipment used by the wind energy system and its support facilities,
including the wind turbine, tower, access roads, control facilities,
meteorological towers, maintenance and all power collection and
transmission systems.
WIND TURBINE — A mechanical device which captures the kinetic energy
of the wind and converts it into electricity. The primary components of a
wind turbine are the blade assembly, electrical generator and tower.
§ 567-3. Licensing.
§ 567-4. License application procedure for wind energy systems.
A. Licenses required. From and after the effective date of this chapter, no
wind energy system shall be operated or maintained in the Village
without first obtaining a license to operate issued by the Village.
B. Effect of other licenses. The fact that a person possesses any other valid
license or permit required by law does not exempt that person from the
requirement of obtaining a wind energy systems license under this
chapter.
C. Nontransferability of licenses. The license is not assignable or
transferable to any other person without the express prior written
consent of the Village, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld;
provided, however, that the licensee may assign the license once to a
new entity, upon notice to the Village, if the licensee submits an
affidavit demonstrating the following:
(1) The new entity is wholly owned by the licensee;
(2) The new entity is properly formed and authorized to do business in
Wisconsin; and
(3) The written assignment requires the new entity to assume all of the
licensee's rights, duties and obligations under the license,
including but not limited to the letter of credit requirements and
the certificate of insurance requirements.
§ 567-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 567-4
1:317
A. Any person desiring to secure a wind energy systems license shall file
an application together with two additional copies of the application
with the Village Clerk/Treasurer.
B. The application shall be on a form provided by the Village Clerk/
Treasurer.
C. The following information shall be required of each applicant and must
be provided under oath or affirmation:
(1) Name, address, and phone number.
(2) If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, limited liability
company or limited liability partnership, the application shall
include the name of the business entity; the date of incorporation,
registration or organization; the state in which the entity was
incorporated, registered or organized; the name and address and
phone numbers of the registered agent, where applicable; the
names and addresses of all officers and directors; operating or
managing partners or general partners; managing members or
managers, whichever is applicable for the particular form of
business entity.
(3) Name and address of any other current or past wind energy
systems operated by the applicant whether in this state or any
other state or district within the United States.
(4) Name, address and phone number of an individual who is
responsible for the day-to-day operation of the facility, who will be
deemed the operator for purposes of this chapter, and who will be
the contact person for the municipality.
(5) A statement that the applicant is familiar and in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter of the Village's municipal code,
including the responsibility to reimburse all reasonable costs and
professional fees associated with the processing, examination and
analysis of the proposed facility.
D. Each application shall be accompanied by a site plan which meets all
the requirements of this chapter, as well as any additional site-specific
requirements of the Village Board and/or the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer in accordance with the technical requirements in this
chapter. Each application shall be accompanied by a site plan of the
wind energy system tower site(s), including total acreage occupied by
the facility.
E. Each application shall be signed by the applicant.
F. Each application shall be accompanied by payment of nonrefundable
application fee to be determined from time to time by separate
resolution of the Village Board. Filing of the application does not occur
until this fee has been paid.
§ 567-4 FOX POINT CODE § 567-4
1:318
§ 567-5. Technical requirements for licensing.
Design, construction and operation of wind energy systems shall be subject
to the requirements of this chapter. It is recognized that the restrictions
herein are neither exclusive nor exhaustive. In instances where a health or
G. The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall date the filing of the application on
the face of the application.
H. Upon receipt of the application, the Village Clerk/Treasurer shall
distribute a copy of the application to the Village Board and Building
Inspector.
I. The Village Board may refer the application to the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer or a qualified consulting engineer for further
review. The reasonably necessary costs associated with the engineering
review shall be the responsibility of the applicant, in accord with the
terms of this chapter.
J. The Village Board may but shall not be obligated to refer the application
to the Plan Commission for review and recommendation.
K. The Village Board may but shall not be obligated to refer the application
to a public hearing for purposes of receiving public comment.
L. Following review, the Village Board shall grant the license, grant the
license subject to specified conditions, or deny the application after
reviewing the application for compliance with the licensing standards
found in this chapter and under state law.
M. If the license is granted by the Village Board, then the Village Clerk/
Treasurer shall issue the license as soon as practicable. If the license is
granted subject to specified conditions, the conditions shall be
described in writing and provided to the applicant.
N. If the Village Board decides to deny the application for a license, the
Board shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for denial.
O. Any applicant aggrieved by such a decision of the Village Board shall be
entitled to immediately appeal the Board's decision in circuit court.
Such an appeal must be made within 30 days of the date of the written
decision by the Board. The administrative review described in Chapter
7 of this Code shall not apply to any appeal of the Village Board's
decision to grant, conditionally grant, or deny an application under this
chapter. The Village explicitly elects not to be governed by Chapter 68,
Wisconsin Statutes, and instead review shall be as described in this
section.
P. Each license issued for a wind energy system shall state on its face the
name of the licensee, the name of the establishment, the street address
of the establishment, the date of issue of the license and its expiration
date.
§ 567-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 567-5
1:319
safety concern is identified with regard to any application for a wind energy
system, additional and/or more restrictive conditions may be included in the
license to address such concerns.
A. Aircraft protection. The wind turbine generator tower shall be marked
as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). There shall be
no lights on the outside of the tower other than what is required by the
FAA or other applicable authority or as otherwise agreed in connection
with the issuance of the license. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this
restriction shall not apply to infrared heating devices used to protect
the monitoring equipment. The tower shall be connected to an
uninterruptible backup power source to ensure continuous compliance
with FAA regulations. To the extent consistent with FAA regulations,
shrouding for the lights shall direct reflection of light up.
B. Blasting. The licensee shall not undertake any blasting in connection
with the construction of the facility unless that applicant shall have
notified the Village and submitted a blasting plan consistent with
applicable laws and regulations.
C. Color. Except as may be required by the FAA, the coloration of the
exterior components and each wind turbine tower shall be off white,
light gray or other neutral color, including the blades. The finish shall
be flat or matte. The licensee throughout the term of this license shall
maintain the required coloration and finish.
D. Electromagnetic interference. The licensee shall not operate the facility
so as to cause microwave, television, radio, or navigation interference
contrary to Federal Communications Commission regulations or other
law.
E. Emergency shutdown. The licensee shall be required to immediately
cease operations for the duration of any emergency. "Emergency" shall
mean a proven condition or situation caused by the facility that
presents an imminent physical threat of danger to life or significant
threat to property.
F. Groundwater protection. The licensee shall operate the facility so as not
to cause groundwater contamination in violation of applicable law.
G. Noise. The noise design limit for each wind turbine shall not exceed 50
dBA as measured as the average dBA at the neighboring property lines,
or outside of boundary lines of any noise attenuation easement obtained
and recorded by licensee, whichever distance is greatest.
H. Public roads. At licensee's expense, licensee shall provide the Director
of Public Works/Village Engineer a videotape documenting the
condition of all haul roads in the Village prior to beginning and after
completing construction of the facility. At licensee's expense, the
licensee shall contract with qualified contractors to repair any damage
to the haul roads due to transportation of equipment and facility
components ("road repair obligations"). In the event a hazardous road
§ 567-5 FOX POINT CODE § 567-5
1:320
condition exists that is not promptly corrected by licensee, the Director
of Public Works/Village Engineer may order emergency road repairs
be performed by qualified contractors, and licensee shall promptly
reimburse the Village for reasonable emergency road repair costs.
Licensee shall assure funding of the road repair obligations by a letter
of credit or guaranty from a contractor of applicant. Weather
permitting, the final road repair obligations shall be completed to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
within six months after completion of construction of the facility, or as
soon thereafter as weather conditions permit. The Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer may waive the requirements of this section
for a small wind energy system, upon the applicant demonstrating to
the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer that
there will be no adverse impact upon Village roads in the transport or
construction of the small wind energy system.
I. Screening. Licensee shall design the facility so as to minimize visual
impacts such as glare, reflection or shadow flicker. Complaint of such
visual impacts occurring inside any residence exceeding five hours per
year shall be dealt with in accordance with the reporting and complaint
resolution procedures herein.
J. Setback.
(1) Wind turbines shall be set back a distance of 1.1 times their height
from the nearest property line, unless appropriate waivers or
easements in a recordable form are secured from adjacent property
owners or other acceptable mitigation is approved by the Village
Board.
(2) Wind turbines shall be set back a distance of no less than three
times their total height from the nearest residence, school, hospital
or church unless waived in a recordable form by the affected
property owner or owners. In no event shall the setback distance be
less than 1.1 times the total height of the wind turbine.
(3) Wind turbines shall be set back a distance of no less than their total
height from the nearest aboveground public electric power line or
telephone line, unless waived in a recordable form by the affected
property owner and utility company.
K. Signage and fencing.
(1) Except for small wind energy systems, licensee shall provide
reasonable signage at the facility, identifying the premises as being
part of the facility and providing appropriate safety notices and
warnings against trespassing. The no trespassing signs shall be
posted around the entire premises at an appropriate distance for
posting but no less than two conspicuous places for every 40 acres
within the facility.
§ 567-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 567-5
1:321
§ 567-6. Insurance and indemnification.
(2) No advertising material or signage other than warning, equipment
information or indicia of ownership shall be allowed on the wind
energy system tower or turbine. This prohibition shall include the
attachment of any flag, decorative sign, streamers, pennants,
ribbons, spinners or waiving, fluttering or revolving devices, but
not including weather devices.
L. Stray voltage. Licensee shall utilize good utility practice to minimize, to
the extent practicable, the impact, if any, of stray voltage caused by the
facility.
M. Reporting and complaint resolution procedure. Licensee shall report to
the Village as follows:
(1) Extraordinary events. Within 24 hours of any extraordinary event,
licensee shall notify the Village. "Extraordinary events" shall
include tower collapse, catastrophic turbine failure, unauthorized
entry to the tower base, thrown blade or hub, any injury to a facility
worker or other person that requires emergency medical
treatment, or other event that in licensee's opinion reasonably
impacts the public health and safety of the Village.
(2) Complaints. The licensee of the wind energy system facility shall, at
the licensee's expense and in coordination with the Village, develop
a system for logging and investigating all complaints related to the
operational standards set forth in Subsections B, D, E, F, G, I, L of
this section and § 567-7B. If the Village determines that it is
reasonably necessary, it may undertake an investigation of the
alleged operational violation by a qualified individual mutually
acceptable to the Village and the owner of the wind energy system
facility. The reasonable cost and fees incurred by the Village in
retaining said qualified individual shall be reimbursed by the owner
of the wind energy system facility. After the investigation, if the
Village Board reasonably concludes that operational violations are
shown to be caused by the wind energy system facility, the licensee
shall use reasonable efforts to mitigate such problems on a case-bycase
basis, including measures such as planting trees and installing
awnings.
A. Insurance. All licensees shall maintain the following insurance
coverages commencing upon construction of the facility, unless reduced
or waived in writing by the Village Board.
(1) The licensee shall, at its expense, maintain a broad form
comprehensive coverage policy of public liability insurance
insuring applicant and participating landowners against loss or
liability caused by applicant's occupation and use of the property, in
an amount not less than $5,000,000 of combined single limit
liability coverage per occurrence, accident or incident, which has a
§ 567-5 FOX POINT CODE § 567-6
1:322
commercially reasonable deductible. The Village shall be named as
an additional insured on the policy.
(2) Workers' compensation coverage in an amount required by
Wisconsin law. The applicant shall require subcontractors and
others not protected under its insurance to obtain and maintain
workers' compensation and employers' liability insurance.
(3) Certificates of insurance evidencing compliance with these
requirements shall be provided upon request of the Village. The
insurer will provide notice to the Village in the event there is a
lapse in coverage exceeding 30 days. All policies other than
workers' compensation shall be written on an occurrence and not
on a claim-made basis.
B. Defense of land use decision and indemnity.
(1) Defense of land use decision. In addition to the indemnification
described below, licensee shall reimburse the Village its reasonable
attorney's fees incurred in defending any legal actions brought by
third parties challenging the legality or enforceability of this
chapter or any portion thereof, or the issuance of a license by the
Village pursuant to this chapter. If the Village seeks
reimbursement, it shall notify licensee in writing promptly upon
discovering any claim entitling it to a land use defense
reimbursement, but in no event later than 120 days after receiving
written notice of any action, lawsuit, proceeding, investigation or
other claim against it which may give rise to a claim for a land use
defense reimbursement. The licensee shall not be obligated to
reimburse the Village with respect to any such liability, action or
claim if the Village fails to notify licensee thereof in accordance
with the provisions of this section in sufficient time including,
without limitation, any responsive motion or answer to a complaint,
petition, notice, or other legal, equitable action or claim, but only
insofar as such knowing failure to notify licensee has actually
resulted in prejudice or damage to licensee. With respect to any
third-party action, lawsuit, proceeding, investigation or other claim
which is subject to reimbursement under this section, licensee shall
be entitled to assume and control (with counsel of its choice) the
defense of such action, lawsuit, proceeding, investigation or other
claim at licensee's expense; provided, however, that the Village
shall be entitled to participate in the defense of such claim and to
employ counsel of its choice for such purpose (the fees and
expenses of such separate counsel to be borne by the Village) and
to assert against any third party any and all cross claims and
counterclaims the Village may have, subject to licensee's consent,
which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. If licensee elects
to assume the defense of any such claim, it may settle such claim in
its sole discretion so long as either such settlement provides an
unconditional release of the Village, or licensee shall obtain the
prior written consent of the Village (which consent shall not be
§ 567-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 567-6
1:323
§ 567-7. Standards.
unreasonably withheld). If licensee elects to assume the defense
of any claim, the Village shall fully cooperate with licensee and its
counsel in such defense.
(2) Indemnification. The licensee shall defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the Village and its officials, employees and agents from
and against any and all claims, demands, losses, suits, causes of
action, damages, injuries, costs, expenses and liabilities
whatsoever, including reasonable attorney's fees (such liabilities
together known as "liability") arising out of licensee's selection,
construction, operation and removal of the wind turbines and
affiliated equipment including, without limitation, Liability for
property or personal injury (including death), whether said liability
is premised on contract or on tort (including without limitation
strict liability or negligence). This general indemnification shall not
be construed as limiting or qualifying the Village's other
indemnification rights available under law.
A. Construction standards. Wind turbines shall be constructed in
compliance with good utility practice for wind turbines. In the event
that, after inspection by a qualified expert in good utility practice, the
Village concludes that a wind turbine is not constructed in compliance
with good utility practice or constitutes a danger to persons or property,
then upon notice being provided, the licensee shall have 90 days to
bring the noncompliant wind turbine(s) into compliance with such
standards or, if 90 days is insufficient time to cure the noncompliance,
the licensee shall present a plan to the Village describing the reason for
the delay and the time frame for the cure to be put in place. Failure to
bring such noncompliant wind turbine(s) into compliance or failure to
provide a plan for compliance within 90 days shall constitute grounds
for the Village to demand removal of said wind turbine(s) at the
licensee's expense.
B. Performance standards. Any wind energy system or wind energy system
facility shall be operated and maintained consistent with good utility
practice for comparable facilities.
C. State and federal standards. Construction of wind turbines shall meet
or exceed current standards and regulations, if any, of any other agency
of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate windpowered
generators. If such standards and regulations are changed
and retroactive application is required for the change, then the licensee
shall bring the wind turbine(s) into compliance with such applicable
revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective
date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance
schedule is permitted by the controlling state or federal agency or
approved by the Village. A determination of no hazard for each wind
turbine must be obtained from the FAA as a condition precedent for the
installation of each turbine, when required.
§ 567-6 FOX POINT CODE § 567-7
1:324
§ 567-8. Repair and replacement.
The licensee shall be authorized to repair and replace the wind turbine
generator and associated equipment consistent with good utility practice
during the term of the license as needed to keep the facility in good repair
and operating condition. However, no such repair or replacement shall
entitle the licensee to any extension of the term of the license, even if it
extends the useful life of the facility. If licensee desires to extend the term
of the license in the future, the licensee shall be required to apply for such
extension or amendment of the license in accordance with the terms of this
chapter.
§ 567-9. Wind turbine generator removal.
D. Wind turbine safety standards. The licensee shall comply with the
following safety standards:
(1) All wiring between the wind energy system tower, the turbine, and
the substation shall be underground;
(2) The outside of wind energy system towers shall not be climbable;
(3) All access doors to the towers and electrical equipment shall be
locked; and
(4) Appropriate warning signage shall be placed on each tower, all
electrical equipment, and all entrances.
A. Cessation of operation. Upon expiration of the license or should
removal of all or part of the wind energy systems facility otherwise be
required under this chapter, the licensee shall effectuate the removal of
the wind energy system affected. Further, if the licensee ceases
operation of the facility for a continuous period of one year, the licensee
shall take all measures necessary to accomplish such removal. Unless
otherwise agreed to with landowners in a recordable form, said removal
shall be to a depth of 48 inches beneath the soil surface, and the
licensee shall restore the premises to substantially the same physical
condition which existed immediately before the construction of the
facility (the "removal obligations"). Any agreement for removal of a
foundation to a lesser depth or for no removal of the foundation shall be
recorded with the Milwaukee County Register of Deeds and shall show
the locations of all such foundations.
B. Financial assurance.
(1) The licensee shall assure funding of the removal obligations by a
letter of credit, cash or the equivalent held in trust in favor of the
Village, in a form to be approved by the Village Attorney in an
amount to be determined by the Village Board using the following
procedure. The licensee shall submit an estimate of the removal
obligations by a qualified engineer, approval of which shall not be
unreasonably withheld. The Village Board may waive this
§ 567-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 567-9
1:325
§ 567-10. Procedures for alteration or revocation of licensed
premises.
requirement for a financial guarantee in the case of a small wind
energy system.
(2) The amount of the required financial guarantee may be adjusted by
the Village Board on an annual basis in accord with the Consumer
Price Index as published by the United States Department of Labor,
Bureau of Labor Statistics, in which circumstance the licensee shall
be required to submit new surety in the adjusted amount. Further,
and notwithstanding the surety, in the event that the licensee has
failed, refused or neglected to comply with the removal
requirements herein within 12 months of the Village's written
notice, the Village and/or its agents shall be allowed to enter onto
the premises for purposes of razing and removing the subject
structures. All costs associated with the Village's efforts in this
regard shall be placed upon the real estate tax bill of the site as a
special charge.
A. Amendment. Following the granting of a license, any licensee who
wishes to materially alter any aspect of the licensed premises which
was required to be described in the building plan or site plan required
under this chapter shall apply to the Village Board for an amendment to
the license. The application shall explain the nature of the alteration
and the reasons therefor and include a nonrefundable application fee.
The applicant shall pay the reasonably necessary engineering expenses,
if any, associated with the review. The Village Board shall act on the
amendment application consistent with the terms of this chapter.
B. Revocation of license. Each of the following occurrences shall
constitute a violation of the terms and conditions of this license (a
"violation"), and any such violation shall be grounds for revocation of
the license (whatever the reason for such an event of default and
whether it shall be voluntary or involuntary or be effected by operation
of law or pursuant to any judgment, order or regulation) after the
expiration of the notice and cure period and revocation hearing as set
forth below:
(1) If the licensee abandons the wind turbine generators located on the
premises for a period of one year or more;
(2) If the licensee fails to observe or perform any material condition or
provision of the license or this chapter for a period of 30 days after
it has received written notice of such failure from the Village;
provided, however, that a violation shall not occur if the licensee
commences performance of such obligation within such thirty-day
period and is diligently proceeding to complete such performance;
or
§ 567-9 FOX POINT CODE § 567-10
1:326
§ 567-11. License expiration.
Unless the Village Board authorizes a different term based upon analysis
of the useful life of the wind energy systems facility, every license issued
pursuant to this chapter will terminate upon the expiration of 30 years from
the date of issuance.
§ 567-12. Fees and expenses.
The licensee shall reimburse the Village as required by Chapter 67, Finance
and Taxation, Article III, Charges for Professional Fees, of the Village Code
for all costs and expenses incurred by the Village in relation to the
application and the facility, both at the time of the application and
throughout the term of the license.
Chapter 573
VACATION RENTALS
§ 573-1. Definition.
VACATION RENTAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any property that is defined or
regulated by Wisconsin Statutes §§ 66.1014(2)(d)2 or 97.01(15k), as a
tourist rooming house.
§ 573-2. Regulation of vacation rental.
(3) If there is a material failure by the licensee to comply with any
statute, regulation, rule, or license administered by any federal,
state or county department, agency, or commission directly related
to the operation of the wind turbine generator and if the licensee
fails to cure the material failure to comply for a period of 30 days
after the date the licensee receives written notice of such failure
from the Village or the federal, state or local governmental body or
agency with jurisdiction; provided, however, that a violation shall
not occur if the licensee commences performance of such
obligation within such thirty-day period and is diligently
proceeding to complete such performance.
C. Hearing. The Village shall not revoke any license without first providing
the licensee a hearing and the right to respond, including the right to
present evidence regarding any defenses or extenuating circumstances
(such as the applicant's prompt commencement of remedial measures
that cannot reasonably be concluded within 30 days) regarding the
alleged violations.
D. Judicial review. The licensee shall have the right to appeal any
revocation to Circuit Court within 30 days of the date of the revocation.
A. Purpose. The following vacation rental establishment licensing
regulations are created, to ensure that applicable state laws are
§ 567-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-2
1:327
followed, to protect persons engaged in this practice either as landlord
or tenant; to protect against adverse impacts of noise, odor,
disturbance, adverse visual impacts, or other nuisances, that this
practice could have upon neighboring properties; to preserve property
values; for the commercial benefit of the Village of Fox Point; and
also to control the impacts of such operations on municipal services,
including snow plowing, garbage collection, sanitation, law
enforcement and fire protection.
B. License required. No vacation rental establishment may operate in the
Village of Fox Point unless a vacation rental establishment license for
such operation is granted by the Village of Fox Point, and only in full
compliance with such license. A separate license is required for each
rental of the vacation rental establishment.
C. Application. Application for license shall be made by the property
owner in writing to the Village Clerk upon forms provided by the Village
of Fox Point. Such application must be filed with the Village Clerk no
later than 48 hours prior to the proposed vacation rental period of use.
The Village Manager is authorized to issue the vacation rental permit if
the Village Manager finds that the application meets all requirements of
this chapter, and the Village Manager may include such conditions as
the Village Manager deems to be necessary or appropriate to ensure
compliance with this chapter. The application must include all of the
following:
(1) Address of vacation rental establishment.
(2) Name (include full legal name with middle initial), address,
telephone number and email address of vacation rental
establishment owner.
(3) Name (include full legal name with middle initial), date of birth,
address, telephone number and email address of vacation rental
establishment operator, if different from the owner or if owner is a
trust or entity other than an individual.
(4) If the owner resides more than 40 miles from the vacation rental
establishment, name (include full legal name with middle initial),
address, telephone number and email address of owner's agent
who is located within 40 miles of the vacation rental establishment.
(5) Name (include full legal name with middle initial), address,
telephone number and email address of person renting the vacation
rental establishment, and of all persons occupying the unit 18 years
of age or older, and name (including full name with middle initial)
and age of all persons occupying the unit under 18 years of age.
(6) Starting date of the 180-day annual rental period.
(7) A copy of the state tourist rooming house license for the vacation
rental establishment.
§ 573-2 FOX POINT CODE § 573-2
1:328
(8) Proof that the vacation rental establishment complies with the
Wisconsin Commercial Building Code as required by Wisconsin
Administrative Code Section ATCP 72.14.
(9) Proof of property and liability insurance covering the vacation
rental establishment property and use.
(10) A list of all property that may be used by the vacation rental
establishment tenants, including, for example, whether tenants are
permitted to use the house, any guest house, any boathouse, any
garage, any dock, any boats, golf carts, or particular amenities of
the vacation rental establishment property.
(11) The total square footage of the principal structure used as a
vacation rental establishment.
(12) The total number of bedrooms, and total number of beds used for
the vacation rental establishment.
D. Fees. The applicant shall pay such fee as may be established from time
to time by the Village of Fox Point Board by separate resolution, for
each vacation rental establishment license application.
E. Minimum standards. Conditions under which permitted. A license shall
not be granted for a vacation rental establishment unless all of the
following conditions are met:
(1) All vacation rental establishments shall be subject to and comply
with Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 97, including maintaining a
tourist rooming house annual license as required by Wisconsin
Statutes § 97.605(1)(a), which sections are incorporated herein by
reference.
(2) All vacation rental establishments shall be subject to and comply
with Wisconsin Administrative Code Section ATCP 72 which is
hereby incorporated by reference.
(3) Each vacation rental establishment shall be required to keep a
register and require all guests to sign such register using their
actual legal names including middle initial and address before
being assigned quarters. The register shall be available for
inspection by the Fox Point police officers, and Village Clerk or
designee for a period of not less than one year.
(4) A minimum of one off-street parking area shall be provided for
every guest bedroom with a minimum of three parking stalls. All
parking areas shall meet the size and location requirements of the
Village of Fox Point Code and shall be hard-surfaced and
maintained in a reasonably dustless condition.
(5) Every vacation rental establishment shall be properly addressed
with numbers on the street side of the structure, a minimum of five
§ 573-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-2
1:329
inches high and of contrasting color so as to be visible from the
street.
(6) The Village Manager shall consider the potential impact to the
surrounding neighborhood and proximity to any existing bed and
breakfast establishment or vacation rental establishment when
reviewing a request for a vacation rental establishment license. If
other such establishments are present in close proximity, the
Village Manager may reduce the number of persons who may be on
site at any one time, per Subsection E(12), but not below the
maximum allowed by state law.
(7) All refuse containers shall be screened from view.
(8) If the Village Manager finds that any statement made on the license
application is incorrect, at any time, the Village of Fox Point may
immediately and summarily revoke the license.
(9) Sleeping quarters related to a vacation rental establishment use
shall only be located within the principal structure on the lot.
Accessory buildings, including guest houses, cannot be used for
sleeping quarters.
(10) Property that is used for a vacation rental establishment must have
clearly delineated property lines, by approved fences, vegetation or
other means to the satisfaction of the Village Building Inspector.
Such clear delineation must be maintained for the duration of the
license, to ensure that all users of the property are clearly aware of
the boundaries of the property and confine their use to the
applicable parcel.
(11) The vacation rental establishment occupancy limits shall not
exceed the lesser of the following occupant limitations at any time:
the number of occupants allowed by Wisconsin Administrative
Code Section ATCP 72.14(2)(b) per bedroom; eight occupants per
1,000 square feet of living area within the principal structure; the
number of occupants for which there are beds available within the
proposed vacation rental establishment structure, provided that
the beds do not include temporary beds (cots, air beds, fold-out
beds, or futon couches) and each bed shall count for one occupant
except each queen and king sized bed shall count for two
occupants; 20 occupants.
(12) The parcel cannot have more people on site than the higher of 20
people or the maximum number of people allowed under Wisconsin
Administrative Code Section ATCP 72.14(2)(b).
(13) The petitioner/owner must provide a copy of this section and a copy
of the license, to all parties using the property for vacation rental
purposes, prior to commencement of each such use.
§ 573-2 FOX POINT CODE § 573-2
1:330
Part V: General Offenses
Chapter 579
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 681.
(14) Transfer of a license because of transfer or sale of property is not
permissible. Should such property be sold, then the license shall
become void.
(15) If a new owner obtains approval of a vacation rental license, the
previously established annual 180-day period shall remain
applicable.
(16) The vacation rental establishment shall be owned and used as a
residential dwelling at all times, in accordance with
§ 66.1014(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
F. Annual limit. If a vacation rental establishment is rented for periods of
more than six but fewer than 29 consecutive days the vacation rental
establishment shall not operate outside of the 180 consecutive day
period that begins on the date of the first such rental, for a 365-day
period. The owner of the vacation rental establishment shall notify the
Village Clerk in writing when the first 365-day period begins, and all
subsequent 365-day periods shall be measured from that date. This
limitation shall be interpreted in compliance with Wisconsin Statutes
§ 66.1014(2)(d)1.
G. Prohibition. Rental of a residential dwelling for six consecutive days or
fewer is prohibited. For purposes of this subsection "rental" includes
any real property that is subject to any verbal or written contract, lease,
sublease, rental agreement, easement, instrument or other device (the
"agreement"), if all of the following circumstances apply: the agreement
or agreements create a right to occupy said property; such rights of
occupancy have an actual duration of less than seven consecutive days;
and the agreement requires payment or other remuneration or barter,
for the benefit of the property owner.
§ 573-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 573-2
1:331

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 25 of the 1961 Code]
§ 579-1. Definitions.
Terms used in this article are defined as follows:
AT LARGE — A dog or cat shall be deemed at large within the Village of
Fox Point when on public property or any private land other than that of its
owner unless it is:
DANGEROUS DOG — Any individual dog which, when either unmuzzled,
unleashed, or unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner's family,
in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent
attitude of attack upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places.
OWNER — Any person owning, harboring, sheltering, or keeping a dog or
cat. The occupant of any premises on which a dog or cat remains or to
which it customarily returns daily for a period of 10 days is presumed to be
harboring, sheltering, or keeping a dog or cat within this definition.
VICIOUS DOG —
Attached to a leash of sufficient strength to restrain the dog or cat,
where said leash is held by a person competent to govern the dog or
cat;
A.
B. Properly restrained within a motor vehicle; or
Under the direction and control of a handler expressly authorized by
the Village Board to act on the Village's behalf.
C.
Any individual dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites on or attacks a
human being or other animal either on public or private property.
A.
Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger
the safety of human beings or domestic animals.
B.
Any individual dog that has a trait or characteristic and a generally
known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked
attacks upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a
particular manner or with special equipment.
C.
Any individual dog which attacks a human being or domestic animal
without provocation.
D.
Any individual dog which has been found to be a dangerous dog upon
three separate occasions.
E.
No dog shall be deemed vicious if it bites, attacks, or menaces a
trespasser on the property of its owner or harms or menaces anyone
who has tormented or abused it or is a professionally trained dog for
F.
§ 579-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 579-1
1:333
§ 579-2. Prohibited acts; dangerous and vicious dogs.
law enforcement or guard duties. Vicious dogs shall not be classified in
a manner that is specific as to a breed.
A. It shall be unlawful:
(1) To own an animal which is at large.
(2) To own an animal which assaults or attacks any person.
(3) To own or keep an animal which, by frequent howling, whining,
yelping, barking, meowing or otherwise, shall cause serious
annoyance or disturbance to a person or persons living in the area.
[Amended 12-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-16]
(4) To own or keep an animal which acts in such a manner as to justify
the belief that it is vicious. Any animal which shall have bitten any
person or other animal within the Village and off the owner's
property shall be presumed a vicious animal.
(5) To keep an animal in the Village except as allowed by and in
compliance with this chapter. [Added 9-13-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-09]
B. Vicious and dangerous dogs.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog
which has been found to be a vicious dog unless such dog is at all
times kept in an enclosure.
(a) The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the
enclosure are:
[1] If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain
veterinary care for the dog; or
[2] To comply with the order, the dog must be muzzled or
restrained with a chain having a tensile strength of 300
pounds and not exceeding three feet in length, and shall be
under the direct control and supervision of the owner or
keeper of the dog. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08]
(b) Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog which is not
confined to an enclosure shall be impounded or turned over to
a licensed veterinarian for destruction by lethal injection.
[Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
(2) No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give away the dog.
(3) Any dog found or determined to be vicious or dangerous shall be
microchipped for permanent identification and all information
§ 579-1 FOX POINT CODE § 579-2
1:334
§ 579-3. Number limited. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08]
No person or persons living, lodging, cooking or eating together in a
residence or residential unit shall own or keep within the Village a number
of dogs and/or cats over the age of six months which added together total
more than three animals.
§ 579-4. Impounding animals. [Amended 8-9-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
The Wisconsin Humane Society and its agents and any police officer or
any health officer of the Village or the Milwaukee Area Domestic Animal
Control Commission may apprehend and impound any dog or cat within
the classification of § 579-2. If the dog or cat falls within either § 579-2A(2)
and/or (4), it may be retained in impoundment in a private kennel until the
Municipal Court or other court having jurisdiction over the matter makes a
finding that there has been a violation or has not been a violation.62
§ 579-5. Rabies. [Amended 8-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
Wisconsin Statutes § 95.21, titled "Rabies control program," and rules of
the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
adopted pursuant to said statute, including such amendments,
recodification, or renumbering as may be made thereto from time to time,
shall apply within the Village of Fox Point. Such laws and administrative
rules are incorporated herein as though stated herein at length, including
the penalties described therein, except as to the penalty of imprisonment.
§ 579-6. Report of animal bite. [Amended 8-9-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
Any person who knows that a dog or cat has bitten any person shall
immediately report such fact to a police officer or health officer of the
Village, and upon notification of such fact, the owner or keeper of the dog
or cat shall have the animal confined, pursuant to the state statutes and
administrative rule authority referenced in § 579-5 above. If the animal is
currently immunized against rabies as evidenced by a valid certificate of
rabies vaccination or other sufficient evidence as determined by the police
officer or health officer, then the owner shall be allowed to quarantine the
animal on the premises of the owner. In other cases the police officer or
pertaining to said animal will be stored in a central database for
the purpose of tracking said animal.
(4) Any dog quarantined for a bite will be microchipped by a licensed
veterinarian prior to its release from quarantine at the expense of
the owner of said animal.
62.Editor's Note: Original § 25.04, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 96-631.
§ 579-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 579-6
1:335
health officer shall order the animal to be quarantined in a boarding kennel
or small animal hospital approved by the police officer or health officer.
The quarantine shall be for a period of at least 10 days after the incident
occurred, and said animal shall not be released or removed from quarantine
without the written approval of a licensed veterinarian.
§ 579-7. Entry on owner's premises.
Any police officer or the Wisconsin Humane Society or any of its agents may
enter upon the premises of the owner or keeper of an unlicensed dog, as
defined in Ch. 174, Wis. Stats., for the purpose of seizing it.
§ 579-8. Redeeming impounded animal. [Amended 11-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-08]
Any dog or cat impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article may be
redeemed by payment as defined by the impounding authority. In addition to
the above fees, the owner of an unlicensed dog or cat shall obtain a license
before it is released.
§ 579-9. Dogs on beaches.
§ 579-10. Dog and cat licenses.
A. The owner of a dog shall not permit the dog from June 1 to September
15 to be upon the public beaches adjacent to North Beach Road in the
Village, whether or not accompanied by the owner or a member of the
owner's family.
B. Any dog found upon the public beaches, except as allowed in
Subsection A, and any dog found upon public beaches adjacent to North
Beach Road from June 1 to September 15 at large, is subject to seizure
by the Police Department or the designee of the Chief of Police, and
upon seizure shall be impounded, subject to the right of the owner to
obtain possession thereof as provided in this article. Any person
allowing or contributing to the illegal presence of a dog upon a public
beach shall be subject to citation and forfeiture as imposed by the § 1-4
of this Code.
A. A dog license shall be required as provided by § 174.05, Wis. Stats., and
a cat license shall be required as provided by Milwaukee County
ordinances. The applicant shall first display a current certificate of
rabies vaccination before a dog or cat license is issued. The registration
fees shall be as provided by the Milwaukee Area Domestic Animal
Control Commission (MADACC).63
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 579-6 FOX POINT CODE § 579-10
1:336
§ 579-11. Fecal matter.
§ 579-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to penalties as provided in § 1-4 of the Fox Point Village Code.
However, the minimum forfeiture to be imposed on any person convicted of
violating any section of this article shall be $25 and shall be increased by
$25 for each prior conviction in a three-year period measured from date of
offense to date of offense.
§ 579-13. Additional penalties.
In any case falling within § 579-2A(2) and/or (4), the owner shall make a
mandatory appearance before the Municipal Court of the Village. If the
Municipal Court makes a finding that there has been a violation of one
of said subsections, the Municipal Court may, in addition to any penalties
under § 579-12, order that the dog or cat be destroyed or removed from the
Village.
§ 579-14. Cruelty to animals.
B. The dog license tag shall be securely attached to a collar. The collar
with the tag shall at all times be kept on the dog or cat for which the
license is issued.
A. No person shall appear with an animal on any public or private property
other than the premises of the animal owner or said person unless such
person visibly has in his or her immediate possession a scoop or device
for the removal of fecal matter.
B. No person who appears with an animal on any public or private
property other than the premises of the animal owner or said person
shall fail to immediately remove fecal matter of said animal and dispose
of it on the premises of the animal owner or said person. Such fecal
matter shall not be deposited in a container or receptacle of any type
which is used for the deposit of rubbish to be collected by the
Department of Public Works of the Village.
C. The owner of an animal is responsible for the prompt removal and
disposal of any fecal matter deposited by the animal on any public or
private property other than the premises of the animal owner where
Subsection B does not apply. Fecal matter shall be deposited on the
premises of the owner and shall not be deposited in a container or
receptacle of any type which is used for the deposit of rubbish to be
collected by the Department of Public Works of the Village.
D. If the person who appears with an animal in violation of Subsection A
and/or B above is a minor, the animal owner shall be held legally
responsible.
§ 579-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 579-14
1:337
A. Cruelty.
(1) No person may cause, allow or themselves cruelly beat, frighten,
overburden, neglect or abuse any animal or bird, or use any device
or chemical substance by which pain, suffering or death may result,
whether the animal belongs to the person or another, except that
reasonable force may be used to drive off vicious or trespassing
animals.
(2) No person shall abandon any animal or bird or transport any animal
or bird in a cruel manner.
B. Food and water. No person owning or having custody of any animal or
bird may neglect or fail to provide it with necessary nourishing food at
least once daily and provide a constant supply of clean water to sustain
the animal or bird in good health.
C. Shelter.
(1) No person may fail to provide any animal or bird in his or her
charge with shelter from inclement weather to ensure the
protection and comfort of the animal or bird.
(2) When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or discomfort to any
animal or bird, shade shall be provided by natural or artificial
means to allow protection from the direct rays of the sun but still
allow air to pass to keep the animal cool.
(3) Dogs and cats kept outdoors for more than one hour at a time shall
be provided with moistureproof and windproof shelter of a size
which allows the animal to turn around freely and to easily sit,
stand and lie in a normal position and to keep the animal clean, dry
and comfortable. Whenever the outdoor temperature is below 40°
F., clean, dry bedding materials shall be provided in such shelters
for insulation and to retain the body heat of the animal.
Automobiles shall not be used as animal shelters.
D. Areas to be kept clean. Any area where an animal is housed or allowed
to remain shall be kept clean of feces, animal waste, and other
substances in order to keep the animal healthy and comfortable.
E. Leashes. Chains, ropes or leashes shall be placed or attached so that
they shall not be entangled with another animal or object and shall be of
sufficient length in proportion to the size of the animal to allow the
animal proper exercise and convenient access to food, water and
shelter. A leash shall be located so as not to allow an animal to trespass
on public or private property nor in such manner as to cause harm or
danger to persons or other animals. A leash shall be located so as not to
allow the animal to jump over an obstacle where the leash can become
entangled and the animal choke.
§ 579-14 FOX POINT CODE § 579-14
1:338
§ 579-15. Feeding deer.
§ 579-16. Feeding of animals other than birds.
The Village Board finds that the unregulated or unfettered provision of
food substances to rodents, or other nondomestic animals, can result in
infestation, the accumulation of feces, or the presence of diseased animals
any of which can present a risk to the health and welfare of the public. As
such, the Village Board adopts the following regulation pertaining to the
feeding of animals.
F. Enforcement. The Police Department or Milwaukee Area Domestic
Animal Control Commission may enforce any provision of this section.
G. Animal removal. The Police Department or Milwaukee Area Domestic
Animal Control Commission may confiscate or remove animals from a
premises for violation of any part of this section. Animals removed
because of such action may be stored or disposed of in a humane
manner by the Milwaukee Area Domestic Animal Control Commission
or its designee. Probable cause that such a violation exists is sufficient
reason to confiscate such animal. Conviction is not required.
H. Exception. This section does not apply to the extermination of rats, mice
or other vermin.
A. No person shall feed any deer in the Village of Fox Point except as
provided in Subsection B below.
B. The feeding of deer shall be permitted only if authorized by the Village
Manager of the Village of Fox Point solely for the purpose of assisting in
any program for the management of deer in the Village of Fox Point or
for the removal of deer from the Village of Fox Point.
C. Upon conviction, a person is subject to such penalties as provided in
§ 1-4 of the Village Code. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08]
A. No person, firm, or corporation, shall place, or allow to accumulate, any
materials that may serve as a food for mice, rats or other rodents and
nondomestic animals at a site accessible to rodents or any other
nondomestic animal. Any waste material that may serve as food for
such rodents or nondomestic animals shall be stored in rodent-proof
containers.
B. The foregoing provision shall not apply to bait material employed for
pest control purposes.
C. Upon conviction, a person is subject to such penalties as provided in
§ 1-4 of the Village Code.
§ 579-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 579-17
1:339
§ 579-17. Feeding of birds.
The Village Board finds that the unregulated or unfettered provision of food
substances to birds can result in infestation, the accumulation of feces, or
the presence of diseased animals, any of which can present a risk to the
health and welfare of the public. As such, the Village Board adopts the
following regulation pertaining to the feeding of birds.
§ 579-17.1. through § 579-17.4. (Reserved)
A. Bird feeders. Feed for birds shall be placed in a covered hopper or
gravity-type feeder. The platform of the feeders shall be of reasonable
size and surrounded by a ledge to deter food from blowing off. The
feeders shall be placed on top of a rodent-proof pole which extends at
least 3.5 feet above the ground and shall be placed at least six feet from
the nearest climbable object, or the feeder may be suspended from a
tree if protected by rodent guards. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
rodent-proof feeders do not need a rodent-proof pole and can be located
closer than six feet to a climbable object; however, rodent-proof feeders
also must be located at least 3.5 feet above the ground.
B. No feed on ground. Feed for birds shall not be placed on the ground
where it is accessible to rodents or geese.
C. No feeding migratory waterfowl. No person or persons shall feed
migratory waterfowl on any public or private property in the Village of
Fox Point. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute, or scatter any edible
material by any person with the intent of feeding, attracting or enticing
migratory waterfowl; or to cause the same, or to provide food for the
same.
MIGRATORY WATERFOWL — Those species of birds commonly known
as ducks, geese, and swans, including all migratory bird species
identified in the categories of "duck," "goose" and "swan" within Title
50, Part 10, Subpart B, Section 10.13 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR), titled "List of Migratory Birds," including such
amendments and renumbering of such code section as may be adopted
from time to time.
D. Pest control excluded. Subsections A, B and C of this section shall not
apply to bait material employed for pest control purposes.
E. Penalties. Upon conviction, a person is subject to such penalties as
provided in § 1-4 of the Village Code.
F. Exception. This section does not apply to the feeding of chickens that
are kept pursuant to § 579-17.5 of this Code. [Added 9-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-09]
§ 579-17 FOX POINT CODE § 579-17.5
1:340
§ 579-17.5. Keeping of chickens. [Added 9-13-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-09]
A. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply.
CHICKEN — The common domestic fowl of the subspecies Gallus gallus
domesticus. This does not include other birds or domestic fowl, such as
ducks, geese, or turkeys.
ROOSTER — A male chicken that is six months old or older.
B. Permit required. No person shall keep a chicken or chickens in the
Village without obtaining a permit upon approval of the Village
Manager or his/her designee. The permit process requires a completed
application accompanied by the fee payment prescribed in § 63-6JJ.
C. Application form.
(1) The applicant shall file a written application to the Village Clerk
that includes all of the following:
(a) A description and drawing that clearly represents the location
where the chickens will be kept on the lot and the location of
the enclosure, including a description and depiction of all
fencing, coops or other structures to be used for enclosing the
chickens;
(b) A description of the plan to ensure the proper maintenance and
cleaning of the area where the chickens will be kept;
(c) A description of the plan to ensure the proper feeding, shelter,
and care of the chickens.
(2) Action on application.
(a) The application shall be provided to the Village Manager who
shall provide notice of the application, by regular and certified
mail, to the property owner (if not the applicant) and to the
owners of all properties that abut the subject property at any
point, including those properties that abut an alley, path or
right-of-way directly across from the yard on the subject
property where the chickens will be kept.
(b) If there are no written objections from such owners within 30
days from the date of mailing of the notices, the application for
the permit shall be deemed accepted by such owners and the
Manager shall issue the permit if the application is otherwise
compliant with the Village Code, including the provisions of
this § 579-17.5.
(c) If there is an objection, there shall be a public hearing before
the Plan Commission, and the Plan Commission shall approve
the application only upon finding that these standards are met:
§ 579-17.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 579-17.5
1:341
[1] Appropriate in the location proposed;
[2] Compatible with the neighborhood;
[3] Not detrimental to the property values of surrounding
property; and
[4] In keeping with the residential character and quality of the
Village.
(d) Any aggrieved party shall have the right to appeal the decision
of the Plan Commission to the Board of Appeals.
D. Keeping of chickens allowed. The keeping of up to four chickens, with a
permit, is allowed on a single-family residential premises, subject to the
following:
(1) No person shall keep any rooster.
(2) No person shall slaughter any chickens.
(3) Chickens shall be provided with fresh water at all times and
adequate amounts of feed.
(4) Chickens shall be provided with a sanitary and adequately sized
covered enclosure, that is at least 16 square feet in size per
chicken, and shall be kept in the covered enclosure at all times.
(5) Chicken coops shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner, be
moisture-resistant and either raised up off the ground or placed on
a hard surface, such as concrete, patio block or gravel. Each shall
be considered a structure and shall require a permit and Village
Manager approval. The Village Manager shall study such
application and approve the chicken coop only upon finding that
these standards are met:
(a) Appropriate in the location proposed;
(b) Compatible with the neighborhood;
(c) Not detrimental to the property values of surrounding
property; and
(d) In keeping with the residential character and quality of the
Village.
(6) Chicken coops and yards shall be constructed and maintained to
reasonably prevent the collection of standing water, and shall be
cleaned of hen droppings, uneaten feed, feathers and other waste
daily and more often as is necessary to ensure that the coop and
yard do not become a health, odor or other nuisance.
§ 579-17.5 FOX POINT CODE § 579-17.5
1:342
(7) The enclosure shall be located in compliance with all of the
following, and in the event of conflicting requirements the more
restrictive shall apply:
(a) The nearest point of the enclosure must be at least 30 feet
away from any residential structure on another lot;
(b) The enclosure, and all parts of the enclosure, are prohibited in
any front yard;
(c) The enclosure, and all parts of the enclosure, are prohibited in
any side yard;
(d) The enclosure can only be located in a rear yard, but no
enclosure, and no part of the enclosure, can be closer to a side
lot line than the closest distance between that lot line and the
principal structure on the lot.
(8) In addition to compliance with the requirements of this section, no
one shall keep chickens that cause any nuisance, unhealthy
condition, create a public health threat or otherwise interfere with
the normal use of property or enjoyment of life by humans or
animals.
(9) The use shall at all times be conducted pursuant to the plans and
representations made in the application.
(10) Nothing herein shall be interpreted to authorize the conduct of a
business or commercial use on a residential property. No sales of
eggs, chicks, or chickens shall be made from a residential property.
(11) Persons applying for and receiving a permit for the keeping of
chickens thereby consent to the entry of Village staff and Village
agents onto the subject property at all reasonable times to inspect
and investigate the property, the enclosure, and the chickens for
purposes of determining compliance with and for enforcement of
this Code.
(12) Costs that the Village may incur in inspection, investigation,
testing, quarantine, isolation, vaccination, humane euthanasia, or
otherwise arising from the subject property owner's keeping of
chickens, may be charged to the property owner, and such charges
that remain unpaid within the time allowed may be imposed on the
tax bill for the subject property as a special charge, pursuant to
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats., and Chapter 67, Article III, of this Code.
E. Public health requirements. Chickens shall be kept and handled in a
sanitary manner to prevent the spread of communicable diseases
among birds or to humans.
(1) Any person keeping chickens shall immediately report any unusual
illness or death of chickens to the Health Department.
§ 579-17.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 579-17.5
1:343
§ 579-17.6. Beekeeping. [Added 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-08]
(2) The North Shore Health Department or its agents may order
testing, quarantine, isolation, vaccination or humane euthanasia of
ill chickens or chickens believed to be carriers of a communicable
disease.
F. Effect of permit. The permit shall allow the applicant to keep up to four
chickens on the subject property in compliance with this section. A new
permit is not required for the applicant to raise new or replacement
chickens on the property, provided that the total shall not exceed four
chickens at any time. The permit shall lapse automatically if no chicken
is kept on the property for any consecutive twelve-month period. The
permit is not transferable from the applicant to any other person, and
does not run with the land to a new owner of the property.
G. Revocation. A permit is subject to revocation by the Village Manager or
designee upon failure to comply with any provisions of Subsection D or
E. Once a permit is revoked, a permit shall not be reissued to the
applicant or for any property where the applicant resides or may reside
in the Village.
H. Duration. The permit issued pursuant to this section shall have a
duration of one year, unless the permit is revoked or lapses pursuant to
the provisions of Subsection F or G, above, prior to the expiration of
said term.
I. Removal. The chickens shall be immediately removed from the property
upon lapse, revocation or expiration of the permit for keeping chickens.
The enclosure in its totality, including any fencing, covered enclosure,
chicken coop, or any other structure or structural elements, shall be
completely removed from the property within 15 days of the lapse,
revocation or expiration of the permit for keeping of chickens.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply.
APIARY — Colonies, hives, and other equipment associated with honey
bees assembled in one location for beekeeping operations; also known
as a bee yard.
BEEKEEPER — A person who owns or has responsibility for one or
more colonies of honey bees.
BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT — Anything used in the operation of a
honey bee apiary, such as hive bodies, honey supers, frames, top covers,
and/or bottom boards.
COLONY — An aggregate of honey bees in a hive consisting of workers,
but having one queen and potentially many drones, including brood,
combs, honey and the receptacle inhabited by the bees.
FLYWAY BARRIER — A barrier at least six feet in height consisting
of a solid wall/fence, dense vegetation, or combination thereof that
§ 579-17.5 FOX POINT CODE § 579-17.6
1:344
is parallel to the parcel line so that all bees are forced to fly at an
elevation of at least six feet above ground level over the property lines
in the vicinity of the apiary.
HIVE — The structure containing a colony of honey bees.
HONEY BEE — All stages of the common domestic honey bee, Apis
mellifera species. Keeping of Apis mellifera scutellata is not permitted
under any conditions.
SWARM — For purposes of this chapter, a swarm is a propagation or
colony of honey bees outside of its hive.
B. Permit required. No person shall keep bees in the Village without
obtaining a permit upon approval of the Village Manager or his/her
designee. The permit process requires a completed application
accompanied with the fee payments prescribed in § 63-6LL and MM.
C. Application form. The applicant shall file a written application to the
Village Clerk, that includes all of the following:
(1) Application form.
(a) A description and drawing that clearly represents the location
where the hive(s) will be located on the lot, including a
description and depiction of all fencing, and any other
structures to be used for the beekeeping use;
(b) A description of the plan to ensure the proper maintenance and
cleaning of the hive(s) and the beekeeping operation;
(c) A description of the plan to ensure the proper watering of the
bees.
(2) Action on application.
(a) The application shall be provided to the Village Manager, who
shall provide notice of the application, by regular and certified
mail, to the property owner (if not the applicant) and to the
owners of all properties that abut the subject property at any
point, including those properties that abut an alley, path or
right of way directly across from the yard on the subject
property where the bees will be kept.
(b) If there are no written objections from such owners within 30
days from the date of mailing of the notices, the application for
the permit shall be deemed accepted by such owners and the
Manager shall issue the permit if the application is otherwise
compliant with the Village Code, including the provisions of
this § 579-17.6.
(c) If there is an objection, there shall be a public hearing before
the Plan Commission and the Plan Commission shall approve
the application only upon finding that these standards are met:
§ 579-17.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 579-17.6
1:345
[1] Appropriate in the location proposed;
[2] Compatible with the neighborhood;
[3] Not detrimental to the property values of surrounding
property; and
[4] In keeping with the residential character and quality of the
Village.
(d) Any aggrieved party shall have the right to appeal the decision
of the Plan Commission to the Board of Appeals.
D. Beekeeping allowed. Beekeeping is allowed on a single-family
residential premises, subject to the following:
(1) No person shall acquire, keep or stock bees in the Village without
first obtaining a valid beekeeping permit.
(2) No more than two hives are allowed on a residential lot. The hives
forming the apiary structure must be located near each other to
form a single apiary. A temporary third hive for hive splitting may
be allowed for a reasonable period of time prior to its removal to
another location.
(3) All honey bees shall be kept in hives with removable frames which
shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
(4) A flyway barrier shall be located between the hive(s) and the
property lines for all hives located within 20 feet of the property
line; except that a flyway barrier is not needed for any beehive kept
at least 10 feet off the ground.
(5) All hives and related structures that form the apiary shall not be
located in front or side yards and must be no less than 20 feet from
the rear yard property line; except that locations closer to the rear
yard property line are permitted with a signed written consent of
all neighbors abutting the rear property line.
(6) Hives shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any structures
located on another property, including patios, porches, decks,
gazebos, swimming pools, and permanently affixed play equipment
unless the owner of the lot where such structure is located has
provided written consent for closer hive placement.
(7) A beekeeper must continually provide fresh water to bees from a
source immediately within the apiary, which allows bees access to
water by landing on a hard surface, to prevent bees from seeking
water sources at nearby property.
(8) In the event bees in a hive repeatedly exhibit aggressive behavior,
it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to remove, destroy or re-queen
the hive.
§ 579-17.6 FOX POINT CODE § 579-17.6
1:346
(9) All apiary structures and flyways must be constructed, located and
maintained consistent with and in conformity to all applicable
provisions of the Village Code, including but not limited to Chapter
745, Zoning, Chapter 756, Building Construction, and Chapter 681,
Property Maintenance.
(10) In addition to compliance with the requirements of this section, no
one shall keep bees that cause any nuisance, unhealthy condition,
create a public health threat or otherwise interfere with the normal
use of property or enjoyment of life by humans or animals.
(11) The use shall at all times be conducted pursuant to the plans and
representations made in the application.
(12) Nothing herein shall be interpreted to authorize the conduct of a
business or commercial use on a residential property. No sales of
honey, wax or other product shall be made from a residential
property.
(13) Persons applying for and receiving a permit for beekeeping thereby
consent to the entry of Village staff and Village agents onto the
subject property at all reasonable times, to inspect and investigate
the property, the hive(s), and the bees for purposes of determining
compliance and for enforcement of this Code.
(14) Costs that the Village may incur in inspection, investigation,
testing, quarantine, isolation, vaccination, humane euthanasia, or
otherwise arising from the subject property owner's beekeeping,
may be charged to the property owner, and such charges that
remain unpaid within the time allowed may be imposed on the tax
bill for the subject property as a special charge, pursuant to
Wisconsin Statutes § 66.0627, and Chapter 67, Article III of this
Code.
E. Public health requirements. Bees shall be kept and handled in a
sanitary manner to prevent the spread of communicable diseases.
(1) Any beekeeper shall immediately report any unusual illness or
death of bees to the health department.
(2) The North Shore Health Department or its agents may order
testing, quarantine, isolation, vaccination or humane euthanasia of
bees believed to be carriers of a communicable disease.
(3) The requirements of Wisconsin Statutes § 94.76, et seq. and any
applicable state regulations shall be followed at all times.
F. Effect of permit. The permit shall allow the applicant to keep up to two
hives on the subject property in compliance with this section. A new
permit is not required for the applicant to raise new or replacement
bees on the property, provided that the total shall not exceed two hives
at any time. The permit shall lapse automatically if no bees are kept on
§ 579-17.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 579-17.6
1:347
the property for any consecutive twelve-month period. The permit is not
transferable from the applicant to any other person, and does not run
with the land to a new owner of the property.
G. Revocation. A permit is subject to revocation by the Village Manager or
designee upon failure to comply with any provisions of Subsections D or
E. Once a permit is revoked, a permit shall not be reissued to the
applicant or for any property where the applicant resides or may reside
in the Village.
H. Duration. The permit issued pursuant to this section shall have a
duration of one year, unless the permit is revoked or lapses pursuant to
the provisions of Subsections F or G, above, prior to the expiration of
said term.
I. Removal. The bees shall be immediately removed from the property
upon lapse, revocation or expiration of the permit for keeping bees. All
hives, including any bee structure or structural elements, shall be
completely removed from the property within 15 days of the lapse,
revocation or expiration of the permit for beekeeping.
§ 579-17.6 FOX POINT CODE § 579-17.6
1:348
ARTICLE II
Sale of Baby Chicks, Ducklings or Other Fowl
[Adopted by Ord. No. 301 (§§ 29.01 and 29.02 of the 1961 Code)]
§ 579-18. Unlawful activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell or offer for
sale, barter, or give away baby chicks, ducklings, or other fowl, whether or
not dyed, colored, or otherwise artificially treated.
§ 579-19. Violation; seizure.
In the case of any violation of this article, it shall be the duty of any duly
appointed humane officer, peace officer, sheriff, or health officer to seize
such fowl or pets and provide the necessary care and attention, and such
fowl or pets shall not be returned until all expenses for such care and
attention shall have been paid.
§ 579-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 579-19
1:349
Chapter 586
BEACHES AND BOATING
§ 586-1. Parking.
No person shall park any automobile, motor truck, motorcycle or similar
motor vehicle upon the Beach Road in the limits of the Village or upon the
beach adjacent thereto, except for the purpose of making necessary repairs,
without a permit, or between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 586-2. Picnicking.
No person shall picnic on the Beach Road or the beach adjacent thereto
within the limits of the Village without a permit or between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 586-3. Swimming.
No person shall swim or bathe on or from the beach adjacent to the Beach
Road within the limits of the Village without first obtaining a permit, or
without being attired in suitable bathing suit, or between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 586-4. Permits.64
Permits issued under this chapter shall be in writing and shall be effective
for one day only, commencing not earlier than 8:00 a.m. and running not
longer than 8:00 p.m. There shall not be outstanding at any one time
permits authorizing the parking of motor vehicles in any one day exceeding
20 in number or for persons exceeding in the aggregate 100 for any one day.
All permits shall be in writing and shall be issued by the Police Department.
§ 586-5. Use of private property.
§ 586-6. Use of boats.
A. This chapter does not prohibit any riparian owner from parking or
permitting the parking of cars, picnicking or permitting picnicking or
bathing upon or from his property if the parking does not interfere with
the free and uninterrupted use of the highway, and proper bathing suits
are worn, and good conduct is observed.
B. Wherever in the prosecution for violation of this chapter the defendant
shall assert as a defense that he has permission of the owner of the land
upon or from which the parking, picnicking or bathing is being
conducted, the burden of proof of such fact shall be upon the defendant.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 579-19 FOX POINT CODE § 586-6
1:350
Chapter 591
BICYCLES, PLAY VEHICLES AND PEDESTRIANS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 870.
§ 591-1. Equipment of bicycles.66
A. No person shall launch a boat or canoe from any public property or
public right-of-way along the shores of Beach Drive adjacent to Lake
Michigan from June 1 to September 15.65
B. No person shall operate or propel any boat or canoe through the
swimming area adjacent to the shore of Lake Michigan described
above, which area is marked by buoys or other floating means of
indicating the area in which swimming is supervised by lifeguards.
C. This section does not prohibit passage of a boat to the shore of Lake
Michigan in case of emergency, nor from the shore in the event the
landing of the boat on the shore area specified in Subsection A of this
section occurs because of an emergency.
A. No person may operate a bicycle or motor bicycle upon a roadway,
pedestrian walk, or bicycle way during hours of darkness unless the
bicycle or motor bicycle is equipped with or the operator is wearing a
lamp emitting a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to
the front of the bicycle or motor bicycle. A bicycle or motor bicycle shall
also be equipped with a red reflector that has a diameter of at least two
inches of surface area on the rear so mounted and maintained as to be
visible from all distances from 50 to 500 feet to the rear when directly
in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp
emitting a red or flashing amber light visible from a distance of 500 feet
to the rear may be used in addition to but not in lieu of the red reflector.
B. No person may operate a bicycle or motor bicycle upon a roadway,
pedestrian walk, or bicycle way unless it is equipped with a brake in
good working condition, adequate to control the movement of and to
stop the bicycle or motor bicycle whenever necessary.
C. No bicycle or motor bicycle may be equipped with nor may any person
riding upon a bicycle or motor bicycle use any siren or compression
whistle.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 586-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 591-2
1:351
§ 591-2. Rules for operation of bicycles.
A. No parent or guardian of any child shall authorize or knowingly permit
such child to violate any of the provisions of this section.
B. In this section, "substandard width lane" means a lane that is too
narrow for a bicycle and a motor vehicle to travel safely side by side
within the lane.
C. Special rules applicable to bicycles. Whenever a bicycle is operated
upon a highway, bicycle lane or bicycle way, the following rules apply:
(1) A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
(2) Except as provided in Subsection C(3), no bicycle may be used to
carry or transport more persons at one time than the number for
which it is designed.
(3) In addition to the operator, a bicycle otherwise designed to carry
only the operator may be used to carry or transport a child seated
in an auxiliary child's seat or trailer designed for attachment to a
bicycle if the seat or trailer is securely attached to the bicycle
according to the directions of the manufacturer of the seat or
trailer.
(4) No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the operator from keeping at least one hand
upon the handlebars.
(5) No person riding a bicycle shall attach himself or herself or his or
her bicycle to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(6) No person may ride a moped or motor bicycle with the power unit
in operation upon a bicycle way.
(7) Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at less than the
normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable to the
right-hand edge or curb of the unobstructed traveled roadway,
including operators who are riding two or more abreast, where
permitted, except:
(a) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction.
(b) When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a
private road or driveway.
(c) When reasonably necessary to avoid unsafe conditions,
including fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles,
pedestrians, animals, surface hazards or substandard width
§ 591-2 FOX POINT CODE § 591-2
1:352
lanes that make it unsafe to ride along the right-hand edge or
curb.
(8) Notwithstanding Subsection C(7), any person operating a bicycle
upon a one-way highway having two or more lanes available for
traffic may ride as near the left-hand edge or curb of the roadway
as practicable.
(9) Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall exercise due
care when passing a standing or parked vehicle or a vehicle
proceeding in the same direction, allowing a minimum of three feet
between the bicycle and the vehicle, and shall give an audible
signal when passing a bicycle rider proceeding in the same
direction.
(10) Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway may ride two abreast if
such operation does not impede the normal and reasonable
movement of traffic. Bicycle operators riding two abreast on a twolane
or more roadway shall ride within a single lane.
(11) Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway may not ride more than two
abreast except upon any path, trail, lane or other way set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles.
(12)No person may operate a bicycle upon a roadway, pedestrian walk
or bicycle way where a sign is erected indicating that bicycles are
prohibited.
(13) Every rider of a bicycle shall, upon entering on a highway, yield the
right-of-way to motor vehicles.
(14) Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle or pedestrian way
shall:
(a) Exercise due care and give an audible signal when passing a
bicycle rider or a pedestrian proceeding in the same direction.
(b) Obey each traffic signal or sign facing a roadway which runs
parallel and adjacent to a bicycle way.
(15) Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle way open to twoway
traffic shall ride on the right side of the bicycle way.
(16) Every operator of a bicycle entering a bicycle way shall yield the
right-of-way to all bicycles and pedestrians in the bicycle way.
D. Applicability of state law. Every person using a bicycle or motor bicycle
upon public roadways shall be subject to the provisions of all
ordinances and state laws applicable to the operator of any vehicle,
except those provisions with reference to equipment of vehicles and
except those provisions which by their nature would have no
application.67
§ 591-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 591-3
1:353
§ 591-3. Registration of bicycles.
§ 591-4. Damaging license tag.
No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter
the number of any bicycle serial number or license tag issued under this
chapter. Within seven days after any bicycle registered in accordance with
this chapter changes ownership or is dismantled and taken out of operation,
the registered owner shall report such information to the Police
Department.
§ 591-5. Locking requirement.
Every bicycle in the Village which is unattended, other than on or at a
private residence, shall at all times be securely locked to prevent the theft
of the bicycle.
§ 591-6. Skateboards, roller skates and roller skis.
A. Any resident of Fox Point who owns and operates a bicycle on the
roadways, pedestrian walks, or bicycle ways within the Village limits
must, prior to operating the bicycle, register the bicycle with the Police
Department and pay the registration fee.
B. Application for registration of a bicycle shall be made to the Police
Department upon the form provided. The applicant shall provide the
owner's name, date of birth, address, telephone number, a complete
description of the bicycle including the serial number and any other
information required by the Chief of Police. The license tag shall be
placed on the support post directly under the seat of the bicycle, facing
towards the front of the bicycle.
C. A registration fee established by the Village Board and included in
Chapter 63 of this Code shall be paid by the applicant. A nonexpiring,
nontransferable bicycle license tag will be issued to the applicant. All
fees shall be paid at the time of issuance and are nonrefundable.
A. No person shall ride, push or travel upon a skateboard, roller skates, or
roller skis upon the following listed premises:
(1) Any Village street except while crossing a roadway at a crosswalk.
(2) All off-road premises held out to the public for use of their motor
vehicles, whether such premises are publicly or privately owned
and whether or not a fee is charged for the use thereof.
(3) Any sidewalk or pedestrian way within any shopping center in the
Village.
(4) All tennis courts on public property within the Village.
67.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 591-3 FOX POINT CODE § 591-6
1:354
§ 591-7. In-line skates.
(5) In or upon any property without the express permission of a person
in authority at such place, or where the owner or person in charge
of such property has posted signs thereto that operation of such is
prohibited.
(6) On the portion of and the pedestrian path adjacent to North Beach
Drive known as Beach Drive Hill, which is located between North
Lake Drive and 7619 North Beach Drive.
B. Operators or riders of skateboards, roller skates, and roller skis shall
yield the right-of-way to other pedestrians using pedestrian ways and
shall not otherwise endanger or interfere with pedestrian traffic on
those pedestrian ways.
C. This section does not apply to in-line skates as defined in
§ 340.01(24m), Wis. Stats.
A. This section is created pursuant to § 349.235, Wis. Stats.
B. Definition. "In-line skates" means skates with wheels arranged singly in
a tandem rather than in pairs.
C. Applicability of state law. Every person using in-line skates upon public
roadways shall be subject to provisions of all ordinances and state laws
applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except those provisions with
reference to equipment of vehicle and except those provisions which by
their nature would have no application.
D. Pedestrian ways. Every person using in-line skates upon a pedestrian
way shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall exercise due
care when passing any other person proceeding in the same direction.
E. Riding on roadway.
(1) Every person using in-line skates on a two-way public street shall
keep as close to the right-hand curb as possible and shall proceed
with traffic. Every person using in-line skates upon a one-way
public street shall proceed in the direction of one-way traffic.
(2) Every person using in-line skates on a two-way public street shall
ride single file on all public roadways.
(3) Persons using in-line skates upon a public roadway shall not
impede the normal and reasonable movement of motor vehicles.
F. Clinging to moving vehicles prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person using in-line skates to cling to or attach to any bicycle or other
moving vehicle upon a public roadway.
G. Observance of traffic regulations. Every person using in-line skates
upon a public roadway shall stop for all stop signs and traffic signals.
§ 591-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 591-7
1:355
§ 591-8. Visibility requirements for pedestrians on Village streets
after dark. [Added 1-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
H. Yielding to traffic. The operator of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way
to use of in-line skates in the same manner as for bicyclists and
pedestrians under §§ 346.23, 346.24, 346.37 and 346.38, Wis. Stats.
When using in-line skates, every person shall, upon entering a public
roadway, yield the right-of-way to motor vehicles, except that a person
using in-line skates shall be subject to the same regulations as bicyclists
and pedestrians under §§ 346.23, 346.24, 346.37 and 346.38, Wis.
Stats.
I. Prohibited use. No person shall ride upon in-line skates upon the
following listed premises:
(1) All off-road premises held out to the public for use of their motor
vehicles, whether such premises are publicly or privately owned
and whether or not a fee is charged for the use thereof.
(2) Any sidewalk or pedestrian way within any shopping center in the
Village.
(3) All tennis courts on public property within the Village.
(4) In or upon any property without the express permission of a person
in authority at such place, or where the owner or person in charge
of such property has posted signs thereto that operation of such is
prohibited.
(5) On the portion of and the pedestrian path adjacent to North Beach
Drive, known as Beach Drive Hill, which is located between North
Lake Drive and 7619 North Beach Drive.
(6) Any street, road or highway prohibited by state law.
(7) On North Lake Drive. [Added 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-06]
J. Lamps and reflectors. Every person using in-line skates between 1/2
hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise shall be equipped with a
lamp firmly attached to the front of such person exhibiting a white light
to the front and with a reflector on the rear visible at a distance of 500
feet. The reflector shall not be less than one inch in diameter. A lamp on
the rear exhibiting a red light may also be used.
A. Pedestrians must be clearly visible. No person may walk, run, stand, or
otherwise be present on a public roadway between one-half hour after
sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, unless such person is clearly
visible as defined herein.
B. Clearly visible defined. "Clearly visible," for purposes of this section,
shall be defined as follows: A person is clearly visible if, and only if, the
person satisfies one or more of the following requirements:
§ 591-7 FOX POINT CODE § 591-8
1:356
§ 591-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed in § 1-4 of this Code.
Chapter 612
FAIR HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fair Housing Commission — See Ch. 19, Art.
V.
§ 612-1. Intent. [Amended 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
It is the intent of this chapter to render unlawful discrimination in housing.
It is the declared policy of this state and of this Village that all persons shall
(1) Reflective clothing. At least four square inches of the surface area
of the outer layer of such person's clothing is reflectorized such
that it is visible from a distance of up to 500 feet when directly in
front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle, both
to the front and rear of such person; or
(2) Reflectors. Such person is equipped with reflectors with a diameter
of at least two inches of surface area, or reflective tape that has at
least two square inches of surface area, which is carried or
attached to such person in a manner as to be visible from up to 500
feet when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on
a motor vehicle, both to the front and rear of such person.
(3) Flashlight alternative. A flashlight that is lit and worn or carried by
the pedestrian and which is visible from a distance of up to 500 feet
in front of such person may be used in lieu of the foregoing
reflective requirements for the front of such person; and a
flashlight that is lit and worn or carried by the pedestrian that is
red in color that is visible from a distance of up to 500 feet behind
such person may be used in lieu of the reflective requirements for
the rear of such person.
C. Parental responsibility. No parent or guardian of any child shall
authorize or knowingly permit such child to violate any of the provisions
of this section.
D. Multiple parties, individual responsibilities. The requirements of this
section apply equally to every person on a public roadway. The fact that
one or more member from a group of pedestrians may satisfy the
requirements does not relieve other members of the group of the
obligation to do so.
§ 591-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-1
1:357
have an equal opportunity for housing without discrimination, as defined by
applicable state laws. This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police
powers of the Village for the protection of the welfare, health, peace, dignity
and human rights of the people of this Village.
§ 612-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the content requires otherwise, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
DISCRIMINATE and DISCRIMINATION — Have the meaning described in
§ 106.50(1m)(h), Wis. Stats.[Amended 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
DISABILITY — As defined in § 106.50(1m)(g), Wis. Stats.68
HOUSING — Any improved property, including any mobile home as defined
in § 66.0435(1), Wis. Stats., which is used or occupied, or is intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as a home or
residence.[Amended 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
UNIMPROVED RESIDENTIAL LOT — Any residential lot upon which no
permanent building or structure containing living quarters has been
constructed.[Added 3-12-1981 by Ord. No. 487]
§ 612-3. Discrimination prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to discriminate:
A. By refusing to sell, lease, finance or contract to construct housing or by
refusing to discuss the terms thereof.
B. By refusing to permit inspection or exacting different or more stringent
price, terms or conditions for the sale, lease, financing or rental of
housing.
C. By refusing to finance or sell an unimproved residential lot or to
construct a home or residence upon such lot.
D. By publishing, circulating, issuing or displaying, or causing to be
published, circulated, issued or displayed, any communication, notice,
advertisement or sign in connection with the sale, financing, lease or
rental of housing which states or indicated any discrimination in
connection with housing.
E. For a person in the business of insuring against hazards, by refusing to
enter into, or by exacting different terms, conditions or privileges with
respect to, a contract of insurance against hazards to a dwelling.
F. By refusing to renew a lease, causing the eviction of a tenant from
rental housing, or engaging in the harassment of a tenant.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 612-1 FOX POINT CODE § 612-3
1:358
§ 612-4. Exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit:
§ 612-5. Representations designed to induce panic sales.70
No person may induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent housing
by representations regarding the present or prospective entry into the
neighborhood of a person of a particular economic status or a member of
a protected class, or by representations to the effect that such present or
prospective entry will or may result in any of the following:
§ 612-6. Interference, coercion or intimidation.
No person may coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in
the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this chapter
or with any person who has aided or encouraged another person in the
exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this chapter.
G. By otherwise making unavailable or denying housing, in a manner
described in § 106.50(2), (2m) or (2r), Wis. Stats. [Added 3-8-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-02]
A. Discrimination on the basis of age in relation to housing designed to
meet the needs of elderly individuals.
B. A person from exacting different or more stringent terms or conditions
for financing housing based on the age of the individual applicant for
financing if the terms or conditions are reasonably related to the
individual applicant.
C. The development of housing designed specifically for persons with a
disability and discrimination on the basis of disability in relation to such
housing.69
D. The activities described as exempt or excluded by § 106.50(5m), Wis.
Stats. [Added 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
A. The lowering of real estate values in the area concerned;
B. A deterioration in the character of the area concerned;
C. An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area concerned; or
D. A decline in the quality of the schools or other public facilities serving
the area.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 612-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-7
1:359
§ 612-7. Requiring references. [Added 3-12-1981 by Ord. No. 48771]
Nothing in this chapter prohibits an owner or agent from requiring that
a person who seeks to buy or rent housing supply information concerning
family status and marital, financial, and business status but not concerning
race, color, disability, sexual orientation, ancestry, national origin, religion,
creed, status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking, or,
subject to § 106.50(5m)(f)2, Wis. Stats., age.
§ 612-8. Fair Housing Commission.72
See Chapter 19, Article V of this Code.
§ 612-9. Enforcement.
A. By the Fair Housing Commission.
(1) In those cases where the Commission, after investigation as
provided in Chapter 19, Article V, of this Code, believes a violation
of this chapter of the Village Code has occurred and has not been
eliminated or remedied, the Commission may, on behalf of the
Village, cause an action to be brought for a forfeiture for violation
of this chapter of the Village Code. A complaint or affidavit in the
usual form alleging a violation of a Village ordinance may be signed
by any member of the Commission, provided a resolution
authorizing such action has been adopted at a meeting of the
Commission by the affirmative vote of not fewer than three of its
members. The complaint or affidavit may be made on information
and belief.
(2) In those cases where the Commission is of the opinion that an
existing violation of this chapter of the Village Code is not only a
violation of this Code but is also a violation of any state statute now
or hereafter adopted, the Commission by the affirmative vote of not
fewer than three of its members may, instead of bringing
proceedings for violation of this chapter of the Village Code, refer
the matter to the appropriate state officer or agency for
proceedings pursuant to the state law.
B. By the complainant. The person originally making the complaint
pursuant to § 19-28A of the Code of the Village of Fox Point may bring
an action in Municipal Court for a forfeiture for violation of this chapter
of the Code, under the following conditions:
(1) When he disagrees with the determination of the Commission that
no violation has occurred;
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
72.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 612-7 FOX POINT CODE § 612-9
1:360
§ 612-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-8-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-02]
Any person who willfully violates any provisions of this chapter shall, for
each such violation, forfeit an amount that is within the forfeiture range
established by § 106.50(6)(h), Wis. Stats. Payment of any such forfeiture
shall be stayed during the period in which any appeal may be taken and
during the pendency of any appeal.
§ 612-11. Public policy. [Amended 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
This chapter of the Village Code was adopted, among other things, for
the purpose of furthering the public policy of the state as is set forth in
§§ 106.50, 66.1011 and 66.0125, Wis. Stats. Said statutes, as existing on the
date of adoption of this chapter and as may be amended in the future from
time to time, including any recodification or renumbering of said statutes,
are incorporated herein by reference. In the event the requirements of this
chapter are not as restrictive as said state laws, the statutory requirements
shall apply.
Chapter 624
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 276.
§ 624-1. Definition.
Hazardous material is defined as either:
(2) When he disagrees with the determination of the Commission that
the alleged violation has been eliminated or remedied; or
(3) After a period of 90 days from the filing of the complaint, if the
Commission has made no determination.
C. Restricted. Except for members of the Commission acting pursuant to
Subsection A above, or a complainant acting pursuant to Subsection B
above, no one is authorized to bring any action for a forfeiture based on
an alleged violation of this chapter of the Village Code.
A. Any material or combination of materials of solid, liquid or contained
gaseous or semisolid form which, because of its quantity, concentration
or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause or
significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in
serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or pose a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
§ 612-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 624-1
1:361
§ 624-2. Prohibited discharge.
No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or cause to be discharged,
leak, leach, or spill upon or into any public street, alley or public property or
onto the ground, surface water, subsurface waters, or aquifers, or onto any
private property except those areas specifically licensed for waste disposal
or landfill activities in the Village, any hazardous material as defined in
§ 624-1.
§ 624-3. Containment, cleanup and restoration.74
Any person, firm or corporation in violation of this chapter must, upon the
direction of any police officer, firefighter or public health official of the
Village, begin immediate actions to contain, clean up and remove to an
approved depository the offending material(s) and restore the site to its
original condition. Should any person, firm or corporation fail to engage
or complete the requirement of this section, the Police Department, Fire
Department or Health Officer may order the owner or lessee to take the
required action or, in default thereof, may, on behalf of the Village, without
the taking of bids, do the necessary work with all costs incurred by the
Village, which include, but are not limited to, professional and volunteer
time, cost of equipment used, cost of materials used, and administrative
overhead, to be reimbursed by anyone violating this chapter unless such
reimbursement is made to the Village by another governmental agency.
§ 624-4. Access.75
The owner or lessee of any site, public or private, where a prohibited
discharge is occurring or where there is probable cause to believe that
such discharge is occurring, shall provide access to personnel of the Police
Department, Fire Department or the Health Officer of the Village for the
purpose of allowing them to evaluate the threat to public health and safety
or to monitor the containment, cleanup or restoration activity needed for
the protection of public health or safety. In the event voluntary access is
environment. Such material includes but is not limited to material
which is toxic, carcinogenic or flammable. Such material also includes
irritants and strong sensitizers and materials which generate pressure
because of decomposition or heat. Likewise, toxic material also includes
containers and receptacles previously used in transportation, storage,
use, or application of material described herein as hazardous material.
B. Hazardous waste as described in Wisconsin Administrative Code,
Ch. NR 660.73
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 624-1 FOX POINT CODE § 624-4
1:362
not granted by the owner or lessee, the appropriate officer may obtain an
administrative search warrant and, after receiving the same, may enter the
premises.
§ 624-5. Officials allowed to act in emergencies.76
Should any discharge occur that reasonably causes a threat to the life,
safety, welfare or health of the public, a police officer, firefighter or health
officer or employee on the scene may order an evacuation of the area or
take other appropriate protective steps for such period of time as needed
until the Village Manager and emergency management officials can act.
§ 624-6. Enforcement.
A police officer shall have the authority to make complaints and issue
citations and summonses under this chapter.
§ 624-7. Civil liability.
Any person, firm or corporation in violation of this chapter shall be liable
jointly and severally to the Village and to any individual whose person or
property was damaged by such violation for any and all expenses incurred
by the Village and loss or damage sustained by the Village by reason of such
violation.
§ 624-8. Violations and penalties.77
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-4.
Chapter 630
HUMAN HEALTH HAZARDS AND PUBLIC HEALTH
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Offenses against public peace, safety and
welfare — See Ch. 670.
§ 630-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 624-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-1
1:363
GROUNDWATER — All water found beneath the surface of the Village
located in sand, gravel, lime rock, or sandstone geological formations or any
combination of these formations.
HEALTH OFFICER — Director of North Shore Health Department, which is
the Health Department for Fox Point.
HUMAN HEALTH HAZARD — A substance, activity or condition that is
known to have potential to cause acute or chronic illness or death if
exposure to the substance, activity or condition is not abated or the
condition of a dwelling or dwelling unit that renders it unsafe for human
habitation.
IMMEDIATE HEALTH HAZARD — A condition which exists or has the
potential to exist which should, in the opinion of the Health Officer or
designee, be abated or corrected immediately, or at least within a twentyfour-
hour period, to prevent possible severe damage to human health and/
or the environment.
OWNER — A person who has legal title or possession, charge, care or
control of property (including but not limited to a structure, building,
dwelling, dwelling unit or vacant land) or as executor, administrator,
trustee, or guardian of the estate of a person or property under this
definition.
PERSON — An individual, owner, operator, corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, association, municipality, interstate agency, state
agency or federal agency or any instrumentality, agent or combination of
the foregoing entities.
PLACARD(ED) — To affix a written notice to the main entrance of a dwelling
stating that the dwelling has been declared unfit for human habitation.
POLLUTION — The contaminating or rendering unclean or impure the air,
land, or waters of the Village, or making the same injurious to public health,
harmful for commercial or recreational use or deleterious to fish, bird,
animal or plant life.
PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE — A thing, act, occupation, condition or use
of property which shall continue for such length of time as to substantially
injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public or in
any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse, and all other discarded or salvageable
solid materials, including solid waste materials resulting from industrial,
commercial, and agricultural operations and from domestic use and public
service activities, but not including solids or dissolved material in
wastewater effluent or other common water pollutants.78
STATE — State of Wisconsin.
STRUCTURE or BUILDING — A building or structure having walls and
a roof erected or set upon an individual foundation or slab constructed,
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 630-1 FOX POINT CODE § 630-1
1:364
designed or used for the housing, shelter, enclosure, or support of persons,
animals or property of any kind, including but not limited to houses,
apartments, condominiums, commercial and manufacturing buildings,
mobile homes and structures accessory to the foregoing uses.
TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any chemical and/or biological
material that is or has the potential to create a human health hazard.
VILLAGE — The Village of Fox Point.
§ 630-2. General provisions.
§ 630-3. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapters 251
and 254 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 630-4. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
and general welfare and to maintain and protect the environment for the
people of the Village and to:
A. Title. This chapter shall be referred to as the "Village Human Health
Hazard and Public Health Nuisance Ordinance."
B. Administration. This chapter shall be administered by the Health
Officer or the Health Officer's designee. The Health Officer or designee
shall have the power to ensure compliance with the intent and purpose
of this chapter by any means possible under the law, including authority
to request that the Police Department issue citations for violations of
this chapter pursuant to § 800.02(2), Wis. Stats.
C. Interpretation. The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be
minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the
Village and shall not be deemed a limitation of any power granted by
the Wisconsin Statutes or repeal of any other Village ordinance that
imposes a stricter or greater requirement.
A. Prevent communicable diseases.
B. Prevent the continuance of human health hazards or public health
nuisances.
C. Assure that Village and state air quality standards are complied with.
D. Assure that insects and rodents do not create human health hazards.
E. Assure that surface and groundwater meet Village and state standards
and regulations.
F. Assure that solid waste is handled, stored and disposed of according to
Village and state standards and regulations.
§ 630-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-4
1:365
§ 630-5. Jurisdiction.
The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all air, land and water (both
surface and ground) within the Village.
§ 630-6. Compliance.
§ 630-7. Administration.
§ 630-8. Human health hazard/public health nuisance.
G. Assure that persons are protected from hazards and unhealthy or
unsafe substances.
A. Written orders. Compliance with this chapter shall include compliance
with written orders issued under this chapter or state health laws by
the Health Officer to abate and/or correct a human health hazard or
bring any other situation or condition in noncompliance with this
chapter into compliance.
B. Noncompliance. Noncompliance with this chapter and/or with a written
order from the Health Officer shall be cause for enforcement action
under this chapter.
A. General provisions. This chapter shall be interpreted, administered,
and enforced by the Health Officer.
B. Powers. The Health Officer or designee shall have all the powers
necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, without limitation
by reason of enumeration, including the following:
(1) To apply for and secure search warrants to obtain access to any
property or structure on or in which he or she has probable cause
to believe that a violation of this chapter or related state statutes
exists.
(2) To order abatement and/or corrections of any human health
hazard/public nuisance in violation of this chapter or related state
statutes.
(3) To delegate the responsibilities of administration and enforcement
of this chapter to a registered environmental health sanitarian or
other person qualified in the field of public health.
(4) To initiate any other action authorized under the law or this chapter
to ensure compliance with the purpose and intent of this chapter
and requirements of this chapter.
A. Human health hazard/public health nuisances prohibited. No person
shall erect, construct, cause, continue, maintain, or permit any human
health hazard/public health nuisance within the Village. Any person
who shall in any way aid or contribute to the causing, creating, or
§ 630-4 FOX POINT CODE § 630-8
1:366
maintenance thereof shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and
shall be liable for all costs and expenses attendant upon the removal
and correction of such human health hazard/public health nuisance and
to the penalty provided in § 630-11 of this chapter.
B. Responsibility of property owner. It shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to maintain such owner's property in a hazard-free
manner and also to be responsible for the abatement and/or correction
of any human health hazard/public health nuisance that has been
determined to exist on his property.
C. Human health hazards enumerated. Specifically, but not limited by
enumeration, the following are human health hazards if determined to
meet the human health hazard definition:
(1) Unburied carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds, or fowl not buried
or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after
death.
(2) Manure. Accumulations of the bodily waste of all domestic animals
and fowl that are handled, stored, or disposed of in a manner that
creates a human health hazard.
(3) Air pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids,
fumes, gases, fly ash, or industrial dust in such quantities as to
endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or threaten
or cause substantial injury to property within the Village.
(4) Noxious odors. Any use of property, substances, or things within
the Village emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome,
nauseous, noxious, or disagreeable odors, effluvia, or stenches
extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons that
annoy, discomfort, injure, or inconvenience the health of persons
within the Village.
(5) Solid waste. Any solid waste which is stored or disposed of in a
manner which may pose a human health hazard.
(6) Vermin/insects. Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable
matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material,
scrap metal or any material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes,
disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed. Also, all
stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies, or other insects can
multiply as well as garbage cans that are not flytight.
(7) Toxic and hazardous material. Any chemical and/or biological
material that is stored, used, or disposed of in such quantity or
manner that it is or has the potential to create a human health
hazard.
(8) Wastewater. The presence of wastewater or sewage effluent from
buildings on the ground surface, backing up into the building and/
§ 630-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-8
1:367
or running into a surface water body, caused by a damaged,
malfunctioning, improperly constructed, or inadequately
maintained private sewage system or private sewage lateral. Also,
any wastewater or sewage effluent that is not handled and disposed
of in compliance with all applicable Village and state codes.
(9) Holes or openings. All abandoned wells or openings in the ground
not securely covered or secured from public access and use.
(10) Nonfunctional public building fixtures. Nonfunctioning water
supply systems, toilets, urinals, lavatories, or other fixtures
considered necessary to ensure a sanitary condition in a public
building.
(11) Food conditions. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or
unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public.
(12) Animals. Wild animals or wild animal hybrids kept as domestic pets
within the Village limits.
(13) Other. Any other substance, activity or condition determined to
meet the definition of a human health hazard.
D. Public health nuisances enumerated. The following acts, omissions,
places, conditions, and things are hereby specifically declared to be
public health nuisances, but such enumerations shall not be construed
to exclude the following or other nuisances from coming within the
definition of public health nuisance in this chapter.
(1) Privy vaults. No privy vaults or cesspools shall be constructed or
maintained.
(2) Bird feeding. Feed for birds shall not be placed where it would
attract rodents or other animals.
(3) Animal waste. Every animal owner shall dispose of the animal's
fecal matter and other waste in a sanitary manner as often as may
be necessary to prevent any unhealthy or unsanitary accumulation
of such matter and/or waste.
(4) Noxious weeds. All noxious weeds as defined in § 66.0407, Wis.
Stats., and other rank growth of vegetation.
(5) Miscellaneous. Failure to comply with any law, ordinance or rule
regarding sanitation and health, including but not limited to:
(a) Plumbing.
(b) Water supplies, including wells, and surface water.
(c) Waste disposal.
(d) Storage or use of chemicals, pesticides, and herbicides or any
other toxic substance.
§ 630-8 FOX POINT CODE § 630-9
1:368
§ 630-9. Designation of dwelling as unfit for human habitation.
§ 630-10. Enforcement.
A. The Health Officer or designee may declare any dwelling or dwelling
unit found to have any of the following defects a human health hazard.
It shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be
placarded by the Health Officer or designee.
(1) A dwelling which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary,
and unsafe or vermin infested that it creates a serious hazard to the
health or safety of the occupants or public.
(2) A dwelling which lacks a potable water supply, a properly
functioning public or private sanitary sewer system, or a
functioning heating system adequate to protect the health or safety
of the occupant or public.
(3) All or portions of a dwelling to the extent it is proven to be
uninhabitable by virtue of a serious and imminent threat to human
health from exposures to lead or asbestos.
B. No person shall continue to occupy, rent or lease quarters for human
habitation which are declared unfit for human habitation by the Health
Officer or designee.
C. Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation
and so designated and placarded by the Health Officer or designee shall
be vacated within a time specified by the Health Officer or designee.
D. No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded
as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation
until written approval is secured from, and the placard is removed by,
the Health Officer or designee. The Health Officer or designee shall
remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding were based have been eliminated.
E. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or
dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation.
F. Any person affected by a notice or order relating to the condemning or
placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit for human habitation may
request and shall be granted a hearing in the matter before the Village
Board. The Village Board shall have jurisdiction to consider whether
there is any error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the Health Officer or other administrative official in the
enforcement of this chapter.
A. Whenever the Health Officer or designee determines that a violation
exists or has reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a
violation of any provision of this chapter, or any rule or regulation
§ 630-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-10
1:369
§ 630-11. Violations and penalties.79
Any person who shall be found guilty of violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties
provided in § 1-4. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 670
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND WELFARE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cigarettes and tobacco products — See Ch.
469.
Emergency management — See Ch. 50.
adopted pursuant thereto, he/she shall issue the violator a written order
to include:
(1) A description of the real estate involved.
(2) A statement of violations and corrective actions required.
(3) A reasonable time limit for the performance of any corrective act
required.
(4) That if the violation is not corrected within the time set forth the
Health Officer may take steps to abate the violation and that the
cost of the abatement may be assessed against the owner of the
property involved.
B. Such notice shall be served upon the owner, operator or occupant, as
the case may require, and may be served by certified mail or in the
manner provided by Ch. 801, Wis. Stats., for service of summons.
C. Exception to written order. In cases where a violation poses an
immediate health hazard to the public as determined by the Health
Officer or designee, the Health Officer or designee may take all
reasonable steps to abate the hazard without a written order.
D. Abatement. In those cases where the Health Officer determines that it
is necessary to abate the violation, the cost of the abatement may be
assessed to the property owner as a special charge pursuant to
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats. In addition to any other methods provided in this
chapter, the Health Officer shall have the power to abate human health
hazards and recover the cost of such abatement in accordance with
§ 254.59, Wis. Stats., which is adopted by reference herein and made a
part of this chapter as if fully set forth.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 630-10 FOX POINT CODE § 630-11
1:370
ARTICLE I
Peace and Good Order
§ 670-1. Disorderly conduct.
No person shall, in a public or private place, engage in violent, abusive,
indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud, or otherwise disorderly
conduct under circumstances in which such conduct tends to cause or
provoke a disturbance.
§ 670-2. Loud and unnecessary noise. [Added 7-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-05; amended 11-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-04]
A. Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited. No person shall make or assist
in making any noise tending to unreasonably disturb the peace and
quiet of persons in the vicinity thereof except as described in
Subsection C.
B. Types of loud and unnecessary noises. The following acts are declared
to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this
section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) Use of radios, sound systems and similar devices. The using,
operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, sound system, meaning a
phonograph, tape player, CD player, or other similar system, or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to
be unreasonably loud under the provisions as set forth in
Subsection A above shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
Subsection A.
(2) Construction or repair of buildings and excavations. The erection,
demolition, alteration or repair of any building, as well as the
operation of any pile driver, motorized tools or equipment, derrick,
motorized hoist, or any other similar equipment attended by loud or
unusual noise, or the conduct of excavation operations, other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on a weekday or
Saturday shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of Subsection
A; provided, however, that the Village Manager shall have the
authority, upon determining that the loss or inconvenience which
would result to any party in interest would be extraordinary and of
such nature as to warrant special consideration, to grant a permit
for a period necessary within which time such work and operation
may take place outside the hours prescribed above. [Amended
8-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
(3) Use of lawn equipment. The use of lawn equipment between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within the corporate limits of Fox
Point shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of Subsection A.
§ 670-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-2
1:371
§ 670-3. Train whistles. [Amended by Ord. No. 469]
§ 670-4. Fireworks. [Added by Ord. No. 464]
(4) Discharge of exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the
exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine or motorboat,
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom, shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of Subsection A.
(5) Garbage collection. The collection of garbage from dumpsters on
nonresidential properties outside the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturday shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of Subsection A.
C. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Any vehicle or equipment of the Village, county, state or other
governmental entity having jurisdiction in the area, or utility, while
engaged in necessary public business.
(2) The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of
governmental or school activities which are noncommercial in
nature.
(3) Reasonable vocal noise from or caused by persons attending
government- or school-sponsored activities, or engaged in
recreational use of public parks or pools.
(4) Noise that cannot be prevented and is necessary for the protection
or preservation of property or the health, safety, life or limb of some
person.
D. Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties and
remedies as set forth in § 1-4 of the Village Code.
A. It shall unlawful for any railroad company or railroad employee to blow
any train whistle between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. within
the Village unless necessary to prevent immediate danger to life or
property, and except that train whistles shall be blown at all hours on
every southbound train even though within the Village as the train
approaches and crosses East Dean Road.
B. In any prosecution of blowing a whistle at a prohibited time, the burden
of proof shall be upon the defendant to show that immediate danger to
life or property required the blowing of the whistle.
A. It is unlawful for any person to sell, expose or offer for sale, use, keep,
discharge or explode any firecrackers, blank cartridges, toy pistols or
cannons, toy canes, or cannons in which explosives are used,
contrivances using explosive caps or cartridges, sparklers, display
wheels, the type of balloon which requires fire underneath to propel the
§ 670-2 FOX POINT CODE § 670-4
1:372
same, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, aerial salutes, American
or Chinese bombs or other fireworks of like construction, or any
fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any
tablets or other devices commonly used and sold as fireworks
containing nitrates, chlorates, oxalates, sulphides of lead, barium,
antimony, arsenic, mercury, nitroglycerine, phosphorous or any
compound containing any of the same or other modern explosives,
within the Village of Fox Point, except as hereinafter provided.
B. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the use of fireworks other than
those prohibited by Subsection G for pyrotechnic displays given by
public authorities, fair associations, amusement parks, park boards,
civic organizations or groups of individuals that have been granted a
permit for such display by the Village Manager upon confirmation by
the Chief of Police and Chief of the North Shore Fire Department, or
their designate, that such use of fireworks or displays will not present
an unreasonable risk to the public health, welfare or safety. [Added
4-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-04]
C. The Village President may require an indemnity bond with good and
sufficient sureties for the payment of all claims that may arise by reason
of injuries to person or property from the handling, use or discharge of
fireworks under such permit. Such bond, if required, shall be taken in
the name of the Village of Fox Point, and any person injured thereby
may bring an action on said bond in his own name to recover the
damage he has sustained, but the aggregate liability of the surety to all
persons shall in no event exceed the amount of such bond. The bond, if
required, together with a copy of the permit shall be filed in the office of
the Village Clerk/Treasurer.
D. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the use or sale of blank
cartridges for circus or theatrical purposes, or signal purposes in
athletic contests or sports events, or use by militia, police or military
organizations; nor the use or sale of colored flares or torpedoes for
railway, aircraft, or highway signal purposes.
E. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any resident
wholesaler, dealer or jobber from selling fireworks other than those
prohibited by Subsection G at wholesale, but only when the same are
shipped or delivered directly outside of the State of Wisconsin or to an
organization or group granted a permit under this section.
F. The following provisions shall apply to places where fireworks are
stored or handled:
(1) Such premises shall be equipped with fire extinguishers approved
by the Chief of the Police Department.
(2) Smoking is prohibited where fireworks are stored or handled.
(3) It is hereby made the duty of every wholesaler, dealer or jobber
keeping, storing or handling, within the Village, fireworks of any
§ 670-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-4
1:373
§ 670-5. Use of fire bombs and other similar devices. [Added by Ord.
No. 357]
No person shall make, carry, possess, sell, give, or use any type of fire
and explosive creating device which is defined to mean a flammable-liquid
filled bottle or container with a fuse, wick, or any other type of ignition
or detonating device, flammable liquid fire bomb or any other device or
missile which can be ignited and cause ignition of any premises or material
or which can cause damage by explosion.
description, to notify the Chief of the Police Department
immediately of the receipt of such fireworks, or the removal thereof
from one location to another, and the location where such fireworks
are stored. No such fireworks shall be stored in any building used
for dwelling purposes or in any building situated within 50 feet
of any building used for dwelling purposes, or in places of public
assemblage, or within 50 feet of any gasoline pump, gasoline filling
station or gasoline bulk station, or any building in which gasoline
or volatile liquid is sold in quantities in excess of one gallon.
G. Under no circumstances shall any person sell, keep for sale,
manufacture or bring into the Village for use therein any fire balloon,
mortars, except mortars used for special display purposes, or cannon,
or any explosive cane, toy pistol, toy revolver or other contrivance using
explosive caps or cartridges, any Chinese firecrackers more than two
inches in length or more than three-eighths inch in diameter, outside
measurements of container, or any article containing a compound of
mercury or yellow phosphorous.
H. A parent or legally appointed guardian of any minor who shall
knowingly permit such minor to purchase or have in his possession or to
discharge any fireworks forbidden by this section shall be deemed to
have violated this section, and such parent or guardian shall be
personally liable for any damage caused by such possession or
discharge of fireworks.
I. The prohibitions provided in this section shall not apply to toy pistols,
toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper caps manufactured
in accordance with the United States Interstate Commerce Commission
regulations for packing and shipping of toy paper caps are used or to
toy pistol paper caps so manufactured, the sale and use of which shall
be permitted at all times.
J. The prohibitions provided in this section shall not apply to gold-starproducing
sparklers on wires which contain no magnesium, chlorate or
perchlorate and toy snakes which contain no mercury; the sale and use
of which shall be permitted at all times.
K. The prohibitions provided in this section shall not apply to smoke
novelties and party novelties which contain less that one-quarter grain
of explosive mixture.
§ 670-4 FOX POINT CODE § 670-6
1:374
§ 670-6. Damage to property. [Amended by Ord. No. 51380]
§ 670-7. Unlawful use of telephone. [Added by Ord. No. 481]
No person shall, by means of a telephone call originating within or received
within the Village of Fox Point:
A. For the purpose of this section, "grounds" includes, without limitation,
real property and any tree, shrub, bush, sod, or other vegetation.
B. Public buildings and property. No person shall intentionally damage,
harm, deface, soil, or mar any building, grounds, or property owned,
possessed, or controlled by the Village or other governmental unit or
subdivision.
C. Private buildings and property. No person shall intentionally and
without the owner's consent damage, harm, deface, soil, or mar any
privately owned building, grounds, or property.
D. Vehicles. No person shall intentionally and without the consent of the
owner, damage, harm, deface, soil, or mar any vehicle, privately or
publicly owned, whether located on public or private property.
A. With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse or harass, make a
telephone call and threaten to inflict injury or physical harm to any
person or the property of any person.
B. With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse, harass or offend,
telephone another and use any obscene, lewd or profane language or
suggest any lewd or lascivious act.
C. Make or cause the telephone of another repeatedly to ring, with intent
to harass any person at the called number.
D. Make repeated telephone calls, whether or not conversation ensues,
with intent solely to harass any person at the called number.
E. Make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without
disclosing his or her identity and with intent to abuse, threaten or
harass any person at the called number.
F. Knowingly permit any telephone under his or her control to be used for
any purpose prohibited by this section.
G. Utilize the 911 emergency telephone number system for any purpose
other than to report an emergency or to report an emergency knowing
that in fact the situation which he or she reports does not exist. An
"emergency" is when an immediate response by public safety personnel
is essential and an existing or very probable situation exists of bodily
harm or life-threatening illness or condition; or property damage or
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 670-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-7
1:375
loss; or escape of a suspect in a criminal offense or its municipal offense
counterpart. [Added 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-564]
§ 670-7 FOX POINT CODE § 670-7
1:376
ARTICLE II
Loitering and Trespassing
§ 670-8. Closing hours and loitering in public areas. [Added
5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-05]
§ 670-9. Trespass.
A. Closing times. The public parks, open spaces, pavilions, and publicly
held green space areas shall be closed to the presence of persons
engaging in activities as hereinafter set forth between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. However, in the event of an organized,
sponsored, or supervised activity, such activities to include by way of
illustration, without limitation by enumeration herein, school groups,
youth or adult athletic leagues, social clubs, scouting, church, or
fraternal groups, senior citizen organizations, public pool activities or
skating activities at public ice rinks, the area or facility shall be deemed
closed at 10:00 p.m. or 1/2 hour after cessation of the event, whichever
is later.
B. No person shall remain upon, stand around, spend time idly, or loiter in,
on, or about any of the aforedescribed areas during the time when such
area is closed to the public. This subsection shall not be construed to
prohibit passing through, travel, or activities devoid of an intent to
remain such as jogging, recreational walking, bicycling, or walking or
exercising pets.
C. The Village staff shall cause any such public areas as hereinabove
described to be posted in such fashion as to reasonably apprise the
public of the provisions of this section.
A. No person shall be in or on any private property, land, dwelling, or
business establishment without the consent, express or implied, of the
owner, tenant or occupant of said property, land, dwelling, or business
establishment, or his agent or representative. The posting of a "no
trespass" sign or notice at the main entrance or at any point of
approach to said private property, land, dwelling, or business
establishment is expression of non-consent. [Amended 7-1-1993 by
Ord. No. 595]
B. No person shall remain in or on any private property, land, dwelling, or
business establishment after consent to remain has been expressly
withdrawn by the owner, tenant or occupant of said private property,
land, dwelling, or business establishment, or by his agent or
representative. [Amended 7-1-1993 by Ord. No. 595]
C. No person shall be in or on any property, building, or structure owned
by or leased from the Village without the express or implied consent of
the Village Manager or an employee of the Village.
§ 670-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-9
1:377
D. No person shall remain in or on any property, building or structure
owned or leased from the Village after consent to remain has been
expressly withdrawn by the Village Manager or an employee of the
Village.
E. No person shall be in or on any property, building or structure owned by
or leased from a school district without the express or implied consent
of the school board, an employee of the school district, or the lessee or
their agent.
F. No person shall remain in or on any property, building or structure
owned by or leased from a school district after consent to remain has
been expressly withdrawn by the school board, an employee of the
school district, or the lessee or their agent. [Amended Ord. No. 513]
G. No person shall knowingly carry a concealed weapon, a weapon that is
not concealed, or a firearm that is not a weapon, in any location
prohibited by § 175.60(16), Wis. Stats., except as allowed therein.
[Added 9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
H. No person shall enter or remain within any property described in
§ 943.13(1m)(c), Wis. Stats., with a firearm, if proper notification
against such entry has been provided. [Added 9-13-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-10]
I. No person shall enter or remain in any building or part of a building
that is owned, occupied or controlled by the Village of Fox Point while
carrying a firearm. The Village Manager, or the Village Manager's
designee, shall post signs in compliance with applicable laws to give
notice of this prohibition. This prohibition does not apply to firearms
that are in a vehicle driven or parked in a Village-owned parking facility
or to any part of a Village-owned building that is used as a parking
facility. This prohibition also does not apply to law enforcement officers.
[Added 9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
§ 670-9 FOX POINT CODE § 670-9
1:378
ARTICLE III
Weapons, Hunting and Trapping
§ 670-10. Use of firearms. [Amended 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 97-640;
9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
No person, except in self-defense or in connection with his or her official
duties as a police officer or an officer of the peace, or an individual approved
by the Chief of Police as part of the Sharpshooting Program approved by the
Fox Point Village Board, permitted by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources, and under the supervision of the Chief of Police, shall discharge
within the Village of Fox Point any firearm or air gun of any type propelling a
metal pellet or any other dangerous instrumentality involving projection of
any type of projectile. This section does not apply and shall not be enforced
if the actor's conduct is justified or, had it been subject to a criminal penalty,
would have been subject to a defense described in § 939.45, Wis. Stats., to
the extent that Village authority is preempted by § 66.0409(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
§ 670-11. Dangerous weapons. [Added by Ord. No. 513]
A. Concealed weapons. No person, except a peace officer, may go armed
with a concealed and dangerous weapon, except as specifically allowed
by § 175.60, Wis. Stats., and other applicable laws of the State of
Wisconsin, and in strict compliance therewith. [Amended 9-13-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-10]
B. No person, except a peace officer or an individual approved by the Chief
of Police as part of the Sharpshooting Program approved by the Fox
Point Village Board, permitted by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources, and under the supervision of the Chief of Police, shall be
found at or upon any public place carrying or having within reach any
dangerous weapon, whether concealed or in plain view, except as
follows. Nothing in this section shall prohibit acts specifically allowed
by § 175.60, Wis. Stats., and other applicable state laws, provided that
such activities are conducted in strict compliance with such state laws.
[Amended 9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DANGEROUS WEAPON — Any device or instrument which, in the
manner it is used or intended to be used, is liable to cause death or
great bodily harm as defined in § 939.22(14), Wis. Stats. Dangerous
weapons include but are not limited to: blackjack; billy club; bludgeon;
sling shot; firearm; any instrument which impels a missile by
compressed air, spring, or other means; metal knuckles; arrows with
any barbed, blade, or pointed tip, straight edge razor; any knife with
a blade three inches or longer; switchblade knife as defined in
§ 941.24(1), Wis. Stats.; or any martial arts weapons including throwing
stars and kung fu or nunchuk sticks.
§ 670-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-11
1:379
§ 670-12. Hunting. [Amended 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 97-641;
3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
No person shall hunt any animals or birds in the Village of Fox Point
with any bow and arrow, crossbow, spring gun, or similar device which is
calculated or intended to propel or project an arrow or other projectile,
except an individual approved by the Chief of Police as part of the
Sharpshooting Program approved by the Fox Point Village Board, permitted
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, and under the
supervision of the Chief of Police, subject to the following exception.
Hunting with a bow and arrow or crossbow is only prohibited by this section
in the following respects and in the following circumstances:
§ 670-13. Trapping. [Added 2-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-03]
PEACE OFFICER — Any person vested by law with a duty to maintain
public order or make arrests for crime, whether that duty extends to all
crime or is limited to specific crimes.
A. No person shall hunt with a bow and arrow or crossbow within 100
yards from a building located on another person's land; provided that
this prohibition does not apply if the person who owns the land on
which the building is located allows the hunter to hunt within 100 yards
of the building.
B. Any person who hunts with a bow and arrow or crossbow must
discharge the arrow or bolt from the respective weapon toward the
ground, such as from a tree stand.
C. No person may hunt with a bow and arrow or crossbow on any land
owned or leased by the Village.
A. In the interest of public health and safety, it shall be unlawful for any
person in or on land within the Village to set, place or tend any trap for
the purpose of trapping, killing, catching, wounding, or molesting any
animal, except by use of live box-type traps only. Live box-type traps
shall be defined as those traps which capture and hold an animal in an
alive and unharmed condition.
B. This section shall prohibit the use of all traps other than live traps as
described in Subsection A of this section, including but not limited to
traps commonly known as leg traps, pan-type traps, or other traps
designed to kill, wound or close upon a portion of the body of the
animal, unless the use of such traps is approved by the Chief of Police.
C. All such traps set, placed or tended shall comply with Ch. 29, Wis.
Stats., as it relates to trapping.
D. This section shall not apply to trapping within the confines of buildings
or homes.
§ 670-11 FOX POINT CODE § 670-13
1:380
E. Nothing in this section shall prohibit or hinder the Village or its
employees or agents from performing their official duties.
§ 670-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-13
1:381

ARTICLE IV
Battery and Theft
§ 670-14. Battery. [Added by Ord. No. 404]
No person shall cause bodily harm to another by an act done with intent
to cause bodily harm to that person or another without the consent of the
person so harmed.
§ 670-15. Theft. [Added by Ord. No. 513]
A. No person shall do any of the following:
(1) Intentionally take and carry away, use, transfer, conceal, or retain
possession of moveable property of another without his consent
and with intent to deprive the owner permanently of possession of
such property.
(2) By virtue of his office, business or employment, or as a trustee or
bailee, having possession or custody of money or of a negotiable
security, instrument, paper or other negotiable writing of another,
intentionally use, transfer, conceal, or retain possession of such
money, security, instrument, paper or writing without the owner's
consent, contrary to his authority, and with intent to convert to his
own use or to the use of another person except the owner. A refusal
to deliver any money or a negotiable security, instrument, paper or
other negotiable writing, which is in his possession or custody by
virtue of his office, business or employment, or as a trustee or
bailee, upon demand of the person entitled to receive it, or as
required by law, is prima facie evidence of an intent to convert to
his own use within the meaning of this subsection.
(3) Having a legal interest in movable property, intentionally and
without consent take such property out of the possession of a
pledgee or other person having a superior right of possession, with
intent thereby to deprive the pledgee or other person permanently
of the possession of such property.
(4) Obtain title to property of another by intentionally deceiving him
with a false representation which is known to be false, made with
intent to defraud, and which does defraud the person to whom it is
made. "False representation" includes a promise made with intent
not to perform it if it is a part of a false and fraudulent scheme.
(5) Intentionally fail to return any personal property which is in his
possession or under his control by virtue of a written lease or
written rental agreement within 10 days after the lease or rental
agreement has expired.
B. Definitions. In this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 670-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-15
1:383
§ 670-16. Attempted battery or theft. [Added by Ord. No. 513]
No person shall attempt to commit a battery or a theft as defined by this
chapter in §§ 670-14 and 670-15, respectively. An attempt to commit an
offense requires that the actor have the intent to perform acts and attain
a result which, if accomplished, would constitute such offense and the
actor does acts toward the commission of the offense which demonstrate
unequivocally, under all circumstances, that the actor formed the intent and
would commit the offense except for the intervention of another person or
some other extraneous factor.
§ 670-17. Retail theft. [Added by Ord. No. 513]
MOVEABLE PROPERTY — Property whose physical location can be
changed, without limitation, including electricity and gas, documents
which represent or embody intangible rights, and things growing on,
affixed to or found in land.
PROPERTY — All forms of tangible property, whether real or personal,
without limitation including electricity, gas and documents which
represent or embody a chose in action or other intangible rights.
PROPERTY OF ANOTHER — Includes property in which the actor is a
co-owner and property of a partnership of which the actor is a member,
unless the actor and the victim are husband and wife.
VALUE — The market value at the time of the theft or the cost to the
victim of replacing the property within a reasonable time after the theft,
whichever is less, but if the property stolen is a document evidencing
a chose in action or other intangible right, "value" means either the
market value of the chose in action or other right or the intrinsic value
of the document, whichever is greater. If the thief gave consideration
for, or had a legal interest in, the stolen property, the amount of such
consideration or value of such interest shall be deducted from the total
value of the property.
A. No person shall intentionally alter indicia of price or value of
merchandise or take and carry away, transfer, conceal or retain
possession of merchandise held for resale by a merchant or property of
the merchant without his or her consent and with intent to deprive the
merchant permanently of possession, or the full purchase price, of the
merchandise.
B. The intentional concealment of unpurchased merchandise which
continues from one floor to another or beyond the last station for
receiving payments in a merchant's store is evidence of intent to
deprive the merchant permanently of possession of such merchandise
without paying the purchase price thereof. The discovery of
unpurchased merchandise concealed upon the person or among the
belongings of such a person or concealed by a person upon the person
or among the belongings of another is evidence of intentional
concealment on the part of the person so concealing such goods.
§ 670-15 FOX POINT CODE § 670-17
1:384
§ 670-18. Worthless check. [Added 6-10-1986 by Ord. No. 86-536]
C. Definitions. In this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MERCHANT — Includes any "merchant" as defined in § 402.104(3),
Wis. Stats., or any innkeeper.
VALUE OF MERCHANDISE —
For property of the merchant, the value of the property, not to
exceed $500; or
(1)
For merchandise held for resale, the merchant's stated price of
the merchandise, not to exceed $500, or in the event of altering,
transferring or removing a price marking or causing a cash register
or other sales device to reflect less that the merchant's stated
price, the difference between the merchant's stated price of the
merchandise and the altered price, not to exceed $500.
(2)
D. In any action or proceeding for violation of the section, duly identified
and authenticated photographs of merchandise which was the subject
of the violation may be used as evidence in lieu of producing the
merchandise.
A. Whoever issues any check or other order for the payment of money less
that $500 within the limits of the Village of Fox Point which, at the time
of issuance, he or she intends shall not be paid shall be subject to a
forfeiture.
B. Any of the following is prima facie evidence that the person, at the time
of issuance of the check or other order for the payment of money,
intended it should not be paid:
(1) Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have
sufficient funds or credit with the drawee.
(2) Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have
sufficient funds or credit with the drawee and that the person failed
within five days after receiving notice of nonpayment or dishonor to
pay the check or other order.
(3) Proof that, when presentment was made within a reasonable time,
the person did not have sufficient funds or credit with the drawee
and the person failed within five days after receiving notice of
nonpayment or dishonor to pay the check or other order.
C. This section does not apply to a postdated check or to a check given for
a past consideration, except a payroll check.
D. In addition to the other penalties provided for violation of this section, a
judge may order a violator to pay restitution to a victim as provided in
§ 943.24(5), Wis. Stats.
§ 670-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-18
1:385

ARTICLE V
Vehicles
§ 670-19. Unenclosed parking or storage of automobiles, trucks and
motorcycles.
§ 670-20. Removing ignition key from vehicles. [Amended by Ord.
No. 513]
No person who is the owner, operator, or custodian of any motor vehicle or
road machinery, as defined in § 340.01, Wis. Stats., shall leave it unattended
without first removing the ignition key or other comparable device used,
either singly or in combination with other devices, for the purpose of
activating the power plant of such vehicle or machinery.81
A. For purposes of this section, the term "motor vehicle equipment or
accessories" includes, without limitation, snow plowing attachments,
cabs for pickup trucks, motorcycle sidecars, or any like equipment or
accessory which can be removed and/or reattached to a motor vehicle.
B. Non-garage parking or storage of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles and
motor vehicle equipment or accessories on residential property in the
Village of Fox Point is prohibited except as expressly permitted as
follows: Automobiles, trucks, and motorcycles, collectively, which are
licensed, operable, and in regular use, the total of which may not
exceed the number of licensed drivers plus one residing at the
residence, and which automobile, truck or motorcycle is regularly used
in whole or in part for personal transportation purposes by a resident.
C. It shall be presumed than any of the following are not in regular use or
for the personal transport needs of a resident:
(1) When said vehicle has a tarp or other covering on it for a period of
10 days or more.
(2) When said vehicle is not driven for a period of 10 continuous days
or more. Upon request, the Police Department may grant written
permission for a longer period of time.
(3) When said vehicle is not registered or is not properly licensed.
(4) When said vehicle is not parked on a driveway surface.
(5) Utility type vehicles such as dump trucks, commercial plowing rigs,
flatbeds or trucks having a load capacity in excess of 3.5 tons.
(6) Vehicles in nonoperable condition.
D. Campers, boats, house trailers and other personal recreational vehicles
shall be excepted from this section and shall be subject to regulation
under § 745-7E of this Code.
§ 670-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-20
1:387
81.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 27.18, Parking house trailer, permit, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 670-20 FOX POINT CODE § 670-20
1:388
ARTICLE VI
Minors
§ 670-21. Curfew.82
No person under the age of 17 shall loiter away from his home between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., nor shall any parent or guardian
of such minor knowingly permit such minor to loiter away from his home
during such hours, unless such minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian
or some person 21 years of age or older standing in place of a parent, or
unless performing an errand or duty if directed by his parent or guardian,
or of urgent necessity, or unless pursing the duties of his employment in an
expeditious and orderly manner, or unless going directly home from places
of business or amusement or private homes.
§ 670-22. Possession of cigarettes.
§ 670-23. Contributing to delinquency or neglect of children.
[Added by Ord. No. 513]
A. Refusal to provide information; penalties. Any person under the age of
18 years being in possession of any cigarettes, cigarette paper or
cigarette wrappers and being asked by any sheriff, deputy sheriff,
police officer, Village marshal, truant officer, probation officer, or
teacher in any school to tell where or from whom such cigarettes,
cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers were obtained, who refuses to
furnish such information, shall forfeit not more than $5, together with
the costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of the forfeiture
and the costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until
such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not more than two days.
B. Misrepresentation of age; penalties. Any person under the age of 18
who intentionally misrepresents his age for the purpose of securing any
cigarettes, cigarette paper, or cigarette wrappers, or any substitute
therefor, or any paper made or prepared for the purpose of making
cigarettes or any substitute thereof, or for the purpose of being filled
with tobacco for smoking, shall forfeit not more than $25 together with
costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of the forfeiture and
the costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such
forfeiture and costs are paid, but not more than 10 days, provided that
if such person is a boy under the age of 17 years or a girl under the age
of 18 years, the provision for forfeiture here set forth shall not apply
and such persons shall be proceeded against as provided in Chapter 48
of the Wisconsin Statutes.
A. The following persons are guilty of a violation of this section:83
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 670-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-23
1:389
§ 670-24. Sale of spray paint and wide-tipped markers to minors.
[Added 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-615]
(1) Any person 18 years or older who intentionally encourages or
contributes to the delinquency or neglect of any child. This
subsection includes intentionally encouraging or contributing to an
act by a child under the age of 10 which would be a delinquent act
if committed by a child 10 years of age or older.
(2) Any parent, guardian, or legal custodian who, by neglect or
disregard of the morals, health, or welfare of the child, contributes
to the delinquency of that child. This subsection includes neglect or
disregard on the part of the parents which results in the
commission or probable commission by a child under the age of 10
of an act which would be a delinquent act if committed by a child 10
years of age or older.
B. Any act or failure to act contributes to the delinquency or neglect of a
child, although the child does not actually become neglected or
delinquent, if the natural and probable consequences of that act or
failure to act would be to cause the child to become delinquent or
neglected.
A. Definitions. In this section, the following terms have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — Any inscription, word, figure or design marked, scratched,
etched, drawn or painted with spray paint, liquid paint, ink, chalk, dye
or other similar substances on buildings, fences, structures, and similar
places without the express permission of the owner or operator of the
property.
SPRAY PAINT — Any container, regardless of the material from which it
is made, which is made or adapted for the purpose of spraying paint.
WIDE-TIPPED MARKER — Any indelible marker or similar implement
with a tip which, at its broadest width, is three inches or greater.
B. Prohibited conduct.
(1) Sale of spray paint and wide-tipped markers to minors. No person,
firm, or corporation, except a parent or legal guardian, employer,
teacher or other person authorized to supervise minors, may sell or
give away or in any way furnish spray paint or wide-tipped markers
to any person under the age of 18.
(2) Possession of spray paint and wide-tipped markers. No person
under the age of 18 may possess spray paint or wide-tipped
markers in a public or private place, without the express
permission of the owner or operator of the property.
§ 670-23 FOX POINT CODE § 670-24
1:390
§ 670-25. Truancy; sanctions against school dropouts. [Added
9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 99-19]
C. Display of spray paint and wide-tipped markers. The owner of an
establishment which offers spray paint or wide-tipped markers for sale
shall:84
(1) Place a sign in clear public view at or near the display of such
products stating: "Graffiti is against the law. The defacing of public
or private property is punishable by a fine of up to $2,500 or
imprisonment on default for up to 90 days."
(2) Place a sign in the direct view of persons responsible for accepting
customer payment for spray paint or wide-tipped markers stating:
"Selling spray paint or wide-tipped markers to persons under 18
years of age is against the law. Violators can be fined up to $2,500
or imprisoned on default up to 90 days."
(3) Display such paint or markers in such a manner as to make them
inaccessible to a customer present in the area allocated for
customer use without assistance from an employee of that
establishment.
D. Penalties.
(1) Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall
be subject to the penalties as provided in § 1-4 of the Village
Code.85
(2) Juveniles may be cited by the citation process on a form approved
by the Village Attorney, and the juvenile's parents or guardian shall
be notified within seven days.
A. Truancy and habitual truancy prohibited. No person shall be a truant or
a habitual truant as hereinafter defined.
B. Contributing to truancy prohibited. No person, regardless of age, shall
perform any act of commission or omission which contributes to a
child's truancy from school. This section does not apply to a person who
has under his or her control a child who has been sanctioned under the
provisions of § 49.26(1)(h), Wis. Stats.
C. Sanctions against school dropouts. Any person who is at least 16 years
of age but less than 18 years of age and is a dropout, as hereinafter
defined, may have his operating privilege suspended by court order
pursuant to § 118.163, Wis. Stats., until the person reaches the age of
18.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 670-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-25
1:391
D. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACT OF COMMISSION OR OMISSION — Anything that contributes
to the truancy of the child, whether or not the child is adjudged to
be in need of protection or services, if the natural and probable
consequences of that act would be to cause the child to be truant.
DROPOUT — The meaning given in § 118.153(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
HABITUAL TRUANT — A pupil under the age of 18 who is absent from
school without an acceptable excuse pursuant to § 118.16(1)(a), Wis.
Stats., for part or all of five or more days on which school is held during
a school semester.86
OPERATING PRIVILEGE — The meaning given in § 340.01, Wis. Stats.
TRUANT — Any pupil under the age of 18 who is absent part or all
of one or more days from school during which the school attendance
officer, principal, or teacher has not been notified of the legal cause of
such absence by the parent or guardian of the absent pupil, and also
means intermittent attendance carried on for the purpose of defeating
compulsory school attendance as such is required under § 118.15, Wis.
Stats.
E. Penalties. If a person under the age of 18 is found to have violated this
section, all of the dispositions as set forth in § 118.163, Wis. Stats., are
available to the court. If a person over the age of 18 is found to have
violated Subsection B of this section, the penalties provided in § 1-4 of
this Code are applicable.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 670-25 FOX POINT CODE § 670-25
1:392
ARTICLE VII
Health and Sanitation
§ 670-26. Adoption of state health laws. [Added by Ord. No. 498]
§ 670-27. Regulation of smoking and electronic smoking devices.
[Amended 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2014-0487; 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08; 10-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-09]
A. Section 252.25, Violation of law relating to health, and § 252.21,
Communicable diseases, of the Wisconsin Statutes, are hereby adopted
and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth. Any
action required to be performed or prohibited by said sections of the
Wisconsin Statutes is required or prohibited by this section. Any future
amendments, revisions or modifications of said § 252.21 or 252.25,
Wis. Stats., are intended to be made a part of this section. A copy of said
sections of the statutes of the State of Wisconsin and any future
amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the Village
Clerk/Treasurer or elsewhere in the Village offices in the Village Hall,
providing such copy is at all times readily available to the Clerk/
Treasurer.
B. Chapter DHS 145 as set forth in the Administrative Rules of the
Department of Health and Social Services of the State of Wisconsin
Administrative Code is hereby adopted and by reference made a part of
this section as if fully set forth. Any action required to be performed or
prohibited by said chapter of the Administrative Code is required or
prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions or
modifications of said Chapter DHS 145 is intended to be made a part of
this section. A copy of said chapter of the State of Wisconsin
Administrative Code and any future amendments shall be kept on file in
the office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer or elsewhere in the Village
offices in the Village Hall, providing such copy is at all times readily
available to the Clerk/Treasurer. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08]
C. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to the
penalty provisions set forth in § 1-4 of this Code.
A. Smoking prohibited. The provisions of § 101.123, Wis. Stats., and any
subsequent amendments or modifications are adopted by reference and
made a part of this section as if more fully set forth herein.
B. Regulation of electronic smoking devices.
(1) Definitions.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — Electronic smoking device
means any product containing or delivering nicotine, or any other
legal or controlled substance, whether natural or synthetic, that
87.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 27.12, Smoking on bus.
§ 670-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-27
1:393
§ 670-28. Adoption of state weed law. [Added 10-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-09; amended 11-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05]
can be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of
vapor, particulates, or aerosol from the device. The term electronic
smoking device includes, but is not limited to, devices
manufactured, marketed, or sold as e-cigarettes, e-pipes, vape
pens, mods, tank systems, or under any other product name or
description. The term also includes any component part of such
product whether or not sold separately. The term electronic
smoking device does not include any product that has been
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
for sale as a tobacco cessation product and is being marketed and
sold solely for that purpose.
SMOKING — Smoking shall have a meaning as defined in
Wisconsin Statutes § 101.123, and shall also include the use of an
electronic smoking device which emits an aerosol, particulates, or
vapor, in any manner or in any form.
(2) Sale of electronic smoking devices to minors. No person shall sell
or offer for sale any electronic smoking device, tobacco product,
electronic smoking device pod, or nicotine product to any person
under 18 years of age.
(3) Possession of electronic smoking device by persons under the age
of 18. No person under the age of 18 shall possess any electronic
smoking device, tobacco product, electronic smoking device pod,
or nicotine product.
(4) Use of electronic smoking devices on school grounds. No person
shall use an electronic smoking device on school grounds or in
school buildings.
(5) Prohibition against smoking. Smoking is prohibited in any of the
following:
(a) Any place in which tobacco smoking is prohibited under
§ 101.123, Wis. Stats.
(b) Any enclosed indoor area where smoking tobacco is prohibited
under § 101.123, Wis. Stats.
(c) All municipal premises, excluding parkland.
C. Penalty. Anyone violating this section shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in § 1-4 of this Code.
A. Section 23.235, Nuisance weeds, § 66.0407, Noxious weeds, and
§ 66.0517, Weed Commissioner, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and by
reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth. Any action
required to be performed or prohibited by said sections of the
Wisconsin Statutes is required or prohibited by this section. Any future
§ 670-27 FOX POINT CODE § 670-28
1:394
§ 670-29. Injuring plants.
§ 670-30. Keeping animals.
The maintenance of one or more horses, cattle, fowl, swine or goats in the
Village is hereby declared to be a nuisance and possession or maintenance
thereof in the Village is hereby prohibited, except that possession within
the Village of one of any of said classes of animals for 24 hours or less at
intervals of not less than eight days is permitted.
§ 670-31. Use of poison.
No person shall expose or cause any person to expose any poison or
poisonous substance outside of a dwelling or outbuilding unless he is or is
working for an exterminator licensed by the City of Milwaukee. This shall
not apply to the exposure or use and application of sprays, powders or other
amendments, revisions or modifications of said sections of the
Wisconsin Statutes are intended to be made part of this section. A
copy of said sections of the statutes of the State of Wisconsin and any
future amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the
Village Clerk/Treasurer or elsewhere in Village offices in the Village
Hall, providing such copy is at all times readily available to the Village
Clerk/Treasurer.
B. Unwelcome weeds.
(1) The Village hereby declares the following additional weeds
unwelcome within the Village of Fox Point:
(a) Garlic mustard (Alliaria petiolate).
(b) Common buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica).
(2) The Village directs persons owning, occupying, or controlling land
to take reasonable measures to control or destroy the enumerated
unwelcome weeds. The Weed Commissioner is authorized to
investigate the existence of unwelcome weeds in his or her district.
C. Violations of this section shall be subject to enforcement or prosecution
as provided in § 1-4 of the Village Code.
A. No person, other than the owner or person in possession of the land
upon which any flowers, trees, bushes, shrubs or plants are situated,
shall, except with the consent of the owner or person in possession of
the land, willfully injure, break, destroy, cut, or remove any flower, tree,
bush, shrub or plant within the Village.
B. No person shall transport or aid or abet in the transportation of any
flowers, trees, bushes, shrubs or plants which have been cut, broken or
removed in violation of this section.
§ 670-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-31
1:395
commercial preparations on trees, shrubs and gardens though the same
contain poison or poisonous substance.
§ 670-31 FOX POINT CODE § 670-31
1:396
ARTICLE VIII
Drugs and Drug Paraphernalia
§ 670-32. Possession of marijuana. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-08]
No person shall carry, possess, or use 25 grams or less of marijuana as
defined by § 961.01(14), Wis. Stats., unless such substance was obtained
directly from, or pursuant to a valid prescription or order of, a practitioner
as defined by § 961.01(19), Wis. Stats., while acting in the course of his
professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by Ch. 961, Wis.
Stats.
§ 670-33. Control of drugs. [Added by Ord. No. 480]
A. Purpose. To prevent:
(1) The display and availability for sale of certain instruments
hereinafter enumerated and simulated drugs and simulated
controlled substances hereinafter defined, for they contribute to
the usage of drugs and controlled substances by the youth of the
community by creating an atmosphere of apparent condonation by
the community.
(2) The promotion and sale of products containing substances which
may be harmless and inert in themselves but which are packaged
or designed to simulate controlled substances or drugs and are
harmful in that they promote and encourage entry into the drug
culture and foster respectability for the use and abuse.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADMINISTER — The direct application of a controlled substance,
whether by injection, inhalation, ingestion or any other means, to the
body of a patient or research subject by:
AGENT — An authorized person who acts on behalf of or at the
direction of a manufacturer, distributor or dispenser. It does not include
a common or contract carrier, public warehouseman or employee of the
carrier or warehouseman.
BUREAU — The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, U.S.
Department of Justice, or its successor agency.
CLOSE PROXIMITY — Within 500 feet on a straight line commencing at
the property lines nearest to each other.
(1) A practitioner (or in his presence by his authorized agent); or
The patient or research subject at the direction and in the presence
of the practitioner.
(2)
§ 670-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-33
1:397
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A drug, substance or immediate
precursor in Schedules I to V of Subchapter II of Wisconsin Statutes
Chapter 961.
COUNTERFEIT SUBSTANCE — A controlled substance which, or the
container or labeling of which, without authorization, bears the
trademark, trade name or other identifying mark, imprint, number
or device, or any likeness thereof, of a manufacturer, distributor, or
dispenser other than the person who in fact manufactured, distributed
or dispensed the substance.
DANGEROUS DRUG — One that is unsafe for use except under the
supervision of a practitioner because of its toxicity or other potentiality
for human effect, method of use, or collateral measures necessary to
use; "dangerous drug" shall include all other drugs or compounds,
preparations or mixtures thereof which the State Department of Health
Services shall find and declare by rule or regulation duly promulgated
after reasonable public notice and opportunity for hearing to have a
dangerous hallucinogenic, hypnotic, somnifacient or stimulating effect
of the body of a human or animal. For the purposes of this definition, the
phrase "intended for use" shall refer to the intent of the person selling,
offering to sell, dispensing, giving away or displaying the instrument
herein defined.
DELIVER or DELIVERY — The actual, constructive or attempted
transfer from one person to another of a controlled substance, whether
or not there is any agency relationship.
DISPENSE — To deliver a controlled substance to an ultimate user or
research subject by or pursuant to the lawful order of a practitioner,
including the prescribing, administering, packaging, labeling or
compounding necessary to prepare the substance for that delivery.
DISPENSER — A practitioner who dispenses.
DISTRIBUTE — To deliver other than by administering or dispensing a
controlled substance.
DISTRIBUTOR — A person who distributes.
DRUG —
Substances recognized as drugs in the Official United States
Pharmacopoeia, Official Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia of the United
States or Official National Formulary or any supplement to any of
them;
(1)
Substances intended for use in diagnosis, cure, mitigation,
treatment or prevention of disease in man or animals;
(2)
Substances, other than food, intended to affect the structure or any
function of the body of man or animals; and
(3)
§ 670-33 FOX POINT CODE § 670-33
1:398
IMMEDIATE PRECURSOR — A substance which the Controlled
Substance Board has found to be and by rule designates as being the
principal compound commonly used or produced primarily for use, and
which is an immediate chemical intermediary used or likely to be used
in the manufacture of a controlled substance, the control of which is
necessary to prevent, curtail or limit manufacture.
INSTRUMENT — A device designated for use or intended for use
in ingesting, smoking, administering or preparing marijuana, cocaine,
phencycledine, opium, or any derivative thereof, or any other controlled
substance.
MANUFACTURE — The production, preparation, propagation,
compounding, conversion or processing of a controlled substance,
either directly or indirectly, by extraction from substances of natural
origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a
combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, and includes any
packaging of the substance or labeling or relabeling of its container,
except that this term does not include the preparation or compounding
of a controlled substance by an individual for his own use or the
preparation, compounding, packaging or labeling of a controlled
substance:
MARIJUANA — All parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa L., whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture
or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the
mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake
made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks (except the
resin extracted therefrom), fiber oil or cake or the sterilized seed of the
plant which is incapable of germination.
MINOR — Any person who has not attained 18 years of age.
NARCOTIC DRUG — Any of the following, whether produced directly
or indirectly by extraction from substances of vegetable origin, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of
extraction and chemical synthesis:
Substances intended for use as a component of any article specified
in Subsection (1), (2) or (3) of this definition. It does not include
devices or their components, parts or accessories.
(4)
By a practitioner as an incident to his administering or dispensing
of a controlled substance in the course of his professional practice;
or
(1)
By a practitioner, or by his authorized agent under his supervision,
for the purpose of, or as an incident to, research, teaching or
chemical analysis and not for sale.
(2)
Opium and opiate, and any salt, compound, derivative or
preparation of opium or opiate.
(1)
§ 670-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-33
1:399
OPIATE — Any substance having an addiction-forming or addictionsustaining
liability similar to morphine or being capable of conversion
into a drug having addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining liability.
It does not include, unless specifically designated as controlled under
§ 961.11, Wis. Stats., the dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy-nmethylmorphinan
and its salts (dextromethorphan). It does include its
racemic and levorotatory forms.
OPIUM POPPY — The plant of the species Papaver Somniferum L.,
except its seeds.
PATIENT — As the case may be:
PERSON — An individual, corporation, government, or governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or
association or any other legal entity.
PLACE OF DISPLAY — Any museum, library, school or other similar
public place upon which business is not transacted for a profit.
POPPY STRAW — All parts, except the seeds, of the opium poppy, after
mowing.
PRACTITIONER —
PREMISES — A business establishment and the structure of which it is
a part and facilities and appurtenances therein and grounds, areas and
facilities held out for the use of patrons.
Any salt, compound, isomer, derivative or preparation thereof
which is chemically equivalent or identical with any of the
substances referred to in Subsection (1) of this definition, but not
including the isoquinoline alkaloids of opium.
(2)
(3) Opium poppy and poppy straw.
The individual for whom a drug is prescribed or to whom a drug is
administered; or
(1)
The owner or the agent of the owner of the animal for which a
drug is prescribed or to which a drug is administered; provided that
the prescribing or administering referred to in Subsection (1) and
this subsection is in good faith and in the course of professional
practice only.
(2)
A physician, dentist, veterinarian, podiatrist, scientific investigator
or other person licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to
distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to or
administer a controlled substance in the course of professional
practice or research in this state.
(1)
A pharmacy, hospital or other institution licensed, registered or
otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with
respect to or administer a controlled substance in the course of
professional practice or research in this state.
(2)
§ 670-33 FOX POINT CODE § 670-33
1:400
PREMISES OPEN TO MINORS — Any business establishment which
sells its wares or merchandise to minors or which permits minors to
enter into its place of business.
PRESCRIPTION — A written order, and in cases of emergency, a
telephone order, issued by a practitioner in good faith in the course
of his professional practice to a pharmacist for a drug for a particular
patient, which specifies the date of its issue, the name and address of
the patient (and, if such drug is prescribed for an animal, the species
of the animal), the name and quantity of the drug prescribed, the
directions for use of such drug, and the signature of such practitioner.
PRODUCTION — Includes the manufacture, planting, cultivation,
growing, or harvesting of a controlled substance.
SCHOOL — Any public or private elementary, junior high, or high
school.
SIMULATED DRUGS and SIMULATED CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
— Any products which identify themselves by using a common name or
slang term associated with a controlled substance or indicate by label
or accompanying promotional material that the product simulates the
effect of a controlled substance or drug.
SOMNIFACIENT and STIMULATING — The meaning attributable in
standard medical lexicons.
ULTIMATE USER — A person who lawfully possesses a controlled
substance for his own use or for the use of a member of his household
or for administering to an animal owned by him or by a member of his
household.
WAREHOUSEMAN — A person who, in the usual course of business,
stores drugs for others lawfully entitled to possess them and who has
no control over the disposition of such drugs except for the purpose of
such storage.
WHOLESALER — A person engaged in the business of distributing
drugs to persons included in any of the classes named above.
C. In determining whether an item constitutes an "instrument," a court
may consider the following:
(1) Whether a person or business establishment charged with violating
this section is a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
(2) Expert testimony as to the principal use of the devices, articles, or
contrivances claimed to be instruments.
(3) Evidence concerning the total business of a person or business
establishment and the type of devices, articles, contrivances, or
items involved in the business.
(4) National and local advertising concerning the use of the devices,
articles, or contrivances claimed to be instruments.
§ 670-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-33
1:401
§ 670-34. Possession, manufacture and delivery of drug
paraphernalia.
(5) Evidence of advertising concerning the nature of the business
establishment.
D. Control of instruments used for inhaling or ingestion of controlled
substances or drugs and control of simulated controlled substances.
(1) Sale and display prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to sell, offer to sell, dispense, give away or
display any instrument or simulated controlled substance or
simulated drug in or upon any premises which are premises open to
minors, unless the instruments, simulated controlled substances or
simulated drugs are kept in such part of the premises that is not
open to view by minors or to which minors do not have access, or
are in close proximity to a school; provided, however, that display of
any such items at a place of display for educational and scientific
purposes shall not be unlawful.
(2) Nuisance. In addition to any penalty authorized by § 1-4 of the Fox
Point Village Code, a violation of any provision of this section is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and punishable as a
separate violation.
A. Definition. In this section, "drug paraphernalia" shall be defined as
provided in § 961.571(1), Wis. Stats.88
B. Determination of drug paraphernalia shall be made in accordance with
§ 961.572, Wis. Stats.89
C. Prohibited activities.
(1) Possession of drug paraphernalia. No person may use, or possess
with the primary intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance or controlled
substance analog in violation of this subsection.90
(2) Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. No person may
deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to
deliver, drug paraphernalia knowing that it will be primarily used to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 670-33 FOX POINT CODE § 670-34
1:402
§ 670-35. Synthetic cannabinoid prohibited. [Added 2-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-01]
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance or controlled
substance analog in violation of the subsection.91
(3) Delivery of drug paraphernalia by a minor to a minor. Any person
who is under 17 years of age who violates Subsection C(2) by
delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 17 years of age
who is at least three years younger than the violator is guilty of a
special offense, and citations for such an offense may require a
mandatory appearance in Municipal Court.
D. Exemption. This section does not apply to drug manufacturers, medical
practitioners, pharmacists, owner of pharmacies and other persons
whose conduct is in accordance with Ch. 961, Wis. Stats. This section
does not prohibit the possession, manufacture or use of hypodermics, in
accordance with Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
E. Penalties. Any person who is under 17 years of age who violates
Subsection C(1), (2) or (3) shall, upon conviction, be subject to
disposition under § 938.344, Wis. Stats. All other persons who violate
Subsection C(1), (2) or (3) shall, upon conviction, be subject to the
penalties described in § 1-4 of this Code.
A. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any one or
more of the controlled substances referenced in § 66.0107(1)(bn), Wis.
Stats., including such amendments, recodification, and renumbering as
may be made to such statute from time to time in the future.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the statutory limitations against local
enforcement regarding repeat offenders shall apply, as described in
said statute.
B. Penalties.
(1) Any chemical used in violation of this section shall be seized and
forfeited to the Village.
(2) Any person who violates Subsection A shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a penalty as described in § 1-4 of this Code, provided
further that the forfeiture shall be not less than $100, and the
penalties may also include such other sanctions as provided in
§ 961.41(3g)(em), Wis. Stats., excluding imprisonment. The Code
and statute references herein shall include such amendments,
recodification and renumbering as may be made from time to time
in the future.
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 670-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-36
1:403
§ 670-36. Public nuisances involving controlled substances. [Added
3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
A. Public nuisance declaration. Violations of Chapter 961 of the Wisconsin
Statutes constitute public nuisances under Chapter 823, Wisconsin
Statutes, irrespective of any criminal prosecutions which may be or are
commenced based on the same acts. This declaration is intended to
reference the public nuisance declaration made in § 961.53, Wis. Stats.,
including such amendments or renumbering as may be made thereto
from time to time.
B. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a public
nuisance, as declared in Subsection A above.
C. Penalties. Violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties
described in § 1-4 of the Village Code.
§ 670-36 FOX POINT CODE § 670-36
1:404
ARTICLE IX
Obscenity
§ 670-37. Lewd and lascivious behavior. [Amended by Ord. No. 513]
No person shall do any of the following:
§ 670-38. Sexual intercourse in public. [Added by Ord. No. 513]
No person shall have sexual intercourse in public. In this section, "in public"
means in a place where or in a manner such that the person knows or has
reason to know that his or her conduct is observable by or in the presence
of persons other than the person with whom he or she is having sexual
intercourse.
§ 670-39. Sexual gratification. [Added by Ord. No. 51392]
No person shall commit an act of sexual gratification in public involving the
sex organ of one person and the mouth or anus of another. In this section,
"in public" means in a place where or in a manner such that the person
knows or has reason to know that his or her conduct is observable by or
in the presence of persons other than the person with whom he or she is
having sexual gratification.
§ 670-40. Public display.
No person shall caress or fondle a person of the opposite sex in, upon or
about any street, highway, alley or other public or exposed places, or in
any motor vehicle, or in any place where any other person passing or being
in or upon any street or other public place might see the same, or in any
way, manner or place so as to annoy any other person exercising his lawful
rights.
A. Commit an indecent act of sexual gratification with another with
knowledge that they are in the presence of others; or
B. Publicly and indecently expose a sex organ.
92.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 27.04, Drunkenness, of this chapter.
§ 670-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-40
1:405

ARTICLE X
Sex Offenders
[Amended 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-14; 12-14-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-19]
§ 670-41. Findings and intent. [Amended 5-8-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-02]
§ 670-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHILD — A person under the age of 18 for purposes of this article.
CHILD DAY CARE — Any facility that provides care and supervision for
compensation to four or more children for less than 24 hours a day where
a license is required under § 48.65(1), Wis. Stats., for the operation of such
facility.
DESIGNATED SEX OFFENDER — Any person who is required to register
under § 301.45, Wis. Stats., for any sexual offense against a child and any
person who is required to register under § 301.45, Wis. Stats., and who has
been designated a Special Bulletin Notification (SBN) sex offender pursuant
to § 301.46(2) and (2m), Wis. Stats. The term "designated sex offender" also
includes any person subject to the sex crimes commitment provisions of
§ 975.06, Wis. Stats., and any person found not guilty by reason of disease
or mental defect placed on lifetime supervision under § 971.17(1j), Wis.
Stats.[Amended 5-8-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
GOLF COURSE — Any public or private golf course or range.
A. The Village Board finds that repeat sex offenders, sex offenders who use
physical violence, and sex offenders who prey on children are sex
predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sex
offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat
their offenses, and most sex offenders commit many offenses, have
many more victims that are never reported, and are prosecuted for only
a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sex offenders'
victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant.
B. It is the intent of this article to not impose a criminal penalty but
instead to serve the Village's compelling interest to promote, protect,
and improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the Village
by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate
in concentrated numbers wherein certain sex offenders and sex
predators are prohibited from loitering and residing. The Village Board
has closely considered this issue and has made numerous findings and
expressions of intent within the preamble to the ordinance which
adopted these Code provisions, which is incorporated herein by
reference.
§ 670-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-42
1:407
LIBRARY — Any library that is held open for use by the public where such
library includes a collection of material specifically intended for use by
children.
MINOR — A person under the age of 17.
PARK/CONSERVATION AREA — Any area held open for use by the public
for active or passive leisure purposes, including but not limited to any park,
parkway, recreation or open space area, beach, playground, conservation
area, lake access point or recreational trail. "Park/conservation area" also
means any private lake access point or private beach that owners of two
or more lots or condominium units are entitled use, pursuant to a deed
restriction, subdivision plat, condominium declaration, condominium plat,
homeowners' association regulation or similar rights of common use.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE — A place where the person abides, lodges, or
resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
PUBLIC/PRIVATE SCHOOL — Any public or private elementary or
secondary school.
SPECIALTY SCHOOL — Any specialized school for children, including but
not limited to a gymnastics academy, dance academy, or music school.
SWIMMING POOL — Any swimming pool, wading pool, or aquatic facility
held open for use by the public.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE — A place where the person abides, lodges, or
resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar
year and which is not the person's permanent address or a place where
the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more
consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the
person's permanent address.
§ 670-43. Prohibited location of residence for designated sex
offenders; exemptions; Residence Board. [Amended 5-8-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-02]
A. Child safety zones. No designated sex offender shall establish a
permanent residence or temporary residence on property that is within
1,000 feet of real property consisting of any of the following:
(1) Public/private school.
(2) Specialty school.
(3) Child day care.
(4) Library.
(5) Park/conservation area.
(6) Swimming pool.
(7) Golf course.
§ 670-42 FOX POINT CODE § 670-43
1:408
(8) Movie theater.
B. Original domicile restriction. In addition to and not to the exclusion or
prejudice of the foregoing, no designated sex offender shall be
permitted to reside in the Village of Fox Point unless the person was
domiciled in the Village of Fox Point at the time of the offense resulting
in the person's most recent conviction of a designated sex offender
crime.
C. Distances for purposes of this section shall be measured in a straight
line from the closest boundary line of the real property supporting the
residence of a person to the closest real property boundary line of the
applicable above-enumerated use(s). A map/list depicting the aboveenumerated
uses and the resulting residency restriction distances, as
amended from time to time, is on file with the Village Clerk/Treasurer
and available for public inspection pursuant to § 670-46 of this article.
D. Exception. A designated sex offender residing within a prohibited area
as described in Subsection A or B does not commit a violation of this
section if any of the following apply:
(1) The person established the permanent residence or temporary
residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to
§ 301.45, Wis. Stats., before the effective date of this article.
(2) The person is a minor and is not required to register under § 301.45
or 301.46, Wis. Stats.
(3) The applicable use described in Subsection A was opened after the
person established the permanent residence or temporary
residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to
§ 301.45, Wis. Stats.
(4) An exception has been granted by the Residence Board.
E. Exception for placements under Chapter 980 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
To the extent required by § 980.135, Wis. Stats., and notwithstanding
the foregoing provisions of this chapter, the Village of Fox Point hereby
exempts and may not enforce any portion thereof that restricts or
prohibits a sex offender from residing at a certain location or that
restricts or prohibits a person from providing housing to a sex offender
against an individual who is released under § 980.08, Wis. Stats., or
against a person who provides housing to such individual, so long as the
individual is subject to supervised release under Ch. 980, Wis. Stats.,
the individual is residing where he or she is ordered to reside under
§ 980.08, Wis. Stats., and the individual is in compliances with all court
orders issued under Ch. 980, Wis. Stats.
F. Petition for exemption.
§ 670-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-43
1:409
(1) A designated offender may seek an exemption from this article by
petitioning to the Sex Offender Residence Board ("Residence
Board").
(2) The Residence Board shall consist of three citizens residing in the
Village. Members shall be selected by the Village Board. Members
shall serve for a term of five years and shall serve no more than two
consecutive terms. The terms for the initial members of the
Residence Board shall be staggered with one member serving one
year, a second serving three years and the third serving five years.
(3) The Residence Board shall approve an official petition form. The
sex offender seeking an exemption must complete the petition and
submit it to the Village Clerk who shall forward it to the Residence
Board. The Residence Board shall hold a hearing on each petition,
during which the Residence Board may review any pertinent
information and accept oral or written statements from any person.
The Residence Board shall base its decision on factors related to
the Village's interest in promoting, protecting, and improving the
health, safety and welfare of the community. Applicable factors for
the Residence Board's consideration shall include, but are not
limited to:
(a) Nature of the offense that resulted in sex offender status.
(b) Date of offense.
(c) Age at time of offense.
(d) Recommendation of probation or parole officer.
(e) Recommendation of Police Department.
(f) Recommendation of any treating practitioner.
(g) Counseling, treatment and rehabilitation status of sex offender.
(h) Remorse of sex offender.
(i) Duration of time since sex offender's incarceration.
(j) Support network of sex offender.
(k) Relationship of sex offender and victim(s).
(l) Presence or use of force in offense(s).
(m) Adherence to terms of probation or parole.
(n) Proposals for safety assurances of sex offender.
(o) Conditions to be placed on any exception from the
requirements of this article.
§ 670-43 FOX POINT CODE § 670-43
1:410
§ 670-44. Loitering by designated sex offender prohibited.
§ 670-45. Other prohibited activity.
It is unlawful for any designated sex offender to participate in a holiday
event in the Village of Fox Point involving one or more children by means
of distributing candy or other items to such child or children on Halloween;
wearing a Santa Claus costume on, or during any of the 30 days preceding,
Christmas; wearing an Easter Bunny costume on, or during any of the 30
days preceding, Easter; or by engaging in other similar type(s) of activity
that may, under the circumstances then present, tend to entice a child to
have contact with a designated sex offender. Holiday events in which the
designated sex offender is the parent or legal guardian of the child or
children involved, and no other children are present, are exempt from this
section.
(4) The Residence Board shall decide by majority vote whether to
grant or deny an exemption. An exemption may be unconditional or
limited to a certain address or time, or subject to other reasonable
conditions. The Residence Board's decision shall be final for
purposes of appeal. A written copy of the decision shall be provided
to the sex offender.
A. It shall be unlawful for any designated sex offender in the Village of Fox
Point to loiter or prowl in any child safety zone identified on the map
required by § 670-46 if any of the foregoing is done in a place, at a time,
or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of the persons or
property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances that may be
considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact
that the actor takes flight upon appearance of a law enforcement
officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to
conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight by the actor or
other circumstances make it impractical, a law enforcement officer
shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the
actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be
warranted, by requesting him or her to identify himself or herself or
explain his or her presence and conduct at the aforementioned
locations. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section
if the law enforcement officer did not comply with the preceding
sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the actor
was true and, if believed by the law enforcement officer at the time,
would have dispelled the alarm.
B. The prohibitions set forth in Subsection A above shall not apply where
the designated sex offender is a minor and is accompanied by one or
both of his or her parents, guardian, or other adult person having his or
her care.
§ 670-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-46
1:411
§ 670-46. Child safety zones map/list. [Amended 5-8-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-02]
The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall maintain an official map/list showing
locations identified in § 670-43A of this article. The Village Clerk/Treasurer
shall cause such map/list to be updated at least annually to reflect any
changes in the location of prohibited zones. These shall be designated
on the map/list as "child safety zones." The map/list is on file with the
Village Clerk/Treasurer and available for public inspection. In the event of
a conflict, the written terms of this article shall control.
§ 670-47. Designated sex offenders prohibited in child safety zones.
A. It is unlawful for any designated sex offender to enter or be present
upon any real property upon which there exists any facility used for or
which supports a use of:
(1) Public/private school.
(2) Specialty school.
(3) Child day care.
(4) Library.
(5) Park/conservation area.
(6) Swimming pool.
(7) Golf course.
(8) Movie theater.
B. Exception. A designated sex offender present within a prohibited area
as described in Subsection A does not commit a violation if any of the
following apply:
(1) The property supporting an enumerated use under Subsection A
also supports a church, synagogue, mosque, temple or other house
of religious worship, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Entrance and presence upon the property occurs only during
hours of worship or other religious program/service as posted
to the public;
(b) Written advance notice is made from the designated sex
offender to an individual in charge of the house of worship, and
approval from an individual in charge of the house of worship
as designated by the house of worship is made in return, of the
attendance by the designated sex offender;
(c) The designated sex offender shall not participate in any
religious education programs which include individuals under
the age of 18; and
§ 670-46 FOX POINT CODE § 670-47
1:412
§ 670-48. Violations and penalties.
(d) The attendance is authorized by the designated sex offender's
conditions of supervision, if on parole.
(2) The property supporting an enumerated use under Subsection A
also supports a use lawfully attended by a designated sex offender's
natural or adopted child(ren), which child's use reasonably
requires the attendance of the designated sex offender as the
child's parent upon the property, subject to the following
conditions:
(a) Entrance and presence upon the property occurs only during
hours of activity related to the use as posted to the public;
(b) Written advance notice is made from the designated sex
offender to an individual in charge of the use upon the
property, and approval from an individual in charge of the use
upon the property as designated by the owner of the use upon
the property is made in return, of the attendance by the
designated sex offender; and
(c) The attendance is authorized by the designated sex offender's
conditions of supervision, if on parole.
(3) The property supporting an enumerated use under Subsection A
also supports a polling location in a local, state or federal election,
subject to the following conditions:
(a) The designated sex offender is eligible to vote;
(b) The designated polling place for the designated sex offender is
an enumerated use;
(c) The designated sex offender enters the polling place property
and proceeds to cast a ballot with whatever usual and
customary assistance is provided to any member of the
electorate, and the designated sex offender vacates the
property immediately after voting; and
(d) The attendance is authorized by the designated sex offender's
conditions of supervision, if on parole.
(4) The property supporting an enumerated use under Subsection A
also supports an elementary or secondary school lawfully attended
by the designated sex offender as a student, under which
circumstances the designated sex offender who is a student may
enter upon that property supporting the school at which the
designated sex offender is enrolled, as is reasonably required for
the educational purposes of the school, provided that the
attendance is authorized by the designated sex offender's
conditions of supervision, if on parole.
§ 670-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-48
1:413
A. Any violation of this article shall be subject to the penalties and
remedies as set forth in § 1-4 of the Village Code. Each day of each
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Violation of this article shall constitute a public nuisance which, in
addition to monetary forfeitures, shall be subject to action by the
Village to abate and enjoin such nuisance.
§ 670-48 FOX POINT CODE § 670-48
1:414
ARTICLE XI
Outdoor Lighting
§ 670-49. Applicability.
This article applies to all outdoor light fixtures in the Village, whether
existing at the time of adoption of this article or hereafter, except as
specifically stated otherwise herein. This article applies to all properties in
the Village, except as specifically stated otherwise herein. No outdoor light
fixture shall be installed, erected, used, or moved except in compliance with
this article and all other applicable requirements of the Village Code. If an
outdoor light fixture will be installed as part of a project for which a building
permit is required, then a lighting plan must be submitted with the building
permit application for Village review pursuant to the building permit review
procedures of this Code.
§ 670-50. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIRECT LIGHT RAY — Any light ray, luminance or luminous flux, that is:
OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE — Any electrically powered illuminating device
used outdoors or used to illuminate exterior areas, consisting of or including
one or more lamps to emit luminous flux in the visible spectrum.
§ 670-51. Setback.
All outdoor light fixtures shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the
property line.
§ 670-52. Height.
No outdoor light fixture directly attached to a building shall be placed above
the highest point of the roofline of any building, except that such directly
attached light fixtures for a deck shall not exceed 12 feet in height from
the finished surface level. No outdoor light fixture on a pole shall exceed
12 feet in height from the finished lot grade, which does not include berms,
artificial hills, and mounds. All other outdoor light fixtures shall not exceed
12 feet in height from the finished lot grade, which does not include berms,
artificial hills, and mounds. The height shall be measured to the highest
point of the outdoor light fixture that emits direct light rays.
A. Directly emitted from an outdoor light fixture; or
Indirectly emitted from an outdoor light fixture or the optics, reflector,
lens, diffuser or opening of an outdoor light fixture.
B.
§ 670-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-53
1:415
§ 670-53. Shielding.
All outdoor light fixtures shall be directed or shielded so that the direct light
rays are not visible beyond the property line.
§ 670-54. Color.
All light emitted from outdoor light fixtures shall be in a color band of white
color light which is defined as white light emitted from incandescent, quartz
halogen, fluorescent or metal halide (MH) sources that are not tinted or
filtered in any way to alter the apparent color. Holiday lighting as described
in § 670-58B of this article shall be excepted from the requirements of this
section.
§ 670-55. Maximum allowable light trespass.
In no case shall illuminance level from any outdoor light fixture(s),
individually or combined, measure above 0.2 footcandle at any location
beyond the property line.
§ 670-56. Existing nonconforming outdoor light fixtures.
Outdoor light fixtures that are in place and operational on May 21, 2008
(existing fixtures) must be brought into compliance with the terms of this
article as follows:
§ 670-57. Parking lots.
Outdoor light fixtures designed to illuminate a parking lot for a business or
institutional use shall be extinguished when the last person who is leaving
the building for the night leaves the premises or when such building is
A. Color. Such existing fixtures that have bulbs that do not comply with the
color requirements of § 670-54 must have replacement, compliant bulbs
installed no later than May 21, 2010.
B. Shielding and light trespass. Such existing fixtures that do not comply
with the shielding and light trespass requirements of §§ 670-53 and
670-55 of this article must be brought into compliance with such
requirements no later than May 21, 2009.
C. Abandonment. Such existing fixtures that do not comply with the terms
of this article and that are not operational or are not used for a period of
365 consecutive days, for any reason, are considered to be abandoned
and shall not be used until they are moved, replaced, removed, or
otherwise brought into compliance with all requirements of this article.
D. Unlawful fixtures. If, immediately prior to the effective date of this
article, any such existing fixture was not in compliance with the thenapplicable
laws and ordinances, such fixture must immediately be
brought into compliance with this article. No waiver or extension is
hereby granted to unlawful existing fixtures.
§ 670-53 FOX POINT CODE § 670-57
1:416
empty. Such lights shall then remain extinguished until a person arrives and
enters the building on the premises. A building is considered to be empty if
it is not occupied, and also if it is occupied by a night watchman, caretaker,
or similar person, who will remain in the building overnight.
§ 670-58. Exceptions.
The requirements of this article are subject to the following exceptions:
A. Residential post lights. The shielding requirements of § 670-53 of this
article shall not be required on property that is used exclusively for
single-family residential purposes, for porch, post lamp, decorative and
sidewalk lighting fixtures that use or provide nondirectional light
sources of 25 watts maximum incandescent clear, 40 watts maximum
incandescent, frosted or diffused by some other means, or 11 watts
maximum fluorescent, or the equivalent. Any such lighting fixture shall
be set back a minimum of 10 feet from property lines excepting the
front property line.
B. Holiday lighting. The shielding requirements of § 670-53 shall not be
required for any outdoor light fixture used for the purpose of decorating
or celebrating (holiday lighting) between November 15 and January 31,
provided that the wattage of any directional or nondirectional light
source or lamp is 100 watts incandescent or less or 22 watts fluorescent
or less, or the equivalent.
C. Specific approvals. The setback and height restrictions of §§ 670-51 and
670-52, respectively, shall not be required on property that is used for a
business, institutional or multifamily residential purpose, if different
requirements are expressly permitted by a development agreement
that was signed by the Village prior to May 21, 2008, and remains in
effect, or are expressly permitted by a conditional use permit granted
by the Village prior to May 21, 2008, that remains in effect, or have
been in place since before December 31, 1993, provided that, in such
event, the lighting must comply with all terms and conditions of the
development agreement, conditional use permit, and laws as they
existed at the time of such installation. In the event that this article and
such prior approval, or such prior laws, have conflicting choice of law
provisions, the more restrictive shall be required, as determined by the
Village Plan Commission.
D. Athletic lighting. Height and shielding restrictions shall not apply to
special outdoor athletic activities such as swimming pools, platform
tennis or ice skating, provided that this exception only applies if:
(1) The property is not zoned or used for a single-family residential
purpose; and
(2) Reasonable efforts are made to shield direct light rays using
current manufacturer supplied equipment in a manner consistent
with the lighting needs of the activity.
§ 670-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-58
1:417
§ 670-59. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article are subject to the penalties described in § 1-4 of
this Code. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
E. Governmental lighting. Outdoor light fixtures expressly required by the
laws, codes, regulations, ordinances and lawful orders of the United
States, the State of Wisconsin, the County of Milwaukee, or the Village
of Fox Point, and agencies and departments thereof, for a duly
authorized use in the Village of Fox Point, are excluded from the
requirements of this article, but only to the extent that this article
directly conflicts with such applicable laws.
§ 670-58 FOX POINT CODE § 670-59
1:418
ARTICLE XII
Enforcement
§ 670-60. Emergency orders. [Amended by Ord. No. 404]
All persons shall obey and comply with the provisions of any ordinance
or resolution adopted or proclamation issued pursuant to the authority of
Chapter 50, Emergency Management, of the Code of the Village of Fox
Point.
§ 670-61. Aid or abet. [Amended by Ord. No. 404]
No person shall participate in or, being present, aid, abet or encourage any
assault, affray, riot, dog fight, disorderly assemblage or other disturbance,
or violation of any ordinance of the Village of Fox Point or of the County of
Milwaukee, or the violation of any law of Wisconsin or of the United States
of America.
§ 670-62. False reports and false alarms.
§ 670-63. Interference with police officers or fire fighters.
[Amended by Ord. No. 513]
A. False reports. No person shall intentionally falsely report in any
manner, directly or indirectly, to the sheriff, coroner, or any police
officer that a violation of a state law or a Village ordinance has been or
is being committed at any place within the Village, or that an accident
has occurred, for the purpose of causing any such officer to investigate
such report, or of misleading any such officer in any manner.
B. False alarms. No person shall intentionally falsely report in any manner,
directly or indirectly, to any officer or employee of the Village, or any
other public officer or employee, that there is any fire in the Village for
the purpose of causing such officer or employee to investigate such
report, or of misleading any such officer or other employee. [Amended
by Ord. No. 513]
A. Failure to aid police officer. No person shall, without reasonable excuse,
refuse or fail, upon command, to aid any person known to him to be a
police officer or auxiliary police officer, while such officer is doing any
act in his official capacity and with lawful authority.
B. Resisting or obstructing police officer.
(1) No person shall knowingly resist, obstruct, or otherwise interfere
with a police officer or auxiliary police officer, or any member of the
Fox Point Police Department, while such officer or member is doing
any act in his official capacity and with lawful authority. "Obstruct"
includes with limitation knowingly giving false information to the
officer or member with the intent to mislead him in the
§ 670-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-63
1:419
§ 670-64. Citations. [Added 11-22-1988 by Ord. No. 88-55595]
Section 66.0113, Wis. Stats., relating to the use of a citation for violations of
ordinances, including ordinances for which a statutory counterpart exists,
is hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter with the
same force and effect as though set forth herein verbatim. Any further
performance of his duty, including the service of any summons or
civil process.
(2) No person shall willfully damage or destroy property belonging to
the Fox Point Police Department or any member thereof.
(3) No person shall commit an assault, battery, or throw any object
which could inflict bodily harm upon a member of the Fox Point
Police Department or any peace officer while engaged in the
performance of any official function or duty.
C. Failure to aid firefighter. No person shall, without reasonable excuse,
refuse or fail, upon command, to aid any person known to him to be a
firefighter or volunteer firefighter, while such firefighter is doing any
act in his official capacity and with lawful authority.
D. Interfering with firefighting.
(1) No person shall willfully hinder, obstruct, or otherwise interfere
with a firefighter, volunteer firefighter, or any member of the Fire
Department while engaged in fighting a fire or in traveling thereto
or therefrom or while otherwise engaged in the performance of any
official function or duty.
(2) No person shall interfere with the proper function of a fire alarm
system, or interfere with, tamper with, or remove without
authorization any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or any other
firefighting equipment, or block or render inaccessible any fire
hydrant.
(3) No person shall willfully damage or destroy property belonging to
or used by the North Shore Fire Department, or any member
thereof.93
(4) No person shall commit any assault, battery, or throw any object
which could inflict bodily harm upon a member of the North Shore
Fire Department while engaged in the performance of any official
function or duty.94
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 670-63 FOX POINT CODE § 670-64
1:420
amendments, revisions or modifications of said § 66.0113 are intended to be
made a part of this section.
§ 670-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 670-64
1:421
Chapter 681
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way — See
Ch. 292.
Trees, shrubs and other plant material — See
Ch. 310.
§ 681-1. Purpose.
When buildings or structures and the premises are in a state of disrepair or
not in a neat and attractive appearance, a condition is created which may
cause or contribute to injury of persons or property, unsanitary conditions
endangering the health and safety of persons using the premises and the
depreciation of real estate property values in the Village. Each of the above
conditions creates a public nuisance.
§ 681-2. Exteriors.
With respect to all buildings or structures, including fences, planters, and
retaining walls, the owner, occupant or agent shall keep the exterior thereof
in a neat and attractive appearance and structurally sound, and including
but not limited to, shall repaint or use preservatives on the exterior from
time to time as reasonably required to maintain the same, and shall keep
stone or brick adequately tuck-pointed and shall keep other building
material in a neat and attractive condition.
§ 681-3. Plantings and lawns. [Amended 9-10-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-10]
A. Every owner of real estate in the Village shall be responsible for
creating and sustaining a condition of stability of the landscape on
every parcel of land which he/she shall own or control, whether this be
accomplished by traditional means (feeding, watering, cutting turf,
pruning) or by the maintenance or restoration and management of
native or natural-appearing plant communities. This section recognizes
the fundamental right of every landowner to develop and manage his/
her landscape in the manner of his/her choosing, insofar as it does not
present a hazard to the public health or safety, or to the natural or
cultivated environment, and meets the other standards set out in this
section.
B. Every real estate owner possessing lawns of the conventional turf grass
type shall be responsible for managing the turf grass at a height not to
exceed four inches. A native or natural appearing landscape is not and
cannot be achieved by the abandonment of a mown lawn. Such a
determination will be made by the Village Manager or his/her agent.
§ 670-64 FOX POINT CODE § 681-3
1:422
§ 681-4. Storage of property.
The owner, occupant or agent of all premises shall not store outside
property not in good operating condition and property not usable on the
premises.
§ 681-5. Litter.
The owner, occupant or agent of all premises shall at all times keep the
premises clean of litter and shall take such necessary measures to prevent
litter from being carried by the elements to adjoining premises. Litter may
include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, grass
clippings, lawn and garden waste, newspapers, wrapping papers,
magazines, glass, containers, and construction materials except where
permitted by Village rules and regulations.
§ 681-6. Nonresidential premises.
In addition to the above, the occupant or agent of all nonresidential
premises shall:
§ 681-7. Vacant or undeveloped land.
C. Dead or dying trees or shrubs adjacent to structures or conventional
turf grass lawns shall be removed. Any tree which in the opinion of the
Village Manager or his/her agent is likely to fall upon any public
sidewalk, public street or public ground shall be declared a public
nuisance and shall not be permitted to remain standing in the Village.
A. Use only refuse, litter, garbage and trash receptacles outside that are
leakproof, secure against rodents and have permanent covers.
B. Screen all outside refuse, litter, garbage and trash receptacles.
C. Maintain all parking areas, driveways and approaches in a neat and
attractive appearance and structurally sound, including but not limited
to the elimination of holes, excavations, wet spots, breaks, broken
surfaces and bumps.
A. Definition. Any private lot, in any zoning district within the Village,
which has never been developed, or as to which all improvements have
been razed such that the lot has been restored to an undeveloped
status, or where there is no occupied or actively used structure, shall be
deemed a vacant or undeveloped lot and subject to the terms of this
section.
B. Requirements. Every owner or other person having authority over or
control of any vacant or undeveloped land as defined in this section
shall maintain such land in accord with the following provisions:
(1) All areas of any such land shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, free from any accumulation of combustible or
§ 681-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 681-7
1:423
§ 681-8. Enforcement, notice and hearings.
noncombustible material, debris and refuse or similar material
which could or may cause fire, safety or health hazards, or a serious
blighting influence upon surrounding properties. The provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to materials stored in conjunction
with any development of the property, while such property is being
developed in accordance with a building permit duly issued during
the period of construction or development.
(2) Sidewalks, walks, drives, and other concrete, asphalt, bricked,
graveled, stoned, or similarly treated area shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair. Conditions resulting in dust, dirt, loose
stones or other aggregate being deposited upon an adjacent public
or private property shall be corrected.
(3) All areas in a natural state shall be kept free of diseased or fallen
trees, branches, brush, debris, and any noxious weeds regulated
under any other provision of the Village Code.
(4) Whenever erosion of the soil on vacant or undeveloped land
repeatedly causes the same to spill over onto the sidewalk, street,
alley, or adjoining property, the condition shall be corrected by the
construction of a suitable retaining wall, grading, sodding, or
planting of grass or other suitable ground cover.
(5) Whenever any depressed area of such vacant or undeveloped land
shall allow the accumulation of standing or stagnant water, which
water does not or cannot percolate into the soils within 24 hours of
the last rain event, the condition shall be corrected by the
construction of a suitable drainage facility or pump in accordance
with all applicable provisions of the Village of Fox Point Code, or by
suitable grading in accordance with any applicable provisions of
this Code.
(6) No vehicles, whether registered or unregistered, or whether in
sound mechanical condition or disrepair, and no materials not
employed in the course of construction under a duly issued building
permit shall be parked upon or stored upon the premises unless
such a vehicle is attended by an individual lawfully upon and
present at the vacant or undeveloped land.
A. Service of notices. Whenever the Building Inspector determines that
there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation
of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of such violation to
the person or persons responsible therefor. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
§ 681-7 FOX POINT CODE § 681-8
1:424
(3) Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued
and a statement of remedial actions which, if taken, would effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
(4) State a reasonable date for the performance of any remedial
actions or repairs and state that the landowner's failure to take
such remedial actions or repairs within the time period specified in
the notice will enable the Village of Fox Point, its officers, agents, or
independent contractors to enter onto the land with no additional
notice required to do so, at the landowner's expense, in order to
take such remedial actions or make such repairs necessary so the
property complies with this chapter.
(5) Be served upon the owner, occupant or the agent, as the case may
require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner, occupant or agent if a copy is delivered to
him personally or by leaving a copy at his place of abode with a
person at least 18 years of age residing there or by mailing by
certified mail a copy to the last address, and the date of mailing
shall be deemed date of service.
B. Repairs or remedial action.
(1) Whenever the owner, occupant or agent fails, neglects or refuses to
take remedial actions or take other corrective action called for by
the notice of noncompliance under Subsection A of this section, the
Building Inspector may undertake such repairs or remedial action
after the date specified in the notice has passed, provided that in
every case the Building Inspector shall allow the property owner at
least the following time period to repair or remedy the matter
following service of the notice:
(a) For violations of § 681-3B: two days.
(b) For all other violations of this chapter: 10 days.
(2) The date indicated in the notice shall automatically be extended, as
necessary, to allow the above-mentioned minimum time following
service of the notice.
(3) The Building Inspector shall not undertake repairs if the cost of
such work will exceed 50% of the assessed value of the building or
structure involved.
(4) Every owner, occupant, or agent who has received notice of
noncompliance and has not made repairs or taken appropriate
remedial action within the time limits under Subsection B(1) shall
give entry and free access to the Village, its agents, or independent
contractors for the purpose of making such repairs or remedial
action.
§ 681-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 681-8
1:425
(5) Costs of repairs made or other remedial action taken at the
direction of the Building Inspector shall constitute a special charge
for current services pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., with a
penalty of 10% per annum on the unpaid amount starting on the
30th day provided above.
C. Petition for hearing.
(1) Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter
may request and shall be granted a hearing before the Board of
Appeals, provided that such person shall file a written petition with
the Board of Appeals requesting such hearing and setting forth a
statement of the grounds thereof within 10 days of service of the
notice.
(2) Within 10 days of filing such petition, the Board of Appeals shall set
a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner
written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why such
notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing before the
Board of Appeals shall be commenced not later than 30 days after
the date the petition was filed, provided that upon written
application, the Board may postpone the date of the hearing for a
reasonable time beyond such thirty-day period if, in its judgment,
the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement. Between the date of filing the petition and the initial
date of hearing and any adjournment granted by the Board of
Appeals, the Building Inspector shall not undertake any repairs or
remedial action under Subsection B.
(3) After such hearing, the Board of Appeals shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice, depending upon its finding as to whether or
not the provisions of this chapter have been complied with, and
shall reduce its order to writing and a copy shall be mailed by
certified mail to the petitioner.
(4) The Board of Appeals may modify any notice so as to authorize a
variance from the provisions of this chapter when, because of
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship,
provided that the spirit of this chapter will be observed, safety and
welfare secured, and substantial justice done. If the Board of
Appeals sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be
an order, and the owner, occupant or agent, as the case may be
require, shall comply with all provisions of such order within a
reasonable period of time, as determined by said Board of Appeals.
§ 681-8 FOX POINT CODE § 681-9
1:426
§ 681-9. Violations and penalties.
Any owner, occupant or agent who failed to take remedial action within
the date specified in the notice of the Building Inspector or who failed
to obey the order of the Board of Appeals shall be subject to a penalty
as provided in § 1-4 of the Fox Point Village Code. Such person shall be
subject to additional prosecutions and convictions for each day upon the
same notice or order, without the necessity of the Building Inspector issuing
a new notice or the Board of Appeals issuing a new order, until such notice
or order has been complied with. In addition to the above, action may be
brought to abate a public nuisance.
§ 681-10. Building Inspector.
As used throughout this chapter, "Building Inspector" means the person
employed by the Village of Fox Point in that position or his or her designee.
Chapter 713
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 681. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 870.
§ 713-1. Vehicle abandonment prohibited.
No person shall leave unattended any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or
mobile home on any public street or highway or public or private property
for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to
reasonably appear to have been abandoned. When any such vehicle has
been left unattended on any street or highway for more than 24 hours, or
on any public or private property within the Village without the permission
of the owner for more than 48 hours, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and
constitutes a public nuisance.
§ 713-2. Removal and impoundment of abandoned vehicles.
Any vehicle in violation of this chapter shall be impounded until lawfully
claimed or disposed of under § 713-3, except that if the Police Chief or
his duly authorized representative determines that the cost of towing and
storage charges for the impoundment would exceed the value of the vehicle,
the vehicle may be junked by the Village prior to expiration of the
impoundment period upon determination by the Police Chief or his duly
authorized representative that the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or
other reason.
§ 713-3. Disposal of abandoned vehicles.
§ 681-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 713-3
1:427
§ 713-4. Owner responsible for impoundment and sale costs.
The owner of any abandoned vehicle, except a stolen vehicle, is responsible
for the abandonment and all costs of impounding and disposing of the
vehicle. Costs not recovered for the sale of the vehicle may be recovered in
a civil action by the Village against the owner.
§ 713-5. Notice of sale or disposition.
Within five days after the sale or disposal of a vehicle as provided in
§ 713-3A or B, the Police Chief or his duly authorized representative shall
advise the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Division of Motor
Vehicles, of such sale or disposition on a form supplied by the Division. A
copy of such form shall also be given to the purchaser of the vehicle, and a
copy shall be retained on file in the Village.
§ 713-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall abandon a vehicle in violation of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty under § 1-4 of this Code.
A. If the Police Chief or his duly authorized representative determines that
the value of the abandoned vehicle exceeds $100, he shall notify the
owner and lienholders of record by certified mail that the vehicle has
been deemed abandoned and impounded by the Village and may be
reclaimed within 15 days upon payment of accrued towing, storage and
notice charges, and if not so reclaimed shall be sold.
(1) In the event an abandoned vehicle determined to exceed $100 in
value is not reclaimed within the period and under the conditions
as provided above, it may be sold by sealed bids. The description of
the vehicle and the terms of sale shall be published as a Class 1
notice not less than five days before the sale.
(2) After deducting the expense of impoundment and sale, the balance
of the proceeds, if any, shall be paid into the Village treasury.
B. Any abandoned vehicle which is determined by the Police Chief or his
duly authorized representative to have a value of less than $100 may be
disposed of by direct sale to a licensed salvage dealer upon
determination that the vehicle is not reported stolen.
§ 713-3 FOX POINT CODE § 713-6
1:428
Part VI: Land Usage
Chapter 724
FLOODPLAIN ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management, erosion control and
bluff regulation — See Ch. 285.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 738.
Zoning — See Ch. 745.
§ 713-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 713-6
1:429

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 724-1. Statutory authorization.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in §§ 61.35 and 62.23,
Wis. Stats., and the requirements in § 87.30, Wis. Stats., as a code pursuant
to § 66.0103, Wis. Stats.
§ 724-2. Finding of fact.
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this
municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general
welfare and tax base.
§ 724-3. Statement of purpose.
This chapter is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
§ 724-4. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Floodplain Zoning Code for the Village
of Fox Point, Wisconsin."
§ 724-5. Areas to be regulated.
This chapter regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional
flood or base flood. [Note: Base flood elevations are derived from the flood
profiles in the Flood Insurance Study. Regional flood elevations may be
derived from other studies. Areas covered by the base flood are identified
as A Zones on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.]
A. Protect life, health and property;
B. Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
C. Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers;
D. Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
F. Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
G. Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers;
H. Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and
result in conflicts between property owners; and
I. Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the
floodplain.
§ 724-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-6
1:431
§ 724-6. Official maps and revisions.
The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as floodplains or A
Zones on the maps listed below and the revisions in the Village of Fox Point
Floodplain Appendix. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA before it is effective.
No changes to regional flood elevations (RFEs) on non-FEMA maps shall be
effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in
the office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer, Village of Fox Point. If more than
one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall
apply.
§ 724-7. Establishment of districts.
The regional floodplain areas are divided into three districts as follows:
§ 724-8. Locating floodplain boundaries.
Discrepancies between boundaries on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map
and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in Subsection
A or B below. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended
according to Article VIII of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator can rely
on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land
use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual predevelopment
field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was
determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this
section. Disputes between the Zoning Administrator and an applicant over
the district boundary line shall be settled according to § 724-38C and the
criteria in Subsections A and B below.
A. Milwaukee County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Panel Numbers
55079C0041E, 55079C0042E, 55079C0043E, and 55079C0044E, dated
September 26, 2008, with corresponding profiles that are based on the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated September 26, 2008, volume
number 55079CV001A-005A.
A. The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those
portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the
regional floodwaters.
B. The Flood-Fringe District (FF) is that portion of the floodplain between
the regional flood limits and the floodway.
C. The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that have been or
may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood.
A. If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall
determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations
shall govern if there are any discrepancies. [Note: Where the flood
§ 724-6 FOX POINT CODE § 724-8
1:432
§ 724-9. Removal of lands from floodplain.
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be grounds for
removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above
the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the
floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to Article VIII of this chapter.
[Note: This procedure does not remove the requirement for the mandatory
purchase of flood insurance. The property owner must contact FEMA to
request a Letter of Map Change (LOMC).]
§ 724-10. Compliance.
Any development or use within the areas regulated by this chapter shall
be in compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable local,
state, and federal regulations.
§ 724-11. Municipalities and state agencies regulated.
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties
are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits.
State agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies.
The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways
and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt
when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
§ 724-12. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
§ 724-13. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter are the
minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body
and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the
Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this chapter, required by Ch. NR 116,
Wis. Adm. Code, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the
profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM,
FEMA must also approve any map amendment pursuant to § 724-42F.]
B. Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be
determined by the map scale, visual on-site inspection and any
information provided by the Department.
A. This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under § 61.35 or 87.30, Wis. Stats., which relate to
floodplains. If another ordinance is more restrictive than this chapter,
that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the
greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
B. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this chapter imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
§ 724-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-13
1:433
standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this chapter or in effect on
the date of the most recent text amendment to this chapter.
§ 724-14. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The flood protection standards in this chapter are based on engineering
experience and scientific research. Larger floods may occur or the flood
height may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply or guarantee that nonfloodplain areas or permitted floodplain
uses will be free from flooding and flood damages, nor does this chapter
create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result
from reliance on this chapter.
§ 724-15. Annexed areas for cities and villages.
The Milwaukee County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of
annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality
for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an
ordinance which meets the requirements of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code,
and the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands
are described on the municipality's official Zoning Map. County floodplain
zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of
administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal
Zoning Administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the
regional flood elevation and the location of the floodway.
§ 724-16. General development standards.
The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed
building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage; be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damages; and be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service
facilities designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering
or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All
subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include
regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets
the subdivision definition of this chapter.
§ 724-13 FOX POINT CODE § 724-16
1:434
ARTICLE II
General Standards Applicable to All Floodplain Districts
§ 724-17. Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses.
§ 724-18. Watercourse alterations.
A. Except as allowed in Subsection C below, no floodplain development
shall:
(1) Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development,
increasing regional flood height; or
(2) Increase regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost
which equals or exceeds 0.01 foot.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the
proposed development will obstruct flow or increase regional flood
heights 0.01 foot or more, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other
adopted map, unless the provisions of Subsection C are met.
C. Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be
permitted if amendments are made to this chapter, the Official
Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in
accordance with Article VIII of this chapter.
Note: This section refers to obstructions or increases in base flood
elevations as shown on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted
map. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA
and the DNR.
A. No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped
floodplain shall be issued until the Zoning Administrator has notified in
writing all adjacent municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional
offices and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and
federal permits. The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.96
B. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of
the watercourse alteration or relocation, the Zoning Administrator shall
notify FEMA of the changes by submitting appropriate technical or
scientific data in accordance with NFIP guidelines that shall be used to
revise the FIRM, risk premium rates and floodplain management
regulations as required.
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 724-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-19
1:435
§ 724-19. Development requiring state permit.
Development which requires a permit from the Department, under Chs.
30 and 31, Wis. Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts,
dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are
obtained and amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles,
BFEs established in the FIS or other data from the officially adopted FIRM,
or other floodplain zoning maps or the floodplain zoning ordinance are
made according to Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 724-20. Public or private campgrounds.
Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and
shall meet the following provisions:
A. The campground is approved by the Department of Health Services.
B. A land use permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning
Administrator.
C. The character of the river system and the elevation of the campground
are such that a seventy-two-hour warning of an impending flood can be
given to all campground occupants.
D. There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that
offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in
the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement
between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government
coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the
flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible
for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used
and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and
personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation.
E. This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which
time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated, by the officials
identified in Subsection D, to remain in compliance with all applicable
regulations, including those of the State Department of Health Services
and all other applicable regulations.
F. Only camping units are allowed.
G. The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for more
than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be
removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours.
H. All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be
issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written
copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization
shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180
days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section.
§ 724-19 FOX POINT CODE § 724-20
1:436
I. The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the
campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this
section.
J. All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive
days must meet the applicable requirements in either Article III or IV of
this chapter for the floodplain district in which the structure is located.
K. The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances
warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a
flood warning is issued.
L. All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection,
electrical service, natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and
wells, shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the
flood protection elevation.
§ 724-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-20
1:437

ARTICLE III
Floodway District (FW)
§ 724-21. Applicability.
This article applies to all floodway areas on the Floodplain Zoning Maps and
those identified pursuant to § 724-31 of this chapter.
§ 724-22. Permitted uses.
The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the
floodway areas of the general floodplain district, if they are not prohibited
by any other ordinance; they meet the standards in §§ 724-23 and 724-24;
and all permits or certificates have been issued according to § 724-36:
§ 724-23. Standards for development in floodway areas.
A. Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
B. Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas,
parking areas and airport landing strips.
C. Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting,
trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and
horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of § 724-23D.
D. Uses or structures accessory to open space uses or classified as historic
structures that comply with §§ 724-23 and 724-24.
E. Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that complies with
§ 724-23D.
F. Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves,
dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of
transmission lines, and pipelines, that comply with Chs. 30 and 31, Wis.
Stats.
G. Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with § 724-23C.
A. General.
(1) Any development in floodway areas shall comply with Article II of
this chapter and have a low flood damage potential.
(2) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects
of the proposal according to § 724-17:
(a) A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular
to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will
obstruct flow; or
§ 724-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-23
1:439
(b) An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional
flood height.
(3) The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if the
project will increase flood elevations upstream or downstream 0.01
foot or more, based on the data submitted for Subsection A(2)
above.
B. Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses,
classified as historic structures, or functionally dependent on a
waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply
with the following criteria:
(1) The structures are not designed for human habitation and do not
have a high flood damage potential;
(2) The structures are constructed and placed on the building site so as
to increase flood heights less than 0.01 foot and minimally obstruct
the flow of floodwaters. Structures shall be constructed with the
long axis parallel to the flow of floodwaters and on the same line as
adjoining structures;
(3) The structures are properly anchored to prevent them from floating
away and restricting bridge openings or other restricted sections of
the stream or river; and
(4) The structures have all service facilities at or above the flood
protection elevation.
C. Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges
may be allowed by permit if:
(1) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood
protection elevation; and
(2) Construction meets the development standards of § 724-17.
D. Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be
allowed by permit, if:
(1) The requirements of § 724-17 are met;
(2) No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit is
issued by the Department pursuant to Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and a
permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344 has been
issued, if applicable, and the other requirements of this section are
met;
(3) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
(4) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
§ 724-23 FOX POINT CODE § 724-24
1:440
§ 724-24. Prohibited uses.
All uses not listed as permitted uses in § 724-22 are prohibited, including
the following uses:
A. Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or
those not associated with permanent open space uses;
B. Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to
property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic
life;
C. Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the
adjoining districts;
D. Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are
removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational
areas and Department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable
provisions of local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code;
E. Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water,
except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local
ordinances and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
F. Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
G. Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted
under § NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code;
H. Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service
existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which
complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
§ 724-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-24
1:441

ARTICLE IV
Flood-Fringe District (FF)
§ 724-25. Applicability.
This article applies to all flood-fringe areas shown on the Floodplain Zoning
Maps and those identified pursuant to § 724-31.
§ 724-26. Permitted uses.
Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the flood-fringe
district if the standards in § 724-27 are met, the use is not prohibited by this
chapter or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates
specified in § 724-36 have been issued.
§ 724-27. Standards for development in flood-fringe areas.
Section 724-17 shall apply in addition to the following requirements
according to the use requested:
A. Residential uses. Any habitable structure, including a manufactured
home, which is to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or
moved into the flood-fringe area, shall meet or exceed the following
standards:
(1) The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement or
crawlway, shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill.
The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation
extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. The
Department may authorize other floodproofing measures if the
elevations of existing streets or sewer lines make compliance with
the fill standards impractical.
(2) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood
elevation if it is floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No
basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood
elevation.
(3) Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a structure to
land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in Subsection
A(4).
(4) In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations
make compliance with Subsection A(3) impractical, the
municipality may permit new development and substantial
improvements where access roads are at or below the regional
flood elevation, if:
(a) The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and
emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to
the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood
event; or
§ 724-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-27
1:443
(b) The municipality has a natural disaster plan approved by
Wisconsin Emergency Management and the Department.
B. Accessory structures or uses.97
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), an accessory structure
which is not connected to a principal structure may be constructed
with its lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation.
(2) An accessory structure which is not connected to the principal
structure and which is less than 600 square feet in size and valued
at less than $10,000 may be constructed with its lowest floor no
more than two feet below the regional flood elevation if it is subject
to flood velocities of no more than two feet per second and it meets
all of the provisions of § 724-23B(1), (2), (3) and (4) and Subsection
E below.
C. Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered
or moved into the flood-fringe area shall meet the requirements of
Subsection A. Subject to the requirements of Subsection E, storage
yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower
elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and
property.
D. Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial
structure which is erected, altered or moved into the flood-fringe area
shall be protected to the flood protection elevation using fill, levees,
flood walls, or other floodproofing measures in § 724-40. Subject to the
requirements of Subsection E, storage yards, surface parking lots and
other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate
warning system exists to protect life and property.
E. Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive,
or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or
aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or
floodproofed in compliance with § 724-40. Adequate measures shall be
taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during
flooding.
F. Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges
shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans, and when failure of public utilities, streets and
bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities
are deemed essential, construction of and substantial improvements to
such facilities may only be permitted if they are floodproofed in
compliance with § 724-40 to the flood protection elevation. Minor roads
or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they
are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 724-27 FOX POINT CODE § 724-27
1:444
G. Sewage systems. All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be
floodproofed, pursuant to § 724-40, to the flood protection elevation and
shall meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis.
Adm. Code.
H. Wells. All wells shall be floodproofed, pursuant to § 724-40, to the flood
protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Chs. NR 811 and
NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
I. Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is
prohibited in flood-fringe areas.
J. Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this chapter.
K. Manufactured homes.
(1) Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize
flood damage and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation
plan indicating vehicular access and escape routes with local
emergency management authorities.
(2) In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement
homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection
elevation; and
(b) Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally
during a flood.
(3) Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new
manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing
parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved
manufactured homes shall meet the residential development
standards for the flood-fringe in Subsection A of this section.
L. Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are
on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and
ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring
requirements in Subsection K(2) and (3). A mobile recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security
devices and has no permanently attached additions.
§ 724-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-27
1:445

ARTICLE V
General Floodplain District (GFP)
§ 724-28. Applicability.
The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains for which
flood profiles are not available or where flood profiles are available but
floodways have not been delineated. Floodway and flood-fringe districts
shall be delineated when adequate data is available.
§ 724-29. Permitted uses.
Pursuant to § 724-31, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is
located within a floodway or flood-fringe area. Those uses permitted in
floodway (§ 724-22) and flood-fringe areas (§ 724-26) are allowed within the
general floodplain district, according to the standards of § 724-30, provided
that all permits or certificates required under § 724-36 have been issued.
§ 724-30. Standards for development.
Article III of this chapter applies to floodway areas; Article IV of this chapter
applies to flood-fringe areas. The rest of this chapter applies to either
district.
§ 724-31. Determining floodway and flood-fringe limits.
Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain
district, the Zoning Administrator shall:
A. Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a
plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the
general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing
floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property,
fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing
measures.
B. Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the
proposal upon flood height and flood flows and regional flood elevation
and to determine floodway boundaries:
(1) A typical valley cross-section showing the stream channel, the
floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, the cross-sectional
area to be occupied by the proposed development, and all historic
high water information.
(2) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground;
pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and
layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location
and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil
types; and other pertinent information.
§ 724-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-31
1:447
(3) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line
of the stream.
(4) Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage,
water supply and sanitary facilities.
C. Transmit one copy of the information described in Subsections A and B
of this section to the Department regional office along with a written
request for technical assistance to establish regional flood elevations
and, where applicable, floodway data. Where the provisions of
§ 724-36B(3) apply, the applicant shall provide all required information
and computations to delineate floodway boundaries and the effects of
the project on flood elevations.
§ 724-31 FOX POINT CODE § 724-31
1:448
ARTICLE VI
Nonconforming Uses
§ 724-32. General provisions.
A. Applicability. If these standards conform to § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats.,
they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming
use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was
lawful before the passage of this chapter or any amendment thereto.
B. The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may continue, subject to
the following conditions:
(1) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure
shall be permitted unless they comply with this chapter. The words
"modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any
alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or
replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory
structure or use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered
an extension, modification or addition; these include painting,
decorating, paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and
other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or
replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or
connections to public utilities. Ordinary maintenance repairs do not
include any costs associated with the repair of a damaged
structure. The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200
square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal
structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of
the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to
provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure.
(2) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted
and any future use of the property, and any structure or building
thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this
chapter.
(3) The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming
uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized
assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have
been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current
value those modifications represent.
(4) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use which over the life of the
structure would exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value
shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently
changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and
§ 724-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-32
1:449
§ 724-33. Floodway areas.
commercial uses in compliance with § 724-27A. The costs of
elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a
nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded
from the 50% provisions of this subsection.
(5) Damage.
(a) Except as provided in Subsection B(5)(b), if any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is
destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced,
reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet
the current ordinance requirements. A structure is considered
substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure
to its predamaged condition exceeds 50% of the structure's
present equalized assessed value.
(b) For nonconforming buildings that are damaged or destroyed by
a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such
nonconforming building may be permitted in order to restore it
after the nonflood disaster, provided that the nonconforming
building will meet all of the minimum requirements under 44
CFR Part 60, or the regulations promulgated thereunder.
(6) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure, the alteration will comply with § 724-23A, flood-resistant
materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing
methods that comply with § 724-40 are used.
A. Modification or addition.
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway
area, unless such modification or addition:
(a) Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all
ordinance requirements;
(b) Meets the requirements of § 724-32; and
(c) Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional
flood height.
(2) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed,
pursuant to § 724-40, by means other than the use of fill, to the
flood protection elevation.
B. No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing onsite
sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been
ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health,
shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or
§ 724-32 FOX POINT CODE § 724-33
1:450
§ 724-34. Flood-fringe areas.
maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a
floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal
ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
C. No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable
water shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or
maintenance of an existing well in a floodway area shall meet the
applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and Chs. NR 811
and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such
modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the
municipality, and the modification or addition shall be placed on fill or
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with the
standards for that particular use in § 724-27, except where Subsection
B of this section is applicable.
B. Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection A of this section
would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will
not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood
damage potential, the Board of Appeals, using the procedures
established in § 724-38, may grant a variance from those provisions of
Subsection A for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed
below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations
lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if:
(1) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential
or commercial structures;
(2) Human lives are not endangered;
(3) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed;
(4) Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
(5) Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
(6) The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described
in § 724-27E.
C. If neither the provisions of Subsection A or B above can be met, one
addition to an existing room in a nonconforming building or a building
with a nonconforming use may be allowed in the flood-fringe, if the
addition:
(1) Meets all other regulations and will be granted by permit or
variance;
(2) Does not exceed 60 square feet in area; and
§ 724-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-34
1:451
(3) In combination with other previous modifications or additions to
the building, does not exceed 50% of the present equalized
assessed value of the building.
D. All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement,
repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system, shall meet
all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383,
Wis. Adm. Code.
E. All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a
well, shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter and Chs. NR
811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 724-34 FOX POINT CODE § 724-34
1:452
ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 724-35. General provisions.
Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of appeals has
already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under
§ 62.23(7), Wis. Stats., these officials shall also administer this chapter.
§ 724-36. Zoning Administrator.
A. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to administer this chapter and
shall have the following duties and powers:
(1) Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing
permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood
elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit
applications.
(2) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this chapter and issue certificates of compliance
where appropriate.
(3) Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a
substantial damage assessment to determine if substantial damage
to the structures has occurred.
(4) Keep records of all official actions such as:
(a) All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
(b) Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations for floodplain development;
(c) Records of water surface profiles, Floodplain Zoning Maps and
ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including
changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
(d) All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures.
(5) Submit copies of the following items to the Department regional
office:
(a) Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or
text amendments;
(b) Copies of any case-by-case analyses and any other information
required by the Department, including an annual summary of
the number and types of floodplain zoning actions taken.
(c) Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all
related correspondence concerning the assessments. [Note:
§ 724-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-36
1:453
Information on conducting substantial damage assessments is
available on the DNR website: http://dnr.wi.gov/org/water/wm/
dsfm/flood/title.htm.]
(6) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this chapter
to the municipal Plan Commission and attorney for prosecution.
Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the Department regional
office.98
(7) Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial reports to
the FEMA regional office.
B. Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any new
development or any repair or change in the use of a building or
structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated.
(1) General information. Application to the Zoning Administrator shall
include:
(a) Name and address of the applicant, property owner and
contractor.
(b) Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification.
(2) Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be
submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
(a) Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
(b) Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
(c) Location of any structures with distances measured from the
lot lines and street center lines;
(d) Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems;
(e) Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
(f) Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from
the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps;
(g) The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any
fill using National Geodetic and Vertical Datum (NGVD);
(h) Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in
NGVD at the location of the development and to determine
whether or not the requirements of Article III or Article IV are
met; and
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 724-36 FOX POINT CODE § 724-36
1:454
(i) Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or
discharge according to § 724-17. This may include any of the
information noted in § 724-23A.
(3) Data requirements to analyze developments. The applicant shall
provide all survey data and computations required to show the
effects of the project on flood heights, velocities and floodplain
storage, for all subdivision proposals, as "subdivision" is defined in
Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., and other proposed developments exceeding
five acres in area or where the estimated cost exceeds $125,000.
(a) The applicant shall provide:
[1] An analysis of the effect of the development on the
regional flood profile, velocity of flow and floodplain
storage capacity;
[2] A map showing location and details of vehicular access to
lands outside the floodplain; and
[3] A surface drainage plan showing how flood damage will be
minimized
(b) The estimated cost of the proposal shall include all structural
development, landscaping, access and road development,
utilities, and other pertinent items, but need not include land
costs.
(4) Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter
shall expire 180 days after issuance.
C. Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used and no
building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified,
repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of
compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator, except where no
permit is required, subject to the following provisions:
(1) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit.
(3) If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance
shall be issued within 10 days after written notification that the
permitted work is completed.
(4) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered
professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill,
lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with
the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require
§ 724-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-36
1:455
§ 724-37. Plan Commission.
§ 724-38. Board of Appeals.
The Board of Appeals, created under § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., is hereby
authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this chapter. The
Board shall exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt
rules for the conduct of business. The Zoning Administrator may not be the
Secretary of the Board.
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
floodproofing measures meet the requirements of § 724-40.
D. Other permits. The applicant must secure all necessary permits from
federal, state, and local agencies, including those required by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
A. The Village of Fox Point Plan Commission shall:
(1) Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning Administrator; and
(2) Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments
to this chapter, maps and text.
B. This Plan Commission shall not:
(1) Grant variances to the terms of this chapter in place of action by
the Board of Appeals; or
(2) Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the
governing body.
A. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall:
(1) Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
(2) Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the
district boundaries shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
(3) Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the
ordinance standards.
B. Appeals to the Board.
(1) Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by
any officer or department of the municipality affected by any
decision of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative
officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days, unless otherwise
provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the official whose
decision is in question, and with the Board, a notice of appeal
§ 724-36 FOX POINT CODE § 724-38
1:456
specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision
is in question shall transmit to the Board all records regarding the
matter appealed.
(2) Notice and hearing for appeals including variances.
(a) Notice. The Board shall:
[1] Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
[2] Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes,
specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing;
[3] Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest
and the Department regional office and the Milwaukee
Metropolitan Sewerage District at least 10 days in
advance of the hearing. [Amended 4-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-06]
(b) Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The
Board shall:
[1] Resolve boundary disputes according to Subsection C of
this section.
[2] Decide variance applications according to Subsection D of
this section.
[3] Decide appeals of permit denials according to § 724-39.
(3) Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
(a) Be made within a reasonable time;
(b) Be sent to the Department regional office within 10 days of the
decision;
(c) Be a written determination signed by the chairperson or
secretary of the Board;
(d) State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board's
decision;
(e) Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part,
dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the
variance application;
(f) Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a
variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the Board
proceedings.
§ 724-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-38
1:457
C. Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the Board
in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries:
(1) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or
detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall
prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may
be examined.
(2) In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical
evidence to the Board.
(3) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform the
Plan Commission or the person contesting the boundary location to
petition the governing body for a map amendment according to
Article VIII of this chapter.99
D. Variance.
(1) The Board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards
of this chapter if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
(a) Literal enforcement of the ordinance provisions will cause
unnecessary hardship;
(b) The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and
unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or
premises. In such case, the ordinance or map must be
amended;
(c) The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
(d) The variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter in
§ 724-3.
(2) In addition to the criteria in Subsection A of this section, to qualify
for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must
be met:
(a) The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood
elevation;
(b) Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than onehalf
acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed
below the RFE;
(c) Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall
not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall
not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be
contrary to the purpose of this chapter.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 724-38 FOX POINT CODE § 724-38
1:458
§ 724-39. Appeals of permit denials.
(3) A variance shall not:
(a) Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district.
(b) Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or
loss.
(c) Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
(d) Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the
area.
(e) Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or
map(s) required in § 724-42.
(f) Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use,
which would preclude its continued designation as an historic
structure.
(4) When a floodplain variance is granted, the Board shall notify the
applicant in writing that it may increase flood insurance premiums
and risks to life and property. A copy shall be maintained with the
variance record.
A. The Board of Appeals shall review all data related to the appeal. This
may include:
(1) Permit application data listed in § 724-36B.
(2) Floodway/flood-fringe determination data in § 724-31.
(3) Data listed in § 724-23A(2) where the applicant has not submitted
this information to the Zoning Administrator.
(4) Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the
Board of Appeals with the appeal.
B. For appeals of all denied permits, the Board of Appeals shall:
(1) Follow the procedures of § 724-38;
(2) Consider Plan Commission recommendations; and100
(3) Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
C. For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation, the Board
of Appeals shall:
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 724-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-39
1:459
§ 724-40. Floodproofing.
§ 724-41. Public information.
(1) Uphold the denial where the Board of Appeals agrees with the data
showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases equal to or
greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed after amending the
flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are
made with all adversely affected property owners.
(2) Grant the appeal where the Board of Appeals agrees that the data
properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase
equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, provided no other reasons for
denial exist.
A. No permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the
flood protection elevation.
B. Floodproofing measures shall be designed to:
(1) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces and other regional flood factors;
(2) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
(3) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement; and
(4) Insure that structural walls and floors are watertight to the flood
protection elevation, and the interior remains completely dry
during flooding without human intervention.
C. Floodproofing measures could include:
(1) Reinforcing walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse caused by
water pressure or floating debris.
(2) Adding mass or weight to prevent flotation.
(3) Placing essential utilities above the flood protection elevation.
(4) Installing surface or subsurface drainage systems to relieve
foundation wall and basement floor pressures.
(5) Constructing water supply wells and waste treatment systems to
prevent the entry of floodwaters.
(6) Putting cutoff valves on sewer lines or eliminating gravity flow
basement drains.
A. Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the
regional flood.
§ 724-39 FOX POINT CODE § 724-41
1:460
B. All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and
widely distributed.
C. All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any
real property is in.
§ 724-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-41
1:461

ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
§ 724-42. Actions requiring amendment.
The governing body may change or supplement the floodplain zoning
district boundaries and this chapter in the manner provided by law.
§ 724-43. Procedures.
Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any interested party
according to the provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats. Such petitions shall
include all necessary data required by §§ 724-31 and 724-36B.
A. Actions which require an amendment include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Any change to the Official Floodplain Zoning Map, including the
floodway line or boundary of any floodplain area.
(2) Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and
Floodplain Zoning Maps.
(3) Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled area
to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is
contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain.
(4) Any fill or floodplain encroachment that obstructs flow, increasing
regional flood height 0.01 foot or more.
(5) Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by § NR
116.05, Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for
changes by the municipality.
B. All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines
or to remove an area from the floodway or the flood-fringe that is based
on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
[Note: Consult the FEMA website, www.fema.gov, for the map change
fee schedule.]
A. The proposed amendment shall be referred to the Plan Commission for
a public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The
amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the
Department regional office, and to the Milwaukee Metropolitan
Sewerage District, for review prior to the hearing. The amendment
procedure shall comply with the provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats.
[Amended 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-06101]
B. No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by
the Department.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 724-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-43
1:463
C. All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow,
increasing regional flood height 0.01 foot or more, shall obtain flooding
easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely
affected property owners and notify local units of government before
the amendment can be approved by the governing body.
D. For amendments in areas with no water surface profiles, the Plan
Commission or board shall consider data submitted by the Department,
the Zoning Administrator's visual on-site inspections and other
available information. (See § 724-8.)102
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 724-43 FOX POINT CODE § 724-43
1:464
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 724-44. Violations and penalties; nuisance abatement.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties described in § 1-4 of this Code. In addition, every violation of this
chapter is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the
maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state,
or any citizen thereof pursuant to § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 724-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-44
1:465

ARTICLE X
Terminology
§ 724-45. Word usage; definitions.
A. Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this chapter shall
have their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance
with their common usage. Words used in the present tense include the
future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is
mandatory and is not discretionary.
B. For purposes of the chapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A facility, structure, building or
use which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property,
structure or building.
A ZONES — Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map
which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be
numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be
reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a
given area.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of
a FIS and depicted on a FIRM.
BASEMENT — Any enclosed area of a building having its floor
subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the
Department pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and which allows limited
filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water
mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions
of this chapter.
CAMPGROUND — Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent
overnight use by four or more camping units or which is advertised or
represented as a camping area.
CAMPING UNIT — Any portable device, no more than 400 square
feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to
a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pickup truck, tent or other
mobile recreational vehicle.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification that the construction
and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor
of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 724-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-45
1:467
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and
banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
CRAWLWAY or CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area below the first
usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used
for access to plumbing and electrical utilities.
DECK — An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides but
has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any artificial change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair
of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any
structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the
placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site
preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or
equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private
sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
DRY LAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the
regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the
floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface
above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and
relief vehicles.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or
development in the floodway.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
is completed before the effective date of this chapter. At a minimum,
this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
EXPANSION TO EXISTING MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
— The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed.
This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The
federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The probability of a flood occurrence which
is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular
flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in
a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any
given year.103
§ 724-45 FOX POINT CODE § 724-45
1:468
FLOOD-FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the
floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and
associated with standing water rather than flowing water.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map designating approximate
flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered
A Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations.
This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects
of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a
Flood Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of a community
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both
special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A technical engineering examination,
evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It
provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood
and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations
and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated
as numbered and unnumbered A Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps,
that accompany the Flood Insurance Study, form the basis for both the
regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the
following conditions:
FLOODPLAIN — Land which has been or may be covered by floodwater
during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the flood-fringe
and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory
purposes.
(1) The overflow or rise of inland waters;
The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source;
(2)
The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake
Superior; or
(3)
The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
(4)
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 724-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-45
1:469
FLOODPLAIN ISLAND — A natural geologic land formation within the
floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the
regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — Policy and procedures to ensure wise
use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation,
education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain
regulations.
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations
of land surface elevations along a stream or river.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural provisions,
changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and
sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the
purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation of two feet of
freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the
regional flood. (Also see "freeboard.")
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of
floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the
regional flood discharge.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FREEBOARD — A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified
number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates
for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated,
including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of
bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization,
loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the
river or stream bed.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE — Any structure or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
HEARING NOTICE — Publication or posting meeting the requirements
of Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once
at least one week before the hearing, is required. For all zoning
ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once
each week consecutively, the last at least a week before the hearing.
Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding
these minimums.
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Damage that could result from
flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant
economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is either:
§ 724-45 FOX POINT CODE § 724-45
1:470
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward
rise in the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot,
based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions
which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but
not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as
roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and
discharge.
LAND USE — Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved
real estate. (Also see "development.")
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to
be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile
home but does not include a mobile recreational vehicle.
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a
single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or
permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for
highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not
for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes
that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain
capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not
fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicle."
MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL — The Village of Fox Point, Milwaukee
County, Wisconsin.104
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program, as determined by
the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.
(4)
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 724-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-45
1:471
NAVD or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, "new
construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning
regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood
insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial
FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — An existing lawful structure or
building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural
requirements of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it
occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe
district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower
than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing lawful use or accessory use of
a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies (such as a
residence in the floodway).
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together
with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood
height.
OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP — That map, adopted and made
part of this chapter, as described in § 724-6, which has been approved
by the Department and FEMA.
OPEN SPACE USE — Those uses having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up
to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention
of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other
easily recognized characteristic.
PERSON — An individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, municipality or state agency.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field
located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative
sewage system approved by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption
§ 724-45 FOX POINT CODE § 724-45
1:472
field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a
system located on a different parcel than the structure.
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines, such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and
distribution and collection systems, such as water, sanitary sewer and
storm sewer.
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Base flood waters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special
flood hazard area and any subsurface waters related to the base flood
will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood
with a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration,
the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object with form, shape and utility,
either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into
the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed
and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and
culverts.
SUBDIVISION — Has the meaning given in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
predamaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized
assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — Where special conditions affecting a
particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict
conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height
or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the
purposes of this chapter.
§ 724-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 724-45
1:473
VARIANCE — An authorization by the Board of Appeals for the
construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner
which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained
in this chapter.105
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development
without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation,
floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment
calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATERSHED — The entire region contributing runoff or surface water
to a watercourse or body of water.
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along
a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile
of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
WELL — An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods to obtain groundwater regardless of
its intended use.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — Unless designated otherwise by the
Village Manager, the Village Building Inspector shall serve as the
Zoning Administrator for purposes of this chapter.
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 724-45 FOX POINT CODE § 724-45
1:474
Chapter 738
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management, erosion control and
bluff regulation — See Ch. 285.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 724.
Zoning — See Ch. 745.
§ 738-1. Purpose.
In addition to the purposes stated in § 236.45, Wis. Stats., this chapter is
further intended specifically to ensure that building sites within the Village
of Fox Point shall be in conformity with the standards as prescribed by the
zoning regulations of the Village.
§ 738-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to:
§ 738-3. Compliance with zoning regulations.
No lot shall be created by the division of land for the purpose of sale or
building development which does not conform to the zoning regulations of
the Village.
§ 738-4. Subdivision procedure. [Amended by Ord. No. 497;
5-28-1991 by Ord. No. 91-579106]
No subdivision shall be recorded except pursuant to the provisions of Ch.
236, Wis. Stats., and the following regulations:
A. Any division of land which results in a subdivision as defined by Ch.
236, Wis. Stats.
B. Any other division of land except:
(1) Transfers of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order.
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or easements.
(3) The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of
adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the
lots resulting are not less than the minimum sizes required by this
chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances.
C. Recorded lots existing on June 25, 1957, which do not conform to the
zoning regulations of the Village.
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 724-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 738-4
1:475
§ 738-5. Land divisions other than subdivisions.
In the case of a division of land as described under § 738-2B of this chapter
which division does not create a subdivision as defined by Ch. 236, Wis.
A. General procedure.
(1) The plat shall not be accepted by the Clerk/Treasurer for filing until
it has been cleared by the Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer as being in compliance with all applicable regulations and
otherwise in order. The minimum fee shall be set by the Village
Board from time to time.
(2) The date of filing shall be stamped on all copies of the plat and the
plat shall be immediately referred to the Plan Commission, and if
the plat has been submitted to the Village as the initial approving
authority, the necessary copies shall be forwarded pursuant to
§ 236.12, Wis. Stats.
(3) The Plan Commission shall make its recommendation to the Village
Board in sufficient time so that the Board may act to approve,
approve conditionally or reject a preliminary plat and a final plat
within the period of time provided by the Wisconsin Statutes then
in effect.
(4) In order to ensure conformity with procedural and other
requirements, it is recommended that the subdivider consult with
the Village staff prior to preparation or submittal of a plat.
B. Preliminary plat.
(1) Prior to submittal of a final plat a preliminary plat shall be
submitted to the Village for approval and shall be in sufficient
detail, particularly with regard to street layout and lot
arrangement, shape and size, to determine the acceptability of a
final plat in conformity therewith.
(2) The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to the
inch and shall show contour lines at five-foot contour intervals.
(3) Two copies of the plat shall be provided in addition to any required
for forwarding pursuant to § 236.12, Wis. Stats., one of which shall
be retained in the Village files and the other returned to the
subdivider with the record of the Village action.
C. Final plat.
(1) A final plat shall be prepared in conformity with the provisions of
Ch. 236, Wis. Stats.
(2) A final plat shall not be accepted for filing unless it is in substantial
conformity with a preliminary plat which has been approved by the
Village.
§ 738-4 FOX POINT CODE § 738-5
1:476
Stats., a plat may be prepared in the same manner as for a subdivision, or
a land division map shall be prepared in the following manner pursuant to
§ 236.45 of the Wisconsin Statutes:
A. General.
(1) A land division map prepared pursuant to this chapter shall require
the approval of the Village Board before it is submitted to be
recorded and shall be processed according to the procedure set
forth in § 738-4 of this chapter, except that there are no other
approving or objecting authorities to whom copies need to be sent.
(2) Following the necessary approvals, such land division map shall be
recorded in the office of the register of deeds and all lots created
thereby shall be described by reference to it by lot number and by
volume and page of the book provided for that use, for all purposes,
including those of assessment, taxation, devise, descent and
conveyance as defined in § 706.01(4), Wis. Stats.
B. Preliminary land division map.
(1) Prior to submission of a final land division map a preliminary land
division map shall be submitted to the Village for approval and shall
be in sufficient detail, particularly with regard to street layout and
lot arrangement, shape and size, to determine the acceptability of a
land division map in conformity herewith.107
(2) The preliminary land division map shall be drawn at a scale of 100
feet to the inch, or at a larger scale when the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer determines that such larger scale will
result in a more readable document, and shall show contour lines at
five-foot contour intervals, provided that contour lines need not be
shown if the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer, on the basis
of information already in the Engineer's office, determines that
contour lines are not necessary. [Amended 1-17-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-612]
(3) Two copies of the preliminary land division map shall be provided,
one of which shall be retained in the Village file and the other
returned to the subdivider with the record of the Village action.
C. Final land division map.
(1) A final land division map shall be prepared in the same manner as
prescribed for a certified survey map by § 236.34, Wis. Stats.,
except that it shall not be limited to two parcels of land and may be
drawn on a sheet 8 1/2 inches wide by 14 inches long or a sheet 16
inches wide by 14 inches long. [Amended by Ord. No. 497]
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 738-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 738-5
1:477
§ 738-6. Substandard lots.
In the case of a lot of record on June 25, 1957, which does not conform
to the zoning regulations of the Village and which adjoins along a side lot
line property held in the same ownership, no such lot shall be conveyed to
another owner nor shall a building permit be issued for a structure on such
lot except in conformity with the following regulations:
§ 738-7. Design standards.
Any division or subdivision of land subject to the provisions of this chapter
shall be made in conformity with generally accepted standards of land
(2) A final land division map shall not be accepted for filing unless it is
in substantial conformity with a preliminary land division map
which has been approved by the Village.
A. The owner of such substandard lot may at any time prior to the
proposed conveyance of such lot or request for building permit petition
the Village for determination as to the status of such lot.
B. Such petition shall be referred to the Plan Commission for a study to
determine the practical possibility of a redivision of such ownership to
provide lots which will be in conformity with the zoning regulations of
the Village.
C. The Plan Commission shall make its recommendation to the Village
Board within 60 days of the date the petition was received and the
Village Board shall act within 40 days to give the petitioner a
determination. [Amended by Ord. No. 497]
D. Such redivision may be accomplished as is most appropriate by:
(1) Vacation and replatting of all or a part of a recorded plat.
(2) Combining of lots or parts of lots.
(3) Redefining of lot lines by a land division map as provided in § 738-5.
E. For the purposes of this section, lots and property shall be considered in
the same ownership when owned by the same individual or corporation;
an individual and another in joint tenancy, or as tenants in common, and
either of said joint or common tenants owns other lots individually or as
joint tenant or tenant in common with another; when any of said lots are
owned by an individual and other lots are owned by his spouse, parents,
grandparents, children, grandchildren, or the spouse of any child or
grandchild, or a brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister of such
person; and when any of said lots are owned by an individual and other
lots are owned by a corporation in which said individual is an officer or
director or controlling stockholder.108
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 738-5 FOX POINT CODE § 738-7
1:478
subdivision practice; with the spirit and intent of the zoning and building
regulations of the Village; with any other state law or local ordinances
applicable thereto; and with the established character of the Village.
Specifically, the following regulations shall apply:
A. General design standards.
(1) The design and location of streets shall be correlated to the overall
plan of Village development with specific consideration of the
relationship to other streets, to topographic conditions and natural
terrain features such as drainage channels and existing tree
growth, to public convenience and safety, to the proposed uses of
land to be served by such streets, and to the engineering
practicality and suitability of street design and construction.
(2) The size, shape, character and orientation of lots shall be
appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated
consistent with the zoning regulations of the Village.
(3) No division or subdivision of land shall be made which in the
opinion of the Village Board would result in substantial damage to
the property value of adjoining properties or be detrimental to the
Village as a whole.
B. Division of land for business use.
(1) The division of land in a business district into smaller parcels or
lots shall be done in a manner consistent with the orderly, unified,
and attractive development of a business center.
(2) No division shall be permitted which in the opinion of the Village
Board would result in the creation of a lot or the leaving of a
remnant parcel which by reason of size, shape, character,
orientation or relation to surrounding properties would be
impractical or undesirable for permitted development. The Board
shall consider in addition to any other pertinent factors the
following:
(a) The ability to meet service and operative requirements such as
off-street parking, loading and service areas, and safe and
efficient ingress and egress.
(b) The adaptability to other potential or possible commercial use
or to possible expansion of existing use.
(c) The effects on adjoining property of lighting, operational noise
or activity, traffic movement, and visual appearance.
C. Division of land for residential use.
(1) The division of land in a residence district into smaller parcels or
lots shall be done in a manner consistent with the semirural
character of the entire Village and with its established objectives of
§ 738-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 738-7
1:479
§ 738-8. Variances.
Where in the judgment of the Village Board the literal application of the
provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship,
it may, consistent with the intent and spirit of this chapter, waive or vary
such provisions so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured.
§ 738-9. Penalties and remedies.
In addition to the penalties provided in this Code, the remedies provided by
§§ 236.30 and 236.31, Wis. Stats., shall be available to the Village.
§ 738-10. Street width. [Added 6-22-1965 by Ord. No. 327]
The Village Board may permit a street of a specified width less than 60 feet,
after recommendation by the Plan Commission to the Village Board, when
the Board, considering the location of the proposed street, the property
it will serve, the zoning area in which it is located, the expected traffic
density, the grade of the street and surrounding property, and the drainage
requirements, determines that a street of less than 60 feet in width will be
sufficient for adequate service.
§ 738-11. Requirements for lake bluff or ravine areas. [Amended by
Ord. No. 396]
Particular requirements in respect to a subdivision of land or a land division
which includes any area on the lake bluff or the bank of a ravine shall be as
follows.
quiet, attractive, semirural living, and which will preserve the
established residential values of existing development in the
immediate neighborhood.
(2) No division shall be permitted which results in the creation of a
"back" lot or lots not having a reasonable amount of direct frontage
on a public street or way, unless in the opinion of the Village Board
the particular circumstances are such as to justify the practical
necessity of division in the proposed manner and no appreciable
detrimental effect to surrounding property values will result from
such division.
A. Purpose to protect residents and property, aesthetics, and to preserve
environmental corridors. The wooded faces of the bluff overlooking
Lake Michigan and the wooded ravines which descend down to the
shoreline or to North Beach Drive are among the most aesthetically
attractive features in the Village of Fox Point. They also provide the
environment and habitat for wildflowers and many species of bird and
wildlife. That area has been included by the Southeastern Wisconsin
Regional Planning Commission as an environmental corridor which
ought to be preserved. In addition, the continuing erosion along Lake
§ 738-7 FOX POINT CODE § 738-11
1:480
§ 738-12. Compliance with floodplain regulations. [Added by Ord.
No. 436]
When applicable to the lands involved, the provisions of Chapter 724,
Floodplain Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Fox Point shall also be
complied with as a condition to the approval of any subdivision or other land
division.
Chapter 745
Michigan and the ravines tributary thereto, unstable soil conditions,
and the pressure of underground water can alone or in combination
cause the lake bluff or ravine banks to slide, leading to the partial
or complete collapse of buildings. Accordingly, the Village establishes
special requirements below governing the approval of a subdivision of
land or a land division where any part of the area is on the lake bluff or
the banks of a ravine. These requirements and the regulations in Article
I of Chapter 285 of this Code are intended to protect the aesthetics,
preserve the environmental corridor, and protect property, structures,
and persons. [Amended 9-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-562]
B. Area limitation. No subdivision or any other land division shall be
approved which includes any lot, a portion of which has an area on the
face of the lake bluff or on the slope of the bank of a ravine, unless one
of the following requirements is met in respect to such lot:
(1) In the opinion of the Village Board there is sufficient area of land in
such proposed lot, exclusive of the area on the face of the lake bluff
or the slope of the bank of a ravine, to permit the construction of a
residence and appurtenant buildings which comply with all
requirements of Chapter 745, Zoning, and all other ordinances of
the Village of Fox Point; or
(2) The area and topography of such proposed lot, in the opinion of the
Village Board, would make it possible to construct a residence and
appurtenant buildings meeting the requirements of Article I of
Chapter 285 of the Fox Point Village Code as now written, or as the
same may be amended or modified from time to time. Area on the
face of the lake bluff and the slope of the bank of a ravine will be
included in determining the open area setback requirements of
Chapter 745, Zoning.
C. All plats or land division maps for proposed lots to which this section
applies shall show thereon or in a separate survey all of the information
required on a plat or survey by Article I of Chapter 285 of this Code.
D. Even though a plat or land division to which this subsection applies has
been approved, the provisions of Article I of Chapter 285 must be
complied with in the erection of a building or structure on any lot or
parcel of land included within said plat or land division.
§ 738-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 738-12
1:481
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management, erosion control and
bluff regulation — See Ch. 285.
Signs — See Ch. 540.
Offenses against public peace, safety and
welfare — See Ch. 670.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 681.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 724.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 738.
Building construction — See Ch. 756.
§ 745-1. General purpose.
The Village of Fox Point is a community in the metropolitan area of
Milwaukee County, in which Village substantially all of the land and real
property has been or is being developed for private residential purposes
by the owners thereof, and territory accessible to the inhabitants of the
Village is now occupied by, or is available for, manufacturing and industrial
purposes more than sufficient for the general needs of the inhabitants of
the Village, and it is the desire of the inhabitants and property owners
to preserve the residential character of the Village, and in the opinion of
the Board of Trustees, the enactment of the regulations of this chapter is
essential for the promotion of the public health, morals and public safety,
and is further necessary for the promotion of the public welfare,
convenience and general prosperity of the Village and its inhabitants by the
prevention of unregulated and unrestricted development.
§ 745-2. Interpretation and definitions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, such provisions
shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements adopted for the public
health, morals and safety, and for the promotion of convenience, comfort
and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village, but it is not intended
to interfere with or abrogate any existing easements or other agreements
between individuals, but when this chapter imposes a greater restriction,
the provisions of this chapter shall control, and the following words, when
used in this chapter, shall have the meaning hereinbelow set forth:
AREA, OPEN — That portion of a lot which will be unoccupied after the
erection of a building or buildings for which a permit has been duly
requested. In computing such open area, the lot shall be considered as
extending not further than the side line of any street or area reserved
for highway purposes upon which a lot abuts, except when this chapter
specifically provides otherwise.
AREA RESERVED FOR HIGHWAY PURPOSES — Area reserved for highway
purposes or for ingress and egress to the premises as well as a public
highway.
§ 738-12 FOX POINT CODE § 745-2
1:482
BUILDING — Any structure used, designed or intended for the protection,
shelter or roofed enclosure of persons, animals or property.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building or portion of a building used for a
purpose customarily incident to the permitted principal use of the lot and
located on the same lot as the principal use.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — The building in which is conducted the principal
use as permitted on such lot by the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
DEPTH OF FRONT YARD — The minimum horizontal distance between the
front line a building and the front lot line or side line of the street or area
reserved for highway purposes, whichever is nearer, except that the roof
of a building or any attachments thereto may extend over said front yard a
distance of not to exceed one foot.
DEPTH OF REAR YARD — The minimum horizontal distance between the
rear line of a building and the rear lot line or side line of the street or area
reserved for highway purposes, whichever is nearer, except that the roof
a building or any attachments thereto may extend over said rear yard a
distance of not to exceed one foot.
DWELLING — A building having accommodations for one family only,
provided that the building may provide quarters for bona fide servants
though they constitute a family as defined in this section.
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage
living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive of
household servants. A number of persons but not exceeding three living and
cooking together as a single housekeeping unit though not related by blood,
adoption or marriage shall be deemed to constitute a family.109
FRONT LINE OF A BUILDING — A line drawn through the point of a
building as defined above nearest to, and parallel with, the front lot line or
the side line of a street or area reserved for highway purposes, whichever
is nearer.
FRONT YARD — An open area on the same lot with a building between the
front line of any building and the front lot line, or the side line of the street
or area reserved for highway purposes, whichever is nearer, extending the
full width of the lot.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A structure primarily intended for and used for the
enclosed storage or shelter of the private motor vehicles of the family
resident upon the premises. Carports shall be considered garages within
this definition.
GARAGE, PUBLIC OR COMMERCIAL — Any garage not falling within the
definition of "private garage" as herein established.
LOT — A parcel of land, whether unplatted or platted, in whole or in part,
all of which is owned legally or under a land contract by the same person
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 745-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-2
1:483
or persons and which is treated or occupied by them as a unit for a use
permitted by this chapter.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use of a building or premises which does
not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated as
provided for by this chapter.
OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Land, water bodies, and
structures, along with accessory equipment, designed and utilized for
leisure time activities of a predominantly outdoor nature and of more
specific active purposes than park-like open areas.110
REAR LINE OF A BUILDING — A line drawn through the point of a building
as defined above nearest to, and parallel with, the rear lot line or the side
line of a street or area reserved for highway purposes, whichever is nearer.
REAR YARD — An open area on the same lot with a building, between the
rear lot line and the rear line of any building, extending the full width of
the lot, except that where the rear of said lot abuts upon a street or area
reserved for highway purposes, the rear yard shall extend only to the side
of said street or area reserved for highway purposes.
SIDE LINE OF A BUILDING — A line drawn through the point of the
building nearest to, and parallel with, the side lot line or the side line of a
street or area reserved for highway purposes, whichever is nearer.
SIDE YARD — An open area on the same lot with a building between the
side lot line and the side line of any building, extending from the front yard
to the rear yard, except that where the side of said lot abuts upon a street
or area reserved for highway purposes, the side yard shall extend only to
the side of said street or area reserved for highway purposes.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials other than natural terrain or
plant growth erected or constructed to form a shelter, enclosure, retainer,
container, support, base, pavement or decoration.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — A structure or portion of a structure
customarily incident to any permitted principal use of such lot and located
on the same lot as such principal use.
STRUCTURE, PERMANENT — A structure placed on or in the ground
or attached to another structure in a fixed and determined position and
intended to remain in place for a period of more than nine consecutive
months.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL — A structure used or intended to be used for the
principal use as permitted on such lot by the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY — Any structure other than a permanent
structure.
110. Editor's Note: The former definition of "personal wireless service facility or PWSF," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 12-10-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-10.
§ 745-2 FOX POINT CODE § 745-2
1:484
SUBSTANDARD LOT — A lot which was of record on April 22, 1958, and
which is:
TIME SHARE PROPERTY — Any property that is regulated by Chapter 707,
Wisconsin Statutes.[Added 4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-07; amended
1-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
USE, ACCESSORY — A use customarily incident to the permitted principal
use of property and on the same lot as the principal permitted use.
USE, PERMITTED — That utilization of land by occupancy, activity, building
or other structure which is specifically enumerated as permissible by the
regulations of the zoning district in which said land is located, including
those uses customarily accessory to such permitted use.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary use of property or structure as
permitted on such lot by the regulations of the district in which it is located.
WIDTH OF LOT — The distance from one side line to the other measured
on a line which will be contiguous with the front line of a building and be as
nearly parallel as possible to the street on which the lot abuts.
WIDTH OF SIDE YARD — The minimum horizontal distance between the
side line of a building and the side lot line or the side line of a street or area
reserved for highway purposes, whichever is nearer, except that the roof
of a building or any attachments thereto may extend over said side yard a
distance of not to exceed one foot.
§ 745-3. Conformity with regulations.
Except as hereinafter provided or superseded by state or federal law, no
building or premises or part thereof shall be used, altered, constructed
or reconstructed except in conformity the provisions of this chapter which
apply to the district in which it is located.
§ 745-4. Existing nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
Smaller in square footage than the total of the minimum open area
requirement of the district in which it is located plus the minimum floor
area described in § 756-15B of this Code; or
A.
Narrower in width than the minimum lot width requirement of the
district in which it is located.
B.
A. Existing nonconforming uses. The lawful nonconforming use of land
without structures, or the lawful nonconforming use of water, or a
lawful nonconforming use in a conforming structure, or a lawful
nonconforming use in a nonconforming structure, or a lawful
nonconforming use on a conforming lot, or a lawful nonconforming use
on a nonconforming lot, or a lawful nonconforming use of land with
conforming structures, or a lawful nonconforming use of land with
nonconforming structures which existed at the time of the adoption or
amendment of this chapter may be continued although the use does not
conform to the provisions of this chapter; however:
§ 745-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-4
1:485
(1) Only that use in actual existence at the time of the adoption or
amendment of this chapter may be so continued as a legal
nonconforming use and said use may not in any way be extended,
enlarged, substituted, moved, added to or changed.
(2) No structure on lands containing a legal nonconforming use may be
extended, enlarged, totally rebuilt, substituted, moved, remodeled,
modified, or added to except when required to do so by law or until
the legal nonconforming use has been made to conform to this
chapter. This subsection does not apply, however, to structural
repairs or alterations that are made in strict compliance with
§ 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., including such amendments as may be
made thereto from time to time.
(3) No lot or lands containing a legal nonconforming use may be
reduced in size, modified, increased in size or changed in any
manner except when required to do so by law or until the legal
nonconforming use has been made to conform to this chapter.
(4) If a legal nonconforming use is discontinued or terminated for a
period of 12 months, any future use of the structure, land or water
must conform to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Existing nonconforming lots containing conforming uses and/or
conforming structures. A building may be erected on a lot of record on
April 22, 1958, which lot does not comply with the requirements of this
chapter, provided as follows:
(1) In the case of such substandard lot which adjoins, along a side lot
line, property held in the same ownership, as defined in Chapter
738, Subdivision of Land, of this Code, no building permit shall be
issued until a determination has been made by the Plan
Commission in the manner provided by § 738-6.
(2) No building permit shall be issued where in the opinion of the
Building Inspector the erection of a building on such substandard
lot would impair or jeopardize the health, safety and general
welfare of the surrounding neighborhood or of the Village.
(3) No dwelling erected pursuant to the provisions of this section shall
occupy an area of a lot which exceeds:
(a) A Residence District: 15% of the gross area of the lot together
with the area of abutting land reserved for highway purposes,
whether public or private, to the center line thereof;
(b) B Residence District: 30% of the gross area of a lot; or
(c) C Residence District: 45% of the gross area of a lot.
(4) Where the proposed erection of a building on such substandard lot
would require a variance from requirements in addition to the lot
§ 745-4 FOX POINT CODE § 745-4
1:486
area and width, such variance must be sought in the normal
manner in such case from the Board of Appeals.
(5) The application of this section in respect to any area annexed to the
Village shall apply to parcels of land and lots as they are owned
when annexed.
C. Existing legal nonconforming structures on a conforming lot or
nonconforming lot with legal conforming uses.
(1) The legal conforming use of a nonconforming structure existing at
the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter whether on a
conforming lot or nonconforming lot may be continued, even
though the structure's size or location does not conform to the
established building setback line along streets, or the open space,
yard, height, parking, loading and/or access provisions of this
chapter.
(2) The aforementioned structure may be extended, enlarged,
substituted, moved, remodeled, modified or added to as long as any
such change which alters the footprint of the structure must
conform to the established building setback lines along streets and
the yard, height, parking, loading, and access provisions of this
chapter. In addition, such structure may be totally rebuilt if such
reconstruction is identical in size and shape and use to the original
structure.
(3) Legal nonconforming structures existing at the time of the adoption
or amendment of this chapter with a legal conforming use whether
on a conforming or nonconforming lot may be moved and if moved
must conform to the established building setback lines along
streets and the open space, yard, height, parking, loading, and
access provisions of this chapter.
(4) Any applicable restriction in this section which prohibits
restoration of a damaged or destroyed nonconforming structure
shall not apply to the extent that 2005 Wisconsin Act 112 applies to
such restoration, including such amendments and renumbering of
the applicable statutes referred to therein as may be made from
time to time.111
D. Burden of proof. The property owner has the burden of showing that a
use, structure or lot is legal nonconforming. The determination shall be
made by the Building Inspector upon proof presented by the property
owner that the use, structure and/or lot is in fact legal nonconforming.
Appeals from the decision of the Building Inspector concerning the
determination of legal nonconformity may be made by any person
aggrieved to the Village Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be filed
with the Village Clerk/Treasurer within 30 days after the determination
of the Building Inspector.
111. Editor's Note: See § 62.23(7)(hc), Wis. Stats.
§ 745-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-4
1:487
§ 745-5. Uses, structures and lots in violation of prior ordinance.
Any use, structure or lot existing on April 22, 1958, or thereafter which
was commenced while a previous zoning ordinance was in effect and was
in violation of such ordinance shall not be a nonconforming use permitted
to continue under § 745-4 but shall be a violation of this chapter, unless
the provision of the prior ordinance which was violated shall have been
changed by this chapter and such use, structure or lot is not in violation of
this chapter, and no violations are waived.
§ 745-6. Structures other than buildings.
E. Reversion. Once a legal nonconforming use, legal nonconforming
structure or legal nonconforming lot has been changed to conform, it
shall not revert back to legal nonconforming status.
F. Conditional use status.
(1) Conditional use status may be granted to existing legal
nonconforming uses, legal nonconforming structures, and legal
nonconforming lots, upon petition of the owner, where such use,
structure or lot is determined to not be any of the following:
(a) Adverse to any of the following:
[1] Public health;
[2] Safety; or
[3] Welfare.
(b) Would not conflict with the spirit or intent of this chapter; or
(c) Would not be otherwise detrimental to the community and
particularly the surrounding neighborhood.
(2) Such conditional use status may be granted by the Village Board
only after the Village Board conducts a public hearing in the
matter, and following receipt of a recommendation from the Village
Plan Commission.
A. Structures not classified as buildings and less than six inches in height
from the surface of the ground shall not require a building permit nor
be subject to the front, side, or rear setbacks, building size, or open
space requirements of this chapter except as may be specifically
otherwise provided in § 745-7 or 745-10 or Subsection C below.
B. Structures not classified as buildings and six inches or more in height
from the surface of the ground shall be subject to the front, side, or rear
setbacks, building size, and open space requirements of this chapter
except as may be specifically otherwise provided in § 745-7 or 745-10 or
Subsection C below.
§ 745-4 FOX POINT CODE § 745-6
1:488
§ 745-7. Accessory uses and structures.
C. The following structures that are not classified as buildings are
excluded from the requirements of this chapter, provided that the
following limitations applicable to these exclusions are strictly
followed:
(1) Retaining walls. This exclusion applies to:
(a) A structure that is intended primarily as a landscape feature
for retaining soil, as determined by the Village Building
Inspector, and the top of the wall is approximately at grade;
(b) A structure that is intended to retain soil primarily for the
purpose of constructing a driveway, as determined by the
Village Building Inspector; and
(c) A structure that is intended primarily to retain soil that is
regulated by Article I of Chapter 285 of this Code, as
determined by the Village Building Inspector.
(2) Play equipment. This exclusion applies to a structure that is play
equipment, as defined herein, provided that it is accessory to a
residential use on the lot where it is located, and the lot is zoned for
residential use, and the play equipment is set back at least three
feet from any lot line. Play equipment is defined as a swingset,
sandbox, jungle gym, or similar equipment that has no utility other
than for amusement of children, as determined by the Village
Building Inspector, but not including a structure that has walls and
a roof which form an enclosure.
(3) Gardens. This exclusion applies to a structure that is primarily
intended to be a planting bed, raised flower garden, rain garden, or
similar landscape feature, as determined by the Village Building
Inspector, provided that such structure shall be located at least
three feet from any property line.
(4) Signs. This exclusion applies to a structure that is primarily
intended to be a sign, as determined by the Village Building
Inspector, provided that the sign is regulated by Chapter 540 of this
Code.
A. General.
(1) Any accessory use or structure shall conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located except as is
specifically otherwise provided.
(2) No accessory use or structure shall be permitted that by reason of
noise, dust, odor, appearance, or other objectionable factor creates
a nuisance or a substantial adverse effect upon the property value
or reasonable enjoyment of the surrounding property.
§ 745-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-7
1:489
(3) Any of the requirements hereinafter established in this section
relating to accessory uses and structures, except for permanent
buildings in excess of 100 square feet in ground area, may be
modified in their specific application to a given situation with the
approval of the Village Manager or his/her designee, where in the
Village Manager's or designee's opinion the strict application of the
requirement would be unnecessarily burdensome or would not in
fact achieve the actual intent of the requirement, or where
modification would more effectively achieve such intent, provided
in all cases such modification is consistent with the basic spirit and
intent of this chapter. Appeal from the determination of the Village
Manager or his/her designee may be made to the Building Board,
provided such appeal is filed with the Village Manager within 30
days from the date of the Village Manager's or designee's action.
B. Permanent structures.
(1) Any permanent roofed structure serving an accessory use if
attached to the principal building shall be considered a part of such
principal building for all regulatory purposes. If such structure is a
building and is not attached to the principal building, no roofed or
enclosed portion shall be closer than 10 feet to any roofed or
enclosed part of the principal building, and such structure shall
conform to the open area, height, and front, side and rear setback
requirements of the district in which such building is located
except as permitted by § 756-36 of this Code.112
(2) Walks, drives, paved terraces and purely decorative garden
accessories such as pools, fountains, statuary, flag poles, etc.,
where subject to "permanent structure" classification, shall not be
permitted closer than three feet to an abutting property line other
than a street line.
(3) Fences, walls, architectural screening devices, driveway gates and
arbors. The following regulations are established to ensure that the
Village of Fox Point retains the openness and semirural character of
its landscape.
(a) Permit required. No person shall erect or construct any fence,
wall, driveway gate, architectural screening device or arbor,
unless specifically exempted by the provisions of this
subsection, on any property within the Village of Fox Point
without having first obtained a permit from the Building
Inspector and having paid the fee prescribed by ordinance.
Retaining walls regulated by § 285-4 of this Code are exempt
from the requirements of this subsection. A survey by a
licensed surveyor shall be submitted with each application for
a fence, wall, architectural screening device, driveway gate or
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 745-7 FOX POINT CODE § 745-7
1:490
arbor 10 feet or less from the lot line of the property. The
determination of the Building Inspector as to proximity shall
be final. When required, the survey shall show the location
of the proposed fence, wall, architectural screening device,
driveway gate or arbor in relation to the property line but
need not depict any other aspect of the subject property. The
Building Inspector shall deny a permit if the proposed fence,
wall, architectural screening device, driveway gate or arbor
is in the right-of-way or if its proposed location will impede
visibility of vehicular traffic.
(b) Replacement or reconstruction. If an existing fence, wall,
architectural screening device, driveway gate or arbor is
substantially or completely destroyed or becomes deteriorated
to a material degree, it may be replaced or reconstructed in the
same location, height and materials by first obtaining a permit,
provided that it must be replaced or reconstructed within 12
months of being removed. All other replacement or
reconstruction of existing fences, walls, architectural
screening devices, driveway gates or arbors must fully comply
with the terms of this section.
(c) Temporary fences. Temporary safety, snow or deer fences of
any type may be allowed in the discretion of the Village
Manager for the purpose of safety, protection from the
elements or protection from deer, for a period not to exceed
120 days, unless extended by the Village Manager. Temporary
construction fences may be allowed in the discretion of the
Village Building Inspector for the time that a building permit is
in effect on the property.
(d) Lake, bluffs and ravines. Where property abuts Lake Michigan,
or is located on a bluff or a ravine in such a locale that
construction of a fence, wall, architectural screening device,
driveway gate or arbor would materially obstruct the aesthetic
views of adjoining and surrounding property owners, the
Building Inspector may deny a permit based upon his
determination that there is a substantial negative impact upon
the aesthetic enjoyment of surrounding properties. Any
affected party may appeal the Building Inspector's
determination to the Board of Appeals within 30 days of the
Building Inspectors' determination. No fence, wall,
architectural screening device, driveway gate or arbor shall be
constructed on the side of a ravine or bluff in violation of
§ 285-3 of this Code.
(e) Construction in right-of-way prohibited. Any fence, wall,
architectural screening device, driveway gate or arbor that is
erected in a street right-of-way or impedes traffic visibility may
be removed by the Village of Fox Point at any time.
§ 745-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-7
1:491
(f) Definitions. For purposes of this subsection, the following
terms shall have the following meanings; the terms "front
yard," "rear yard" and "side yard" shall be defined as set forth
in § 745-2 of this chapter:
ARBOR — Any structure intended to provide a support system
for plantings or to designate an aesthetically pleasing outdoor
seating or walk area.
ARCHITECTURAL SCREENING DEVICE — Any self-standing
fence or wall type of structure employed for gardening,
screening, ornamental, decorative, signage or landmark
purposes.
DRIVEWAY GATE — A fence that opens and closes across a
driveway.
FENCE — A structure which creates an enclosure, barrier or
boundary, having a set or permanent location in the ground, or
which is attached to something having a permanent location on
the ground. A fence is considered to be a structure.
FINISHED LOT GRADE — Does not include berms, artificial
hills and mounds.
HEIGHT — Does not include two inches of clearance at the
bottom of the fence, nor does it include two inches in excess
of the height limitation of the fence posts, nor a lighting device
on the top of a wall.
OPEN FENCE — A structure of rails, planks, stakes, strung
wire or similar material erected as an enclosure, barrier or
boundary. Open fences are those with more than 50% of their
surface area open for free passage of light and air. Examples of
such fences include chain link, picket, rail and cyclone fences,
which are not merely ornamental.
ORNAMENTAL FENCE — A structure whose primary purpose
is to decorate, accent or frame a feature of the landscape or
premises.
SOLID FENCE — A structure of rails, planks, stakes, strung
wire or similar material erected as an enclosure, barrier or
boundary. Solid fences are those with 50% or less of their
surface open for free passage of light and air and designed
to conceal from view the activities conducted behind them.
Examples of such fences are stockade, board-on-board, board
and batten, basket weave and louvered fences.
WALL — Substantially a solid masonry, wood, or composite
structure which shall be self-supporting, but is not
incorporated into an enclosed structure, and shall include any
nonenclosed structure having as its purpose the denomination
or accent of driveways or entryways. Any structure that
satisfies the foregoing definition but which also fully complies
§ 745-7 FOX POINT CODE § 745-7
1:492
with the requirements of one or more of the following, as
determined by the Village Building Inspector, is excluded from
this definition of "wall":
Signs. This exclusion applies if the wall is primarily
intended to be a sign as regulated by Chapter 540 of this
Code.
[1]
Lights. This exclusion applies if the wall is intended
primarily as a pediment to support a light fixture.
[2]
Small size. This exclusion applies if the wall is smaller
than three feet wide, and smaller than three feet deep, and
smaller than five feet high.
[3]
Retaining wall. This exclusion applies if the wall is
intended primarily as a landscape feature for retaining soil
and the top of one side of the wall is approximately at
grade.
[4]
(g) Construction standards. Fences, walls, architectural screening
devices, driveway gates and arbors shall be constructed in
such a manner that the "finished" side shall face the
neighboring property. Fence posts shall be on the side of the
fence facing the permit applicant's property. Fences shall be
constructed of wood or other wood-simulated naturalappearing
materials, wrought iron or other metal materials
generally employed to obtain an aesthetically pleasing
appearance. Open fences may be permitted; however, barbed
wire, electric wire, chicken wire, or double- or triple-strand
wire shall not be used in the construction of a fence, except as
allowed by the Building Board.
(h) Location and height restrictions. Subject to the following
exceptions, a fence, wall, architectural screening device,
driveway gate or arbor may be permitted up to the lot line in
the side and rear yard of any property in Fox Point. A fence,
wall, driveway gate or architectural screening device located
in a rear or side yard shall not exceed a height of six feet from
the finished lot grade and shall not project forward of the front
line of the principal building. An arbor shall not exceed a
height of eight feet seven inches from the finished lot grade
and shall not project forward of the front line of the principal
building.
[1] In the event a building is irregularly configured, such as an
L- or V-shaped structure, or the building is located upon a
corner lot, irregularly shaped lot, or lot which abuts upon
more than one public or private road, such that there are
or appear to be multiple front, side, or rear sides of the
structure, the determination of the front, rear or side
areas, as well as the determination of the location of any
§ 745-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-7
1:493
fencing, shall be referred by the Building Inspector to
the Board of Appeals, which shall then review the matter
without requirement of any appeal fee. The Board of
Appeals shall treat the application as a request for a
special exception, which shall specifically not be subject to
the requirements applicable to zoning variances, and shall
proceed in accordance with Subsection B(3)(j) herein. The
Board of Appeals shall consider the least obtrusive
alternative, and any other criteria as set forth in the
provisions of this chapter which serve to balance the
interests of the applicant with the interests of the
surrounding property owners.
[2] No new fence, wall, architectural screening device,
driveway gate or arbor shall be located beyond the front
line of the principal building unless permitted by the Board
of Appeals by special exception after a hearing, pursuant
to the procedures described in Subsection B(3)(j) below.
The Board of Appeals may grant a special exception under
this subsection only if it finds that the fence, wall,
architectural screening device, arbor or driveway gate is
reasonably necessary to protect the safety of people
residing on the property, in addition to the additional
findings and conditions required by Subsection B(3)(j)
below. Every special exception granted by the Board of
Appeals for a driveway gate shall be conditioned upon the
applicant filing with the Village Clerk/Treasurer the
written approval of the Village Police Chief in consultation
with the Fire Chief for the specific driveway gate and gate
location that is proposed; and if such approval is denied,
the special exception is thereby denied. [Amended
6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
[3] If the rear of the applicant's lot abuts a neighbor's side
yard, any proposed fence shall be an "open fence," unless
the neighbor consents to an alternate type fence in
writing.
[4] An ornamental fence or architectural screening device
may be allowed anywhere on the property without a
permit, provided the fence or screening device does not
exceed 3 1/2 feet in height and is set back in its entirety 20
feet or more from all boundaries of the property.
[5] For purposes of this section, the side yard of any corner lot
that abuts a road shall be treated as a front yard; however,
if a building footprint is other than square or rectangular
in configuration, the provisions of Subsection B(3)(h)[1]
generally shall control over the provisions of this
subsection.
§ 745-7 FOX POINT CODE § 745-7
1:494
[6] The provisions of this section, the limitations set forth
herein, and the requirement for a permit shall not apply to:
[Amended 4-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-05]
[a] Lands owned by the state, school district, county,
Village or any other publicly held land, where fencing
is employed for sport or recreational purposes such as
baseball diamonds, backstops, swimming pools,
playgrounds or any other public recreational or safety
purpose;
[b] Private athletic or country clubs, or cemeteries,
employing such fencing for similar uses as stated
herein;
[c] Dog kennels or runs less than 120 square feet,
provided such fencing is located no closer to any lot
line of the property than is allowed for a principal
structure on the property;
[d] Private residential swimming pool fencing; or
[e] Tennis court fencing, provided such fencing is located
no closer to any lot line of the property than is allowed
for a principal structure on the property unless
modified pursuant to § 745-10G(3).
[7] Notwithstanding the otherwise applicable height
limitations stated elsewhere in this section, a fence may be
constructed to a height of 11 feet from the finished lot
grade on property in the D Business District or the
adjacent single-family residential use district along a lot
line which separates a large business use from such singlefamily
residential use. For purposes of this exception, a
large business use is defined as a use conducted in the D
Business District for which 150 or more off-street parking
spaces are available to the business. Such a fence may be
constructed on the top of a berm, provided the berm is
constructed in compliance with the requirements of this
Code and all applicable laws, and further provided that the
height of the fence shall be measured from the finished lot
grade as defined in this section. This exception is intended
to allow a fence to be constructed which will screen the
large business use from the abutting single-family
residential use.
(i) Maintenance. The owner, occupant or their agent shall keep all
fences, architectural screening devices, walls, driveway gates
and arbors structurally sound and maintained in a neat and
attractive manner. The maintenance standards established in
§ 745-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-7
1:495
this section shall be enforced as provided in §§ 681-7 and 681-8
of the Village of Fox Point Code.
(j) Special exceptions. A special exception to the height, size,
material, design, setback or other physical standards set forth
in this subsection or to allow a driveway gate may, upon filing a
written application, be considered by the Board of Appeals
after a hearing. The application must include an accurate
visual rendering of the proposed wall, architectural screening
device, driveway gate or arbor, along with a written statement
outlining the applicant's need for the same. Notice of hearing
shall be given to all property owners within a radius of 500 feet
of the property upon which the fence, wall, architectural
screening device, driveway gate or arbor is proposed to be
constructed and the notice shall include the visual rendering
submitted by the applicant. The Board of Appeals may grant
the request for a special exception upon finding that the
property owner has shown clear and convincing evidence to
believe that the applicant has a legitimate need for the special
exception and that granting the special exception will not
adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the community
or the immediate area where located and will not impede the
purpose, spirit and intent of this section, in addition to such
other specific findings as may be required by other subsections
of this section. Every special exception granted by the Board of
Appeals shall be conditioned upon the applicant submitting the
visual rendering to the Village Building Board and receiving
the Building Board's approval of the architectural appearance,
design and construction materials for the proposed fence, wall,
architectural screening device, arbor or driveway gate, taking
into consideration the existing development on the lot and in
the surrounding neighborhood, and if the Building Board
denies the application, the special exception is thereby denied.
C. Garages. Garages in a residence district or on a lot where the principal
use is single- or two-family residences shall conform to the following:
(1) Not more than one detached private garage structure shall be
permitted on a lot. A detached garage is allowed without regard to
whether or not there is also one or more attached garages on the
premises. In the event there exists or is built a detached garage,
only one other accessory detached structure shall be permitted,
which structure shall be limited in size to 170 square feet.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, as to lots in excess of 25,000
square feet, one additional detached garage or accessory structure
shall be allowed for each additional 25,000 total square feet of lot
size. All setback requirements and requirements of Chapter 756,
Building Construction, must be satisfied in addition to any
requirements of this provision.
§ 745-7 FOX POINT CODE § 745-7
1:496
(2) The floor area of garages shall be subject to all regulations of
Chapter 756, Building Construction, as from time to time adopted.
(3) The side and rear yard provisions for a detached private garage on
a lot less than the required minimum width of 80 feet in B and C
Residence Districts may be reduced by three inches for every foot
less than 80 feet of lot width but to not less than five feet.
(4) No detached private garage shall be located closer than 20 feet to
the principal residence building on an adjoining lot.
(5) Subject to such other provisions of the Fox Point Code as may
regulate the construction of structures, there is no limit on the
number of attached garages for the private use of the resident.
D. Temporary structures.
(1) Any temporary structure over 500 cubic feet in bulk shall require a
building permit, except as follows: [Amended 6-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-04]
(a) No building permit is required for the placement of a trash
receptacle for purposes of disposing demolition materials from
a building or structure on the property in conjunction with a
project for which a building permit has been issued, subject to
the following. Such trash receptacle shall not be placed prior
to the issuance of a building permit, or prior to one week
before commencement of demolition work, whichever is later.
Such trash receptacle shall be removed within one week of
completion of the demolition work, or when the work is
suspended for more than seven days, or when the building
permit expires or is terminated, whichever occurs first.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village Building Inspector
may impose more restrictive requirements regarding trash
receptacles as a condition of the building permit, which must
be stated on the building permit when it is issued, or may be
added by the Building Inspector after the permit is issued if the
use of a trash receptacle was not shown in the plans submitted
with the building permit application.
(2) Every temporary structure shall comply with the front, side and
rear yard requirements of the district in which it is located, except
that such structure may be permitted anywhere on the lot with the
approval of the Village Manager where in his opinion such
structure where proposed to be located would not be detrimental to
general community aesthetic values or enjoyment of use of
adjoining properties.
(3) Appeal from the decision of the Village Manager may be taken to
the Board of Appeals.
§ 745-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-7
1:497
(4) No person shall build, place, or maintain any portable outhouse,
privy vault, surface privy, dry closet, septic tank, or other moveable
method of sewage disposal or cause the same to be built, located,
placed, or constructed on any lot or premises within the Village
limits except as follows: [Added 3-13-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-03]
(a) The Village Building Inspector may grant permission in
conjunction with the issuance of a building permit. Such
permission shall be expressly set forth on the face of the
building permit and shall terminate upon the Building
Inspector's determination that the project for which the
building permit was issued has been substantially completed,
or the expiration, suspension, or revocation of the building
permit by the Village, whichever occurs first.
(b) The Building Inspector or Village Manager may grant a permit
to allow such temporary structure for a special event or other
limited use, based upon a determination by the Building
Inspector or Village Manager that restroom facilities are not
otherwise available or that restroom facilities are available but
are not reasonably adequate for the size of the expected
assemblage. Application for a permit under this subsection
shall be made on the application form provided by the Village
and shall be accompanied by the fee as established by the
Village Board from time to time. For purposes of this
subsection, the Building Inspector and Village Manager shall
consider the proximity of existing restroom facilities without
regard to whether such facilities are subject to payment of a
fee for their use.
E. Unenclosed storage.
(1) No camp, boat, house or other trailer, bus, boat, recreational
vehicle, camp trailer on a truck, or truck over three-quarter-ton
capacity may be stored or parked regularly on a lot in a residence
district except within a garage or other enclosed storage structure
except as hereinafter set forth:
(a) For the period extending from April 15 to October 31 of each
year, the following type of vehicle may be parked unenclosed
on the driveway of a lot in a residential district, provided it is in
actual use during such period and is not merely being stored,
and that when parked it is sufficiently far in from the street as
to not interfere with the view of operators of vehicles on the
street, or on an adjacent intersecting street:
[1] A camp trailer or boat on a trailer, in either case not
exceeding 35 feet in length, and designed to be hauled by
a passenger automobile.
§ 745-7 FOX POINT CODE § 745-7
1:498
[2] A recreational vehicle not exceeding 35 feet in length.
[3] A camp trailer on a pickup truck not exceeding threequarter-
ton capacity.
(b) Open storage of any such vehicle may be permitted at any time
with the approval of the Chief of Police or designee if such
vehicle is effectively shielded from normal observation from
the street or adjoining properties by landscaping, walls or
fencing, and provided such storage is not between any portion
of the building and an abutting street. No such permitted
storage shall by reason of the permissive grant have any future
claim to legal nonconforming use rights and such permissive
grant may be rescinded at any time for due cause.113
(c) Parking a vehicle as permitted above or storage as permitted
above does not authorize the use of any such trailer, boat or
truck for the housing (sleeping and/or eating) therein of any
person, and such housing is a violation of this chapter.
(2) Materials, equipment, supplies or waste. [Amended 9-11-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-11]
(a) Definition. For purposes of this subsection, "materials,
equipment, supplies or waste" shall mean the following: worn
out or discarded material of little or no value, including but not
limited to household appliances or parts thereof; machinery
and equipment or parts thereof; vehicles or parts thereof;
tools; iron, chain, brass, copper, tin, lead and other base
metals; trailers, farm machinery and equipment or any parts
thereof to be junked or demolished, taken apart or destroyed
for salvage materials; lumber or building materials; rubbish,
ashes, paper, dirt, stones, bricks, tin cans, boxes, barrels or
other substances whatsoever; oil, kerosene, benzene, or other
similar oil or oily substance or liquid; wood, brush, and any
form of discarded vegetation; yard trimmings, grass clippings,
foundry sand and industrial waste of any kind or description;
sewage material removed from septic tanks and dry wells used
in connection with sewage disposal systems; or any similar
materials which constitute health, fire or safety hazards or
which contribute to a blighting influence upon the immediate
or surrounding area or other unsightly debris.
(b) Prohibition; exceptions. No unenclosed storage of materials,
equipment, supplies, or waste shall be permitted where such
storage may be viewed from a public street or another
property, except as follows:
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 745-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-7
1:499
[1] Firewood. Firewood may be stored for use on the property
as follows. Firewood must be neatly stacked and may be
stacked not closer than two feet to any lot line and not
higher than six feet from grade, except adjacent to a fence
where firewood can be stacked against the fence as high
as the fence. "Fence" as used in this subsection shall not
include hedges or other vegetation. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, wood piles that contain diseased wood that is
capable of transmitting disease to healthy trees and
woodpiles that harbor or are infested or inhabited by rats
or other vermin are public nuisances and may be abated
pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
[2] Lawn and garden items. Lawn and garden items that are in
regular seasonal use may be stored outdoors provided they
are neatly arranged on the property. Such items may
include but not be limited to outdoor furniture, planters,
flowerpots, and grills.
(c) Public nuisance. Violation of this Subsection E(2) is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
(d) Nonexclusive authority. This subsection may be enforced by
the Village Building Inspector, which shall be in addition to,
and not to the exclusion or prejudice of, the matters enforced
by the Village Building Inspector pursuant to Chapter 681,
Property Maintenance, of this Code.
(3) In the case of such storage related to the construction, remodeling,
or repairing of a building on the property, this regulation shall
apply to items placed on the property and allowed to remain
thereon more than one week prior to the commencement of such
operation or more than one week after its completion.
F. Home occupations.
(1) Restrictions. A home occupation may be permitted in residential
zoning districts in the Village, in single-family or multifamily
dwellings, together with accessory uses incidental thereto, subject
to the restrictions described in this subsection "Home occupation"
is defined as an accessory use of a dwelling carried on by one or
more members of the immediate family residing in the premises,
which is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
residential purposes and does not change the character of the
residence so as to adversely affect the residential character of the
neighborhood. Home occupations shall be limited to professional
and nonmanual labor, or nonindustrial type uses, and shall not
involve the use of machinery or equipment not generally found or
maintained on residential premises. A home occupation shall be
conducted with minimal disturbance, or it shall be minimally
apparent from the exterior of the building that any type of business
§ 745-7 FOX POINT CODE § 745-7
1:500
activity is taking place on the premises, and without materially
increasing traffic, noise or pedestrian activity on the premises
or the surrounding neighborhood. No sign relating to the home
occupation shall be visible from the exterior of the building.
(2) Home occupation permit required. A home occupation shall be
deemed a special use and shall require that an application for a
home occupation permit be filed with the Building Inspector. A
home occupation permit for a home occupation may be granted by
the Building Inspector if he/she determines that such use shall not
have an adverse impact on the residential aesthetics and
residential character of the surrounding area. In making his/her
determination, the Building Inspector shall consider, without
limitation, the effects on the surrounding area of noise, pedestrian
and motor vehicle traffic which may be generated by such use. A
home occupation permit for a home occupation shall be subject to
review every five years, or sooner if the Village receives a
complaint concerning the use of residential property for home
occupation purposes. A home occupation permit may be revoked
upon a determination that the home occupation has adversely
impacted the residential character of the surrounding
neighborhood. Violation(s) of any portion of the Fox Point Code
pertaining to noise, odors, hazardous materials and emissions
generated as the result of a home occupation being conducted on a
residential premises may serve as the basis for the immediate
revocation or nonrenewal of a home occupation home occupation
permit, as it is expressly intended that the impact of a home
occupation on surrounding neighbors in any of the foregoing
respects be of a far more minimal nature than is prohibited by the
general regulations of the Village Code as to each of the foregoing
matters.114
(3) Permit exception. Home occupations shall expressly be prohibited
without permit, except home occupation activities conducted solely
by a resident of the household via telephone or employing only
computer, facsimile and copy-type services, and which have no
employees, clients or visitors to the premises.
(4) Permit fee. A permit fee shall be paid at the time of filing the
application for a home occupation permit, the amount of which
shall be set by the Village Board from time to time.
(5) Appeals. The Building Inspector's determination to deny the
application for or the renewal or revocation of a home occupation
permit may, upon written application, be reviewed by the Plan
Commission. Any denial of an application or nonrenewal or
revocation of a home occupation permit to be heard by the Plan
Commission shall not be heard until 14 days have elapsed from the
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 745-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-7
1:501
§ 745-8. Time-share property restricted. [Added 4-19-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-07]
§ 745-9. Condominium property restricted. [Added 4-19-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-07]
date notice has been served, by first class mailing, to any and
all surrounding residences or structures within 500 feet of the
applicant's premises. The applicant shall bear the burden of
identifying the property owners to whom notice shall be served and
mailing the notice required hereunder. In making its determination
whether to affirm or reverse the Building Inspector's
determination, the Plan Commission shall take into consideration
the same factors considered by the Building Inspector, including
evidence or testimony of surrounding property owners. The
determination of the Plan Commission shall be final.115
A. Time-share property, as defined herein, shall be subject to all of the
following requirements:
(1) The property must be owned in such a way, and must include such
uses, so as to subject the property to the regulations of Chapter
707, Wisconsin Statutes; and
(2) The property must fully and strictly comply with the requirements
of Chapter 707, Wisconsin Statutes at all times; and
(3) The use shall be subject to a PDO Planned Development Overlay
zoning amendment being granted, in accordance with all of the
rules and regulations of § 745-21 of this chapter, prior to
commencing such use, and must fully and strictly comply with the
same at all times.
B. Time-share property that does not satisfy the requirements of
Subsection A of this section, above, is prohibited in the A-1, A-2, A-3, B
and C Residence Districts in the Village of Fox Point. These regulations
are intended to impose the same requirements upon property that is
regulated by Chapter 707, Wisconsin Statutes, that are imposed upon
physically identical property in the Village of Fox Point that is not in
time share ownership.
A. Condominiums, as defined in Chapter 703, Wisconsin Statutes, shall be
subject to all of the following requirements:
(1) The property must be owned in such a way, and must include such
uses, so as to subject the property to the regulations of Chapter
703, Wisconsin Statutes;
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 745-7 FOX POINT CODE § 745-9
1:502
§ 745-10. Outdoor recreational areas and facilities.
Swimming pools, tennis courts, athletic fields, and other buildings or
grounds used for leisure-time activities of a predominantly outdoor nature
shall be permitted in those districts and subject to such regulations as are
hereinafter designated.
(2) The property must fully and strictly comply with the requirements
of Chapter 703, Wisconsin Statutes, at all times; and
(3) The use shall be subject to a PDO Planned Development Overly
zoning amendment being granted, in accordance with all of the
rules and regulations of § 745-21 of this chapter, prior to
commencing such use, and must fully and strictly comply with the
same at all times.
B. Condominium property that does not satisfy the requirements of
Subsection A, above, is prohibited in the A-1, A-2, A-3, B and C
Residence Districts in the Village of Fox Point. These regulations are
intended to impose the same requirements upon property that is
regulated by Chapter 703, Wisconsin Statutes, that are imposed upon
physically identical property in the Village of Fox Point that is not in
condominium ownership.
A. General.
(1) No such use shall be permitted in any case where it shall create a
nuisance, a hazard, or otherwise result in a substantial adverse
effect on the surrounding property values or on the enjoyment of
such property, or be in any other way detrimental to the general
public welfare. Every reasonable effort shall be made to prevent
such effect through control of lighting, attractive design and
maintenance of structures, use of planting screens or attractive
fences, careful placement on the site, and sensible regulation of
use.
(2) Adequate provision shall be made for off-street parking consistent
with the need generated by the facility.
B. Classification. For purposes of regulation, such uses shall be classified
as follows:
(1) Public. Facilities owned and operated by a governmental agency for
limited or general public use.
(2) Private commercial. Facilities owned and operated by an individual
or group for profit as a business, whether or not open to general
public use.
(3) Private noncommercial group. Facilities owned and operated by a
group for exclusive use of the members of such group and their
guests and not for profit as a business.
§ 745-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-10
1:503
(4) Private residential. Facilities owned by the individual, located on
the same or adjoining lot to his residence, and intended solely for
the use of his family and guests.
C. Public facilities. Such facilities may be permitted in any district as a
principal or accessory use subject to the procedure hereinafter set
forth.
D. Private commercial facilities. Such facilities may be permitted in an
Institutional District as an accessory use, and in a "D" Business or "E"
Semi-Business District as a principal or accessory use subject to the
procedure hereinafter set forth.
E. Private noncommercial group facilities. Such facilities may be
permitted in any district as a principal or accessory use subject to the
procedure hereinafter set forth.
F. Procedure. The following procedure shall be complied with before
public facilities, private commercial facilities, or private noncommercial
group facilities are permitted.
(1) The request for such use, together with site, building and
operational plans, shall be submitted to the Village Board and shall
be referred to the Plan Commission for its study and
recommendation to the Village Board.
(2) Any active use area or structure shall conform to the appropriate
open area, height, and front, side and rear setback requirements of
the district in which located, provided, however, that in no case
shall a swimming pool, athletic field, or game court be permitted
closer than 100 feet to an adjoining property line of a property in a
residence district.
(3) As a special exception, open area, height, front, side and rear
setback requirements in effect pursuant to Subsection F(2) above
may be reduced.
(4) In acting on a request pursuant to Subsection F(1) above or on the
question of granting a special exception pursuant to Subsection
F(3) above the Plan Commission shall take into consideration the
requirements of Subsection A above and shall also consider
whether or not the proposed use is compatible with the area, is in
keeping with the unique residential character of the community,
and would result in substantial adverse effect upon surrounding
properties.
(5) The Plan Commission shall make its recommendation to the Village
Board.
(a) The Village Board, taking into consideration the requirements
above set forth and the recommendation of the Plan
Commission, shall reject, grant, or grant with modification the
§ 745-10 FOX POINT CODE § 745-10
1:504
request; provided that if the request includes a request for
a special exception under Subsection F(3) above, it shall not
be granted until after a public hearing has been held by the
Village Board. Notice of such hearing shall be given as
required for Board meetings, and in addition thereto, written
notice shall be given to the owners of property abutting that
on which the special exception would exist at least five days
before such hearing by delivering such notice to a person
of suitable age residing on the premises, or by mailing such
notice to the person residing on the premises as appears in
the records of the Village for sending water bills, or if vacant
property to the person who appears as owner on the records
of the Village for real estate taxes. If notice is given by mail, it
shall be mailed not less than seven days before the meeting.
(b) The notice shall give the time and place of the hearing and
describe the special exception that has been requested.
(c) After such hearing, the Village Board, applying the
requirements above set forth, shall reject, grant or grant with
modification the special exception requested.
G. Private residential facilities. Such facilities may be permitted as an
accessory use in any district permitting residential use, subject to the
following:
(1) Backboards shall comply with the setback regulations and shall be
in such location or so screened by building or vegetation that it will
not substantially adversely affect the value or reasonable
enjoyment or use of adjoining property, and will not present an
unattractive appearance from the street or adjoining property. The
Village Manager shall determine that the provisions of this
subsection are complied with before a building permit is issued.
(2) Any active use area or structure shall conform to the open area,
height, and front, side and rear setback regulations of the district
in which located except as is otherwise provided.
(3) In the case of tennis, badminton or other similar areas for court
games where size and proper orientation limit suitable locations,
the aforesaid regulations may be modified by the Village Manager
upon his determination that, as the regulations are modified, the
facility will not substantially adversely affect the value or
reasonable enjoyment or use of adjoining property and will not
present an unattractive appearance from the street or adjoining
property. In addition to this general requirement, the following
requirements must be met:
(a) The location as proposed is justified in terms of logical
utilization of the site.
§ 745-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-10
1:505
(b) In no case shall any portion of the court area be closer than five
feet to a lot line.
(c) Appropriate landscaping shall be provided.
[1] The plan for such landscaping shall be submitted to and
approved by the Village Manager as meeting these
requirements. Such landscaping shall thereafter be
continuously maintained in good condition, so long as such
court continues in existence.
[2] The Village Manager may from time to time instruct the
owner to make changes in or additions to the landscaping
when the Village Manager determines that because of the
use being made of the court or adjoining premises,
changes or additions to the landscaping are necessary for
continued compliance with these provisions. Such
instructions shall be promptly complied with.
(d) In those cases where the Village Manager has modified the
height or any setback requirement (front, side or rear), every
enclosure around a court for the containment of balls or birds,
etc., shall be as open as reasonably possible to permit the
passage of light and air, provided that the Village Manager may
permit a canvas or plastic windbreak on such court enclosure
upon his determination that there will still be compliance with
these provisions.
(4) The power here given to the Village Manager to modify regulations
does not apply to the above regulations in respect to backboards.
H. Swimming pools. In addition to the foregoing, swimming pools shall be
subject to the following:
(1) Pumps, filter, and heating equipment shall in no case be closer than
20 feet to a property line and shall be adequately housed or
screened and muffled.
(2) Surfaced terraces, sundecks, and walks may be permitted no closer
than five feet to a lot line where accessory to a private residential
pool. In the case of public, private commercial or private
noncommercial group pools, such accessory uses may be permitted
no closer than 10 feet to a lot line.
(3) Reasonable precautions shall be taken to insure the safety of the
pool area and to prevent it from becoming an "attractive nuisance."
Pools other than those classified as "private residential" shall be
completely fenced so as to prevent the unregulated entrance of
young children to the pool area.
(4) Pools erected on top of the surface of the ground shall have the pool
construction completely and adequately screened from the view of
§ 745-10 FOX POINT CODE § 745-10
1:506
abutting properties by means of combined fence and landscape
screen.
(5) Pools other than those classified as "private residential" or "private
noncommercial group" shall conform to the following:
(a) Water supplied to the pool shall meet state standards for pure
drinking water.
(b) Adequate provision shall be made for separate shower,
lavatory, and dressing facilities for men and women which are
well lighted, ventilated and properly equipped.
(c) Pool construction shall be of concrete, steel, or other material
having an impervious smooth surface and approved by the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer.
(d) Pool shape, design, depth, and slopes shall be such as to
promote safe control of the bathers in the pool.
(e) Inlets must be submerged and produce uniform circulation
without "dead" spots.
(f) Outlets must be of ample size and located at the pool low
points.
(g) Hose connections must be of ample size and pressure to clean
all the pool area.
(h) Overflow gutters must surround the pool and have a pitch
adequate to carry off all overflow.
(i) Adequate steps or ladders shall be provided to allow safe
emergence from the pool and shall be made of impervious
material, easily cleaned, and must not collect water or retain
water.
(j) A suction cleaner must be used to remove sludge, sediment
and other accumulations.
(k) Recirculation systems shall consist of pumping equipment, hair
and lint catcher, filters, and all necessary fixtures and
connections; must be capable of a six-hour turnover of water;
and must include disinfecting equipment.
(l) All equipment must be accessible, satisfactorily located and
the equipment room adequately drained.
(m) Each pool shall have available a pH and residual determination
outfit.
(n) If used at night, the pool shall be adequately lighted.
§ 745-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-11
1:507
§ 745-11. Districts; Official Zoning Map.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Village of Fox Point is hereby divided
into the following basic zoning districts: A-1, A-2, A-3, B and C Resident
Districts; D Business District; E Semi-Business District, and F Institutional
District. In addition to the basic districts, there is hereby created PDO,
Planned Development Overlay District, and also Cultural Overlay District.
Said districts are as shown and indicated on a map of the Village of Fox
Point entitled "Official Zoning Map No. 21 of the Village of Fox Point." Said
map is on file in the office of the Village Manager.
§ 745-12. District boundary lines.
The district boundaries are either lot lines, the center line of streets or
alleys, or the extension thereof, and where the districts designated on
the Official Zoning Map which is a part of this chapter are approximately
bounded by lot lines, streets or alleys, the lot lines or center line of such
streets or alleys or the extension thereof shall be considered to be the
district boundaries. Where the district boundaries are not shown as being
either lot lines, streets or alleys or the extension thereof, unless otherwise
indicated, they shall be construed to be parallel to and 120 feet from the
nearest street, provided that if a lot line or an alley shall hereafter be
platted and recorded paralleling within 30 feet of such district boundary,
such lot line or center line of such alley shall thereupon be construed as
the district boundary. In such cases, where a district boundary line divides
a lot in single ownership, and where the majority of such lot is in the
district requiring the lesser restrictions, these restrictions shall prevail for
the entire lot, provided the area of the land located in the district with
the greater restrictions does not exceed the open area requirement of said
district for the erection of the proposed building.
§ 745-13. A-1 Residence District.
A. Uses. In an A-1 Residence District, no building or premises, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be erected or used except for
dwelling, together with accessory uses incident to the permitted use,
provided always accessory use does not constitute or become a public
or private nuisance.
B. Areas and yards. In an A-1 Residence District, no building may be
erected, enlarged or altered except in conformity with the following:
(1) The open area of a lot on which a dwelling is erected or proposed to
be erected, together with the area of abutting land reserved for
highway purposes, whether private or public, to the center line
thereof, shall not be reduced to less than 40,000 square feet for
each family. No building not erected for a dwelling shall occupy
more than 10% of the gross area of the lot or exceed a height of 25
feet.
§ 745-11 FOX POINT CODE § 745-13
1:508
(2) A front yard of not less than 30 feet shall be provided for every
building on a lot for which a setback is not hereinafter provided for.
Every building shall be set back from the center line of each
adjoining street or area reserved for highway purposes, or any
extension or separated portion thereof hereafter established, not
less than the street setback specified upon the Official Zoning Map,
except that the following reductions may be made for corner lots
from the setbacks specified on the Official Zoning Map: five feet
when width of lot is more than 80 feet but less than 90 feet; 10 feet
when width of lot is more than 70 feet but less than 80 feet; and 15
feet when the width of lot is 70 feet or less; provided, however, that
no setback will be less than 15 feet plus 1/2 the width of the
abutting road or area reserved for highway purposes. [Amended
9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-11]
(3) A side yard of not less than 20 feet shall be provided for on each
side of every building, except that in the case of lots existing as of
May 6, 1958, and less than 100 feet in width measured at the
narrowest place adjacent to the location of the dwelling, the side
yard may be reduced by 1/4 of the difference between said width
and 100 feet; provided, however, that the side yard shall in no event
be less than 15 feet.
(4) A rear yard of not less than 20 feet shall be provided for every
building.
(5) Every lot on which a building is erected shall have a minimum
width of 120 feet.
(6) No single-family residence built or existing in this district shall
have a height greater than 35 feet above the lowest point of the lot
grade abutting the structure, except if located in the A-1, A-2, A-3,
or B District. Any single-family residence located in the A-1, A-2,
A-3, or B District shall not have a height greater than 40 feet from
the grade abutting the structure on the front side of the structure,
with the exception in the A-1 District that, upon application to the
Board of Appeals, the Board of Appeals may grant a special
exception under the conditions as further set forth in this
subsection. Any single-family residence located in the A-1 District
and constructed on a lot of not less than 80,000 square feet in total
area may apply to the Board of Appeals for a special exception from
any height limitation upon the following criteria:
(a) Special exceptions to the height limitations as hereinbefore set
forth may be granted by the Board of Appeals upon
consideration of the following:
[1] Reasonable compatibility with the character of the
immediate neighborhood.
§ 745-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-13
1:509
§ 745-14. A-2 Residence District.
§ 745-15. A-3 Residence District.
[2] Whether there will be unreasonable interference with the
aesthetics and scenic views of residences in the
surrounding area.
[3] Compatibility of the overall size of the structure in relation
to the size of the lot.
(b) For any special exception granted, an additional two feet of
setback on all sides of the structure is required for each foot of
additional height allowed.
(c) In no event shall the Board of Appeals grant a special exception
allowing a height greater than 55 feet.
(d) For purposes of this subsection, the height of the building shall
include the highest roof point of any interior portion of the
structure which can be occupied, including but not limited to
attic and storage structures and observatories which
accommodate entry or occupancy by a person, but shall not
include roof attachments such as chimneys, antennas or
decorative cupolas.116
(e) The special exceptions herein are not deemed to be variances
from this chapter, but an allowed height upon satisfactory
compliance with the foregoing conditions.
(f) The Clerk/Treasurer shall provide notice of Board of Appeals
proceedings under this subsection to owners or occupants of
properties the boundaries of which are within 500 feet of any
boundary of the subject property.
A. The provisions of this chapter in respect to an A-1 Residence District
above set forth shall apply to an A-2 Residence District, except that the
open area required by § 745-13B(1) above shall be 30,000 square feet;
the side yard required by § 745-13B(3) above shall be 15 feet, and the
width required by § 745-13B(5) above shall be 100 feet.
B. The height limitations of single-family residence structures shall be
governed by § 745-13B(6).
A. The provisions of this chapter in respect to an A-1 Residence District
above set forth shall apply to an A-3 Residence District, except that the
open area required by § 745-13B(1) above shall be 20,000 square feet;
the side yard required by § 745-13B(3) above shall be 12 feet, and the
width required by § 745-13B(5) above shall be 90 feet.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 745-13 FOX POINT CODE § 745-15
1:510
§ 745-16. B Residence District.
§ 745-17. C Residence District.
B. The height limitations of single-family residence structures shall be
governed by § 745-13B(6).
A. Uses. In a B Residence District, no building or premises, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be erected or used except for
dwelling, together with accessory uses incident to the permitted use;
provided always the accessory use does not constitute or become a
public or private nuisance.117
B. Areas and yards. In a B Residence District, no building may be erected,
enlarged or altered except in conformity with the following:
(1) The open area of a lot on which a dwelling is erected, or proposed
to be erected, shall not be reduced to less than 15,000 square feet
for each family. No building not erected for a dwelling shall occupy
more than 20% of the gross area of the lot or exceed a height of 25
feet.
(2) A front yard of not less than 30 feet shall be provided for every
building on a lot for which a setback is not hereinafter provided for.
Every building shall be set back from the center line of each
adjoining street or area reserved for highway purposes, or any
extension or separated portion thereof hereafter established, not
less than the street setback specified upon the Official Zoning Map,
except that the following reductions may be made for corner lots
from the setbacks specified on the Official Zoning Map: five feet
when width of lot is more than 80 feet but less than 90 feet; 10 feet
when width of lot is more than 70 feet but less than 80 feet; 15 feet
when width of lot is 70 feet or less; provided, however, that no
setback will be less than 15 feet plus 1/2 the width of the abutting
road or area reserved for highway purposes.
(3) A side yard of not less than 10 feet shall be provided for on each
side of every building.
(4) A rear yard of not less than 20 feet shall be provided for every
building, except one of not less than 10 feet shall be provided for a
building used for or classified as an accessory use.
(5) Every lot on which a building is erected shall have a minimum
width of 80 feet.
(6) The height limitations of single-family residence structures shall be
governed by § 745-13B(6).
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 745-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-17
1:511
§ 745-18. D Business District.
A. Uses. In a C Residence District, no building or premises, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be erected or used except for
dwelling, together with accessory uses incident to the permitted use,
provided always the accessory use does not constitute or become a
public or private nuisance.118
B. Areas and yards. In a C Residence District, no building may be erected,
enlarged or altered except in conformity with the following:
(1) The open area of a lot upon which a dwelling is erected, or
proposed to be erected, shall not be reduced to less than 10,500
square feet for each family. No building not erected for a dwelling
shall occupy more than 15% of the gross area of the lot or exceed a
height of 25 feet above the proposed grade of the ground.
(2) A front yard of not less than 30 feet shall be provided for every
building on a lot for which a setback is not hereinafter provided for.
Every building shall be set back from the center line of each
adjoining street or area reserved for highway purposes, or any
extension or separated portion thereof hereafter established, not
less than the street setback specified upon the Official Zoning Map,
except that the following reductions may be made for a corner lot
from the setbacks specified on the Official Zoning Map: five feet
when width of lot is more than 80 feet but less than 90 feet; 10 feet
when width of lot is more than 70 feet but less than 80 feet; 15 feet
when width of lot is 70 feet or less; provided, however, that no
setbacks will be less than 15 feet plus 1/2 the width of the abutting
road or area reserved for highway purposes.
(3) A side yard of not less than 10 feet shall be provided for on each
side of every building.
(4) A rear yard of not less than 20 feet shall be provided for every
building, except one of not less than 10 feet shall be provided for a
building used for or classified as an accessory use.
(5) Every lot on which a building is erected shall have an average
minimum width of 80 feet.
(6) The height limitations of single-family residence structures shall be
governed by § 745-13B(6).
A. Intent. This section is adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety and welfare such as to provide for adequate light, pure air, safety
and ample parking facilities. It is intended that the uses specified in
Subsection C shall be permitted, and the uses specified in Subsection D
shall be conditional. It is further intended that site plan review is
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 745-17 FOX POINT CODE § 745-18
1:512
required for all conditional uses, per Subsection D(2)(e), and site plan
review is required for all permitted uses and conditional uses when
exterior work is proposed per Subsection E and § 745-19. [Amended
6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
B. In a D Business District, no building, structure or premises shall be
used nor shall any building or structure be erected, altered or enlarged
except as provided below.
C. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the D Business
District:
(1) Business offices, defined as follows. A business office is use of a
tenant space or building solely for administrative functions of an
organization, with no retail or wholesale sales or services on site.
(2) Computer services, defined as follows: "computer service" is use of
a tenant space or building for repair, maintenance and ancillary
sales of computers, computer components, computer hardware and
computer software, for retail customers.
(3) Financial service institutions, defined as follows. Financial services
institutions are banks, savings banks, savings and loan
associations, credit unions, and trust companies, as further defined
and regulated by Chapter 404, Wisconsin Statutes, titled "Uniform
Commercial Code - Bank Deposits and Collections," specifically
excluding payday loan businesses, licensed lenders, pawnbrokers
and community currency exchanges that are subject to licensure
under § 138.09, 138.10 or 218.05, Wis. Stats., and institutions
similar thereto.
(4) Offices of trade and professions licensed by a governmental agency,
subject to the following limitations. For purposes of this subsection,
trade offices are the use of a tenant space or building by an
electrician, plumber, carpenter or person in a similar building or
construction trade that provides licensed services off site within
the Village and its environs. For purposes of this subsection,
professional offices are the use of a tenant space or building by an
architect, dentist, doctor, lawyer or other licensed person that
offers services to people within the Village and its environs by a
person with a degree from a four-year college or university that is
listed on the U.S. Department of Education Database of Accredited
Postsecondary Institutions and Programs, or subsequent
educational degree from such an institution, in a field closely
related to the service offered.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Uses. The following uses can be allowed by conditional use permit
in the D Business District, pursuant to the conditional uses
procedures described below:
§ 745-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-18
1:513
(a) Bowling alleys.
(b) Dance, music or physical health studios.
(c) Gasoline service stations.
(d) Greenhouses.
(e) Hotels and motels.
(f) Personal wireless service facility (subject to criteria and
procedures outlined in § 745-23).
(g) Premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.
(h) Restaurants except drive-ins.
(i) Retail and services stores except commercial sale or purchase
of guns.
(j) Schools and day-care centers.
(k) Television, video and photo production studios.
(l) Theaters, except outdoor theaters.
(m) Video game arcades.
(n) Wholesale office or sample rooms.
(o) Other uses found to be substantially similar uses to those listed
here by the Village Plan Commission.
(2) Application. The applicant shall furnish on an application provided
by the Building Inspector for referral to the Plan Commission the
following information:
(a) Name and address of owner and/or operator.
(b) The specific interest of the applicant in the property. If the
applicant is not the owner, all owners must be listed and sign
as co-applicants.
(c) Address and legal description of site.
(d) Current survey of site showing existing improvements, if any.
(e) Site plan of proposed project and, if requested, appropriate
elevations, building and landscape information.
(f) Such additional information as may be required by the Building
Inspector, Health Officer, Police Department, Plan Commission,
or Village Board.119
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 745-18 FOX POINT CODE § 745-18
1:514
(3) Fee. The applicant shall pay a fee set by the Village Board from
time to time.
(4) Plan Commission recommendation. The Village Plan Commission
shall review the application and make recommendations to the
Village Board on the following areas:
(a) Whether conditions, if any, as found in Subsection D(5) should
be recommended;
(b) Whether there will be compliance with all other provisions of
this chapter, including Subsection F of this section, except if
the project is deemed to be of superior quality by the Plan
Commission. Then, in such cases, the front setback shall not be
less than 15 feet plus 1/2 the width of the abutting road or area
reserved for highway purposes;
(c) Whether the approval of the application would impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of the
adjoining properties or properties in the same D Business
District;
(d) Whether adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or
necessary facilities have been or are being provided;
(e) Whether adequate measures have been or will be taken to
provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic
congestion on the public streets;
(f) Whether there will be compliance with all other applicable
laws and regulations;
(g) Whether traffic entering or exiting the site is likely to endanger
safety or cause congestion on nearby streets.
(5) Conditions. Conditions which may be imposed as deemed
necessary by the Village Board shall include:
(a) Commencement, staging and completion dates.
(b) Types of construction.
(c) Landscaping.
(d) Planting or other screening.
(e) Parking.
(f) Fencing.
(g) Lighting.
(h) Hours of operation.
§ 745-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-18
1:515
(i) Front, rear and side yard setbacks and whether parking within
them is permitted.
(j) Operational plan.
(k) Highway access and loading provisions.
(l) Traffic circulation.
(m) Highway dedication.
(n) Deed restrictions.
(o) Sureties.
(p) Signs.
(q) Noise control.
(r) Special requirements characteristic to the use as may be
deemed necessary to protect the aggregate property values of
adjoining properties or the Village as a whole and/or to protect
as provided in Subsection A above.
(6) Public hearing. A public hearing may be held by the Village Board
in the event of a favorable recommendation by the Village Plan
Commission to consider the application, the recommendations of
the Village Plan Commission, and other pertinent information.
(7) Village Board action. After any public hearing, and after approval
by the Village Board, the Village Board may authorize the Village
staff to issue a conditional use permit with or without conditions
after finding such conditional use or structure is in accordance with
the purpose and intent of this section and any conditions shall be
attached to the permit.
(8) Inspection. To ensure that the applicant has fulfilled the conditions
for operation agreed to and made part of the conditional use
permit, the Building Inspector may conduct a review within six
months after the grant of the occupancy permit and report to the
Plan Commission. If conditions are not being met, the Plan
Commission shall do one of the following three: grant a
continuation of time to achieve compliance, recommend a
modification of the conditions, or recommend rescission of the
conditional use designation to the Village Board. After the formal
review period, the Building Inspector is empowered to review the
subject Conditional Use at any time to ensure that the original
conditions imposed on the use are being met. Failure to meet all
conditions of the permit shall be cause for rehearing of the permit
before the Plan Commission at which time the Plan Commission
may recommend and Village Board approve or deny continuation of
the conditional use.
§ 745-18 FOX POINT CODE § 745-18
1:516
(9) Limited exception for minor interior work. Separate conditional use
approval is not required for an alteration to an existing building,
structure or premises, if all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The use has been conditionally permitted by prior action of the
Village Board;
(b) The approved use will not change as a result of the alteration;
(c) The total cost of the alteration as defined in Chapter 756 of this
Code is $5,000 or less; and
(d) No prior alterations have been made since the date of the
Village Board's approval of the use.
E. Plan review. To encourage a business environment that is compatible
with the residential character of the Village, building permits that
include any exterior work regarding permitted principal uses and
conditional uses in the D Business District shall not be issued without
site plan review and approval by the Village Board, pursuant to
Subsection F of this section.
F. Regulation. In a D Business District, no building may be erected,
enlarged or altered except in conformity with the following:
(1) Final site plans shall be submitted to and be subject to approval by
the Village Board before a building permit shall be issued. Said site
plans shall show the following: drainage, the location of all
buildings, fences, walls, signs, lighting, installations, landscaped
areas, off-street parking, and loading areas, the arrangement of
internal and in-and-out traffic flow, and the relationship to
immediately abutting streets and other property, all to be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances
of the Village, and also in accordance with the following general
principles as determined by the Village Board:
(a) The Village Board may choose to rely on the following
considerations, without limitation:
[1] Buildings should not have a design or exterior appearance
which is of such unorthodox or abnormal character in
relation to its surroundings as to be unsightly or offensive
to generally accepted taste and community standards.
[2] Buildings should not have a design or exterior appearance
which is so identical with those adjoining as to create
excessive monotony or drabness.
[3] Buildings should not have any exposed facade that is not
constructed or faced with finished materials which are
aesthetically compatible with the other facades, and
building facades should present an attractive appearance
to the public and to surrounding properties.
§ 745-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-18
1:517
[4] The facade which faces upon a street right-of-way should
be finished with aesthetically pleasing materials.
[5] The relative proportion of a building to its neighboring
buildings, to pedestrians and observers, or to other
existing buildings should be maintained or enhanced when
new buildings are built or when existing buildings are
remodeled or altered.
[6] Building rooflines and roof shapes. The visual continuity of
roofs and their contributing elements (parapet walls,
coping, and cornices) should be maintained in building
development and redevelopment.
[7] Since the selection of building colors has a significant
impact upon the public and neighboring properties, color
should be selected in general harmony with existing
neighborhood buildings.
[8] No building or sign should be permitted to be sited on the
property in a manner which would unnecessarily destroy
or substantially damage the natural beauty of the area,
particularly insofar as it would adversely affect values
incident to ownership of land in that area, or which would
unnecessarily have an adverse effect on the beauty and
general enjoyment of existing structures on adjoining
properties.
(b) No building or use should have a negative impact on the
maintenance of safe and healthful conditions in the Village.
(c) No articles, goods, material, finished or unfinished product,
incinerators, storage tanks, refuse containers, or like
equipment should be kept outdoors, exposed to public view, or
exposed to view from adjacent buildings and property. Garbage
and refuse containers should be screened from the street and
from neighboring facilities. The Village Board may permit the
outdoor display of product or merchandise upon finding that
such display is essential to a business use.
(d) Buildings and uses should serve to implement the Village's
existing and planned stormwater drainage systems.
(e) Buildings and uses should provide for safe traffic circulation
and safe driveway locations.
(f) Buildings and uses should provide adequate parking and
loading areas. No loading dock or overhead door shall face
upon a street right-of-way unless a determination is made by
the Village Board to allow the same due to extraordinary
circumstances.
§ 745-18 FOX POINT CODE § 745-18
1:518
(g) Buildings and uses should be provided with adequate public
services as approved by the appropriate utility.
(h) Buildings and uses shall make appropriate use of open spaces
and the Village Board may require appropriate landscaping
and planting screens.
(2) No building shall exceed two stories in height, excluding spires,
towers, roofs or other architectural embellishments not usable for
business purposes, provided that a balcony or mezzanine floor shall
be considered as a story.
(3) No such permitted building shall be closer than 20 feet to any
adjoining residence district, or closer than 10 feet to any lot line
except in the case of "row" type buildings, where by mutual consent
common walls are provided between adjoining buildings.
(4) Every building shall be set back from the center line of each
adjoining street or area reserved for highway purposes, or any
extension or separated portion thereof hereafter established, not
less than the street setback specified upon the Official Zoning Map;
provided, however, that no setbacks will be less than 15 feet plus 1/
2 the width of the abutting road or area reserved for highway
purposes.
(5) The provision of any exterior lighting shall be subject to Chapter
670, Article XI, of this code regulating exterior lighting and any
amendments thereto, or other ordinance enacted regulating
exterior lighting.
(6) Unenclosed storage of merchandise, cartons, equipment, refuse or
any other item which might detract from cleanliness, neatness and
general attractiveness of the surrounding area shall not be
permitted on the premises. Any enclosure provided for such
purpose shall be subject to approval of the Building Inspector.
(7) Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided as follows:
(a) At least five parking stalls for automobiles shall be provided for
each 1,000 square feet of gross area of a building exclusive of
storage areas.
(b) The dimensions for parking spaces and aisles shall be as
follows:
[1] Ninety-degree-angle parking, two-way traffic: stalls nine
feet by 19 feet; aisles 25 feet wide.
[2] Sixty-degree-angle parking, one-way traffic: stalls nine
feet by 21 feet; aisles 18 feet wide.
[3] Forty-five-degree-angle parking, one-way traffic: stalls
nine feet by 20 feet; aisles 14 feet wide.
§ 745-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-18
1:519
[4] Ninety-degree-angle parking, one-way traffic: stalls nine
feet by 19 feet; aisles 22 feet wide.
(c) In addition to the required parking stalls, adequate driveways
or space required for movement of automobiles on such
parking area shall be provided.
(d) A lesser or greater number of parking stalls may be
recommended by the Plan Commission on taking into
consideration the location of the parking area, the type and use
of building which the parking area is to serve, and other
parking areas available in close proximity to the area being
considered. Such recommendation will be effective only on
approval by the Village Board.
(e) Such off-street parking area shall be surfaced and maintained
reasonably dustless in accordance with standards prescribed
by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer and shall be
adequately lighted when in use. In no case shall any portion of
the paved parking area be closer than 20 feet to any adjoining
residence district or to any street line lying between the
business district and residence district, and said 20 feet shall
be landscaped and maintained in an attractive manner.
(f) An off-street parking area, in addition to the defined off-street
parking area, having an area at least 10 feet wide by 25 feet
long and with a minimum fourteen-foot height clearance shall
be provided for every 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof in
excess of 3,000 square feet of building area used for
commercial purposes.120
(8) Vehicular access driveways shall be subject to the following
regulations:
(a) The location and design of all vehicular access driveways from
the public street to the premises shall be approved by the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer on the basis of
providing reasonable service to the premises with the
minimum interference to the normal, safe, and efficient
movement of traffic and avoiding possible nuisance or adverse
effect on the surrounding residential area.
(b) No vehicular access drives shall be permitted along that
portion of a street where the opposite frontage is zoned
exclusively for residential purposes, except where no other
access is possible.
120. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (7)(g), regarding application for building compliance,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 745-18 FOX POINT CODE § 745-18
1:520
§ 745-19. E Semi-Business District.
(9) Adequate screening shall be provided under the circumstances and
in the manner as follows:
(a) Screening shall be provided along any property line adjoining a
property zoned in a Residence District, and along that portion
of a street where the opposite frontage is zoned in a Residence
District.
(b) Such screening shall be of such a nature as to attractively and
effectively screen from ordinary view the commercial
operation and shall be subject to approval of the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer.
(c) If the screen is composed entirely of plant materials, it shall be
of sufficient initial depth and height and of such plant varieties
as to provide adequate visual screening within no more than
two years and during all seasons of the year.
(d) Where architectural walls or fences are used, sufficient
landscaping shall be used in conjunction with such fence or
wall to create an attractive view from the residential side. Any
wall or fence shall be not less than four feet nor more than six
feet in height.
(e) Where the screen is for a parking area, it shall be sufficiently
opaque to prevent the penetration of headlight glare.
A. Uses. In an E Semi-Business District, no building or premises shall be
used nor shall any building or other structure be erected, altered or
enlarged which is arranged, intended or designed to be used for any
purpose except for the business purposes, exclusive of residential uses,
hereinbelow set forth:
(1) Administrative and public service offices.
(2) Professional offices.
(3) Real estate and insurance offices.
(4) Studios for photography, painting, music, sculpture, dance, or
other recognized fine art.
(5) Banks, savings and loan, investment houses or other financial
institutions.
(6) Subject to approval of the Plan Commission as being compatible to
the restrictive character of the district:
(a) Any other office not involving on the premises the retail sale or
the manufacture, assembly, warehousing or distribution of
goods.
§ 745-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-19
1:521
§ 745-20. F Institutional District. [Amended 3-12-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-01]
In the F Institutional District, no building or premises shall be used, nor
shall any building be constructed or enlarged, and no exterior alterations
shall be made to an existing building which is arranged, intended, or
designed to be used for any purpose except in conformity with the following.
(b) Personal service facilities, such as beauty shops, travel
agencies, funeral homes, and interior decorators.
(7) Accessory uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted
uses.
B. Regulation. In an E Semi-Business District, no building may be erected,
enlarged or altered except in conformity with the following:
(1) The provisions of § 745-18F shall apply and be complied with.
(2) In keeping with the restrictive character of this district, the
buildings erected therein and the treatment of site shall be subject
to the following general standards:
(a) All facades of buildings shall be covered with finished facing
material and shall be designed with adequate consideration of
aesthetic appearance from rear and sides.
(b) The grounds surrounding the building shall be attractively
landscaped and maintained.
(c) A filing fee as described in Chapter 63 of this Code shall be
paid to the Village at the time of filing an application that is
required by this subsection or Subsection A.
A. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the F Institutional
District, subject to the limitations and conditions of Subsection B below.
(1) Dwelling and residential uses accessory thereto as and when
permitted in a B Residence District.
(2) Buildings and adjoining grounds for:
(a) Schools and municipal purposes, including storage yards;
(b) Church services, exclusive of graveyards;
(c) Social clubs or lodges, except those the chief activity of which
is a service customarily carried on as a business;
(d) Community recreational, cultural and social service purposes
operated on a not-for-profit basis; and
(e) Including accessory uses incident to and reasonably necessary
for the furtherance of any of the above permitted uses.
§ 745-19 FOX POINT CODE § 745-20
1:522
(3) Convalescent or nursing homes or similar institutions for the
accommodation of the aged or infirm.
B. Limitations, conditions and procedure.
(1) Written application for the use, construction or enlargement of
premises or a building or for exterior alterations to an existing
building shall be made to the Village Board, accompanied by such
building plans, sketches, renderings, and site plans as the Board
determines reasonably necessary to form an opinion. A filing fee as
described in Chapter 63 of this Code shall be paid to the Village at
the time of filing the application.
(2) The Village Board shall refer the application to the Plan
Commission. The Plan Commission shall study such application and
shall hold a meeting jointly with the Building Board. After such
study and joint meeting, the Plan Commission shall make its report
to the Village Board advising the Village Board whether or not the
Plan Commission considers that the standards have been met. The
standards to be applied are:
(a) Appropriate in the location proposed;
(b) Compatible with the neighborhood;
(c) Not detrimental to the property values of surrounding
property; and
(d) In keeping with the residential character and quality of the
Village.
(3) If the Plan Commission reports that in its opinion any one or more
of the above standards have not been met, and the Village Board on
motion duly adopted agrees with this report, then the application
shall be considered denied.
(4) If the Plan Commission reports that in its opinion the above
standards have been met, or if the Plan Commission has reported
that in its opinion any one or more of the above standards have not
been met and the Village Board has not agreed with the report of
the Plan Commission, then the Village Board shall schedule a
public hearing on the application.
(5) Notice of such public hearing shall be given by publication at least
once in the official newspaper of the Village and by mailing a copy
of such notice to all property owners who own land abutting on the
site or across a street from the site, not less than five days prior to
the hearing. Mailing shall be to the last known address of the
respective property owners as appears from the records of the
Village.
§ 745-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-20
1:523
(6) If after such public hearing it shall appear to the Village Board that
the standards above set forth have been met, the application shall
be approved; otherwise, it shall be denied.
(7) The Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board
(whether or not recommended by the Plan Commission) may
condition its approval upon the compliance with such requirements
as appear reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the
above standards.
(8) Although the Plan Commission and Building Board are required to
meet jointly, they shall act separately, and action by the Plan
Commission and subsequent action by the Village Board shall in no
way control or affect action by the Building Board in respect to the
application for a building permit as is provided in this Code.
C. Exceptions. No review pursuant to Subsection B is required in the
following limited circumstances:
(1) For an alteration to the interior of an existing building or structure.
(2) For an alteration to an existing building, structure or premises, if
all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The use has been approved by prior action of the Village Board;
(b) The approved use will not change as a result of the alteration;
(c) The total cost of the alteration as defined in Chapter 756,
Building Construction, of this Code is $5,000 or less; and
(d) No prior alterations have been made since the date of the
Village Board's approval of the use.
D. Regulation. In an F Institutional District, no building may be erected or
enlarged, and no exterior alterations shall be made to an existing
building, except in conformity with the following:
(1) Dwelling and accessory buildings shall conform with the provisions
of § 745-16B.
(2) Off-street parking areas shall be provided for nonresidential
buildings subject to the following:
(a) At least 117 square feet of parking area shall be provided for
each seat on the basis of the posted or (in the case of proposed
construction) the proposed seating capacity for a church, club,
lodge, or hall for assembly. The parking square footage
includes the area used for parking stalls and the driving areas
between and at the end of rows of parking areas; it excludes
the driveways leading into the parking area from streets,
structures, other parking areas, etc. The dimensions for
parking spaces and aisles shall be as follows:
§ 745-20 FOX POINT CODE § 745-20
1:524
[1] Ninety-degree-angle parking, two-way traffic: stalls nine
feet by 19 feet; aisles 25 feet wide.
[2] Sixty-degree-angle parking, one-way traffic: stalls nine
feet by 21 feet; aisles 18 feet wide.
[3] Forty-five-degree-angle parking, one-way traffic: stalls
nine feet by 20 feet; aisles 14 feet wide.
[4] Ninety-degree-angle parking, one-way traffic: stalls nine
feet by 19 feet; aisles 22 feet wide.
(b) In order to eliminate daily on-street parking around areas in
which children are present and to eliminate on-street parking
and loading of school buses, the following rules are adopted:
[1] One parking space for employees, including teachers
(part- and full-time), administrators (part- and full-time),
and support staff (part- and full-time);
[2] One and one-half parking spaces shall be provided per
classroom to allow for visitor parking;
[3] One space shall be provided for every five students 16
years and older;
[4] Sufficient off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
the safe and convenient loading and unloading of students
as determined by the Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer and Police Department based on the following
criteria:
[a] Number of buses normally used;
[b] The time schedule of the buses;
[c] The size of the buses; and
[d] The traffic patterns.
[5] The applicant shall indicate proposed location for future
parking if the need arises as determined by the Police
Department;121
[6] The parking square footage includes the area used for
parking stalls and the driving areas between and at the
end of rows of parking areas; it excludes the driveways
leading into the parking area from streets, structures, and
other parking areas, etc.;
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 745-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-20
1:525
[7] The dimensions for parking spaces and aisles shall be as
follows:
[a] Ninety-degree-angle parking, two-way traffic: stalls
nine feet by 19 feet; aisles 25 feet wide.
[b] Sixty-degree-angle parking, one-way traffic: stalls
nine feet by 21 feet; aisles 18 feet wide.
[c] Forty-five-degree-angle parking, one-way traffic: stalls
nine feet by 20 feet; aisles 14 feet wide.
[d] Ninety-degree-angle parking, one-way traffic: stalls
nine feet by 19 feet; aisles 22 feet wide.
(c) Such off-street parking area shall be surfaced and maintained
reasonably dustless in accordance with standards prescribed
by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer and shall be
adequately lighted when in use.
(d) No portion of the parking area or of any driveway shall be
closer than 15 feet to an adjoining residence district or the lot
line of any lot on which there is an existing residence as of May
6, 1958, or closer than five feet to any street, or closer than 10
feet to any lot line, provided that by written mutual consent
and agreement of owners of adjoining nonresidential property
filed with the Building Inspector, this ten-foot setback may be
reduced or eliminated, and no setback is required where a lot
line abuts on property on which a railroad track is maintained.
(e) Where offset areas are required by Subsection D(2)(d) above,
such areas shall be landscaped and kept free from refuse and
debris, and screening provided in conformity with the
following:
[1] Such screening shall be of such nature as to attractively
and effectively screen from ordinary view the parking area
and shall be subject to the approval of the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer.
[2] If the screening is composed entirely of plant materials, it
shall be of sufficient initial depth and height and of such
plant varieties as to provide adequate visual screening
within no more than two years from the date of its planting
and during all seasons of the year.
[3] Where architectural walls or fences are used, sufficient
landscaping shall be used in connection with such fence or
wall to create an attractive view from the abutting
property or street, and any wall or fence shall be not less
than four feet nor more than six feet in height.
§ 745-20 FOX POINT CODE § 745-20
1:526
[4] Such screening shall be sufficiently opaque to prevent the
penetration of headlight glare.
[5] Such screening may be eliminated between adjoining
parking areas by mutual agreement of the adjoining
property owners executed in writing and filed with the
Building Inspector.
(3) The location and design of all vehicular access driveways from the
public street to the premises shall be approved by the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer on the basis of providing reasonable
service to the premises with the minimum interference to the
normal, safe and efficient movement of traffic and avoiding possible
nuisance or adverse effect on the surrounding residential area.
(4) The provision of any exterior lighting shall be subject to Chapter
670, Article XI, of this Code regulating exterior lighting and
amendments thereto or other ordinance enacted regulating
exterior lighting.
(5) Whenever any building is erected or enlarged, or exterior
alterations are made to an existing building, the use of the building
must be one permitted by Subsection A, and the lot and said
building shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The lot shall have a minimum street frontage of 140 feet
measured along the street which said building faces.
(b) The lot shall maintain a side yard on each side of such building
with a minimum width of 20 feet in respect to a building 40 feet
or less in length, and the side yard on each side of said building
shall be an additional one foot in width for every additional
four feet of length of the building along the street on which the
building faces. This side yard calculation shall exclude any
incidental connecting corridors of only one story at the ground
level that link together otherwise separate buildings or
structures for the convenience of enclosed access and the
purpose of which is limited to ingress and egress between the
connected buildings.
(c) The building shall be placed and maintained on said lot.
(d) No such building shall cover more than 35% of the area of the
lot on which it is erected or located.
(e) Every building shall be set back from the center line of each
adjoining street or area reserved for highway purposes, or any
extension or separated portion thereof hereafter established,
not less than the street setback specified upon the Official
Zoning Map; provided, however, that no setbacks will be less
than 15 feet plus 1/2 the width of the abutting road or area
reserved for highway purposes.
§ 745-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-20
1:527
§ 745-21. PDO Planned Development Overlay District.
(f) No institutional building built or existing in this district shall
have a height greater than 35 feet above the lowest point of the
lot grade abutting the structure, excluding, however, from this
height limitation religious institutions and spires, towers,
chimneys and nonfunctional architectural embellishments.
[1] For institutional uses, a special exception may be sought
before the Board of Appeals from any height limitation,
and the Board shall consider, without limitation by
enumeration herein, the following:
[a] Reasonable compatibility with the character of the
immediate neighborhood.
[b] Whether there will be unreasonable interference with
the aesthetics and views from residences in the
surrounding area.
[c] Compatibility of the overall size of the structure in
relation to the size of the lot.
[2] In no event shall the Board of Appeals grant a special
exception allowing a height greater than 45 feet.
E. Doctor's Park. Milwaukee County Doctor's Park, which is identified as
Parcel Tax Key No. 0579999000, is located in the F Institutional District
and is hereby zoned as a park, to the full extent and meaning of the
words "zoned as a park" in § 59.17(2)(b)(3), Wis. Stats. [Added
4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02; amended 4-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-07]
A. Intent. The regulations of this district are intended to allow for greater
flexibility, variety of use, and design freedom than would be permitted
by the standard application of basic district regulations, in the case of
tracts of land of suitable size and appropriate location, where the
unified and planned development of such tract and the increased
flexibility, variety of use and design freedom would achieve optimum
utilization of the site and produce a more aesthetically satisfying and
economically desirable development than would result from the
application of basic district controls.
B. Application of regulations.
(1) The regulations herein set forth shall be made effective as an
"overlay" of permitted use upon the basic district to permit the
planned development pursuant to the provisions herein set forth.
(2) Individual uses and structures as permitted and regulated by the
basic zoning district shall continue to be subject to the regulations
§ 745-20 FOX POINT CODE § 745-21
1:528
as already established unless they are part of a proposed planned
development.
(3) Individual uses and structures in a planned development shall not
be subject to the specific building location, size, yard, lot size, and
open space requirements of the underlying basic district but shall
be subject to the regulations hereinafter set forth governing such
project.
(4) Normal standards relative to road design or other engineering
matters may be modified in a planned development consistent with
good engineering practice.
C. Procedure.
(1) Pre-petition conference. Prior to official submittal of a petition for
consideration of a planned project, the petitioner shall meet with
the Plan Commission for a preliminary discussion as to the scope
and nature of the proposed development. The applicant shall pay a
fee as described in Chapter 63 of this Code prior to the pre-petition
conference.
(2) Petition. Following the preliminary consultation with the Plan
Commission, petition may be made to the Village Board by the
owner, or his agent, of property proposed for such development for
the approval of a specific project plan under the provisions of these
regulations. Such petition shall be accompanied by the following
information:
(a) A statement describing the general character of the intended
development along with such other information as would be
pertinent to a determination as to the suitability and
desirability of granting the proposed planned development on
the particular site.
(b) A general development plan of the project showing at least the
following information and such additional information as may
be required by the Plan Commission in a specific situation in
sufficient detail to allow the Plan Commission and the Village
Board to apply the criteria for approval as hereinafter set forth:
[1] An accurate map of the project area, including its
relationship to surrounding properties.
[2] Statistical data on total size of project area, area of open
space, density computation and proposed number of
residential units, population analysis, market analysis,
economic analysis, impact upon municipal services and
any other similar data pertinent to a comprehensive
evaluation of the proposed development.
§ 745-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-21
1:529
[3] The pattern of public and private roads, driveways, and
parking facilities, and intended design standards.
[4] The size, arrangement, and location of lots or of proposed
building groups.
[5] The type, size and location of structures.
[6] The location of sewer and water facilities, drainage
facilities, stormwater retention or detention basins, and
any and all plans to control or reduce flooding on the
subject site, and from the subject site to any and all areas
on or off the site, whether within or without the corporate
limits of the Village.
[7] Architectural drawings and sketches illustrating the
design and character of proposed structures.
[8] The location of recreational and open space areas and
areas reserved or dedicated for public uses such as school,
park, etc.
[9] General landscape treatment.
[10] Existing topography and storm drainage pattern and
proposed storm drainage system showing basic
topographic changes.
[11] General outline of intended organizational structure
related to property owners' association, deed restrictions,
and provision of services.
[12] Garbage, recyclable materials, yard waste, or hazardous
material collection, storage and pickup facility plans.
(c) A general summary of financial factors such as value of
structures, estimated improvement costs, amount proposed for
landscaping and special features, estimated sale or rental
price, and total anticipated development cost of the project.
(3) Referral to Plan Commission. Such petition shall be referred to the
Plan Commission for study and investigation, including informal
hearing if deemed necessary. The Plan Commission shall make its
recommendation to the Village Board as to the appropriateness and
desirability of the proposed development plans, and any changes or
additional conditions applicable to such plans which it may feel
necessary or appropriate.
(4) Public hearing. Upon receipt of the Plan Commission's
recommendation, the Village Board shall before taking affirmative
action to approve such petition hold a public hearing on the
proposal. Notice for such hearing shall include reference to the
consideration of the specific proposed project development plans.
§ 745-21 FOX POINT CODE § 745-21
1:530
D. Permitted uses.
(1) Any use permitted in the basic zoning district shall be permitted in
a planned development.
(2) Attached single-family and multiple-family dwellings with
appropriate quality and character may be permitted in a planned
development.
(3) In addition to accessory uses permitted in the basic zoning district,
such uses as a swimming or other recreational area, pavilion or
similar use designed as an accessory amenity to the planned
development may be permitted.
(4) When the planned development consists in whole or in part of
residential units, each residential unit shall be occupied by only one
family.
(5) The owner of property that is zoned for residential use and PDO
Planned Development Overlay under this section may use a limited
portion of such property for limited commercial office use upon
initial and continuing compliance with all of the following
requirements:
(a) The improvements to the subject property must include 250 or
more residential dwelling units;
(b) No more than one unit of average size on the subject property
shall be used for commercial office purposes, and such office
operations are restricted to the interior of said unit;
(c) No exterior commercial sign(s) or interior sign(s) visible from
the exterior shall be maintained on the subject property for the
benefit of the commercial office purpose;
(d) The proposed commercial office use must not be incompatible
with the residential use of the subject property as determined
by the Village Board;
(e) The commercial office use must be owned and operated by the
owner of the subject property;
(f) The requested office use must be expressly provided for within
the development agreement required under Subsection F of
this section or an amendment to such agreement that sets forth
operational limitations, including, but not limited to, hours of
operation and number of employees.
E. Basis for approval. The Plan Commission in making its
recommendations and the Village Board in making its determination
shall give consideration and satisfy themselves to the following:
§ 745-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-21
1:531
(1) That the proposed development is consistent with the spirit and
intent of this chapter, is in conformity with the general character of
the Village and would not be contrary to the general welfare and
economic prosperity of the Village or of the immediate
neighborhood, but rather that the benefit from improved design of
the resultant development justifies the variation from the normal
requirements of this chapter through the approval of a planned
development.
(2) That the proponents of the proposed development have
demonstrated that they intend to start construction within a
reasonable period following the approval of the project, that the
project appears economically sound, that the proponents of the
proposed development have the financial capacity to carry out the
project as proposed and intend to commence and complete
construction within a reasonable time from the date of approval.
(3) That the size, quality and architectural design of all buildings
within the project will be compatible with the general character of
the Village and specifically to the surrounding neighborhood. To
arrive at such determination, the recommendation of the Building
Board shall be obtained prior to the Plan Commission's report to
the Village Board. Approval of individual building plans by the
Building Board is not supplanted by this section.
(4) That the specific project plans have been prepared with competent
professional advice and guidance.
(5) That setbacks shall be maintained along any boundary street of the
project area as required by the basic zoning district.
(6) That no building shall be permitted closer to a side or rear
boundary line of the project area than required by the applicable
side or rear yard requirements of the adjoining zoning district
abutting along a side or rear property line of the project.
(7) That no building shall exceed the height limitation of the basic
zoning district.
(8) In the case of proposed residential developments:
(a) That such development will create an attractive residential
environment of sustained desirability and economic stability,
compatible with the character of the Village and where the
economic impact of the development in terms of income levels,
property values, and service demands is substantially as
beneficial to the community as that which could be anticipated
under the basic zoning.
(b) That the population composition of the development will not
substantially alter adversely the impact upon school or other
§ 745-21 FOX POINT CODE § 745-21
1:532
municipal service requirements as anticipated under the basic
zoning.
(c) That the project will not create traffic beyond the capacity of
the street system to serve it, and shall provide adequate offstreet
parking based upon the need generated by the
development.
(d) That the total average residential density of the planned
development based upon the specific design characteristics of
the development proposed will be compatible with the
previously stated criteria. Specifically, the allowable density
for a given development shall be computed by dividing the
gross area of the proposed development exclusive of existing
public right-of-way by the appropriate density factor as follows:
[1] Single-family dwelling: 10,000 square feet per dwelling.
[2] Single family attached or multiple-family dwellings as
follows:
[a] One-bedroom: 4,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
[b] Two-bedroom: 4,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
[c] Three-bedroom: 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
(e) Where the proposed development area includes more than one
dwelling type, the density computation shall be made on the
basis of the proportionate ratio involved. An increase in the
computed allowable maximum density not to exceed 20% may
be permitted as an incentive reward where in the opinion of
the Plan Commission the character and quality of the
development and of the amenities provided justify the
additional density allowance.
(f) That the plan would result in the preservation of open land in a
manner which would enhance the total environmental setting
and desirability of the development and compensate for any
reduction in individual lot area requirements which are
allowed.
(g) That adequate guarantee is provided for permanent
preservation of the residual common open land area resulting
from the application of these regulations by private
reservation, as an enhancement to the development.
(h) The common open area to be reserved shall be protected
against building development by conveying to the municipality
as part of the conditions for project approval an open space
easement over such common open areas restricting them
against any future building or use except as is consistent with
that of providing natural or landscaped open space for the
§ 745-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-21
1:533
esthetic and recreational satisfaction of the surrounding
residences. Buildings or uses for noncommercial recreational
or cultural purposes compatible with the open space objective
may be permitted only where specifically authorized as part
of the development plan or subsequently with the express
approval of the Village Board following approval of building,
site, and operational plans by the Plan Commission and the
Building Board.
(i) The care and maintenance of such common open space
reservations shall be insured either by establishment of
appropriate management organization for the project or by
agreement with the municipality for establishment of a special
service district for the project area on the basis of which the
municipality shall provide the necessary maintenance service
and levy the cost thereof as a special assessment on the tax
bills of properties within the project area. In any case, the
Village shall have the right to carry out and levy an assessment
for the cost of any maintenance which it feels necessary if it is
not otherwise taken care of to the satisfaction of the Village.
The manner of assuring maintenance and assessing such cost
to the individual properties shall be determined prior to the
approval of the final project plans and shall be included in the
title to each property.
(j) Ownership and tax liability of private common open space
reservations shall be established in a manner acceptable to the
municipality and made a part of the conditions of the plan
approval.
(9) In case of proposed commercial developments:
(a) That the economic practicality of the proposed development
can be justified on the basis of purchasing potential,
competitive relationship and demonstrated tenant interest.
(b) That the proposed development will be adequately served by
off-street parking and truck service facilities.
(c) That the locations for entrances and exits have been designed
to prevent unnecessary interference with the safe and efficient
movement of traffic on surrounding streets, and that the
development will not create an effect upon the general traffic
pattern of the area substantially incompatible with that
anticipated under the basic zoning.
(d) That the architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting,
and general site development will result in an attractive and
harmonious service area compatible with and not creating a
substantially adverse effect upon the property values of the
surrounding neighborhood.
§ 745-21 FOX POINT CODE § 745-21
1:534
F. Determination.
(1) The Village Board, after due consideration, may deny the petition,
approve the petition as submitted, or approve the petition subject
to additional conditions. Such approval shall constitute approval of
the specific project development plan.
(2) The approval of a planned development shall be based on and
include as conditions thereto the building, site, and operational
plans for the development as approved, as well as all other
commitments offered or required as regard to project value,
character, or other factors pertinent to an assurance the proposed
development will be carried out basically as presented in the
official submittal plan. Detailed construction and engineering need
not necessarily be completed at the time the project is approved
but the approval of such preliminary plans is conditioned upon the
subsequent submittal and approval of more specific and detailed
plans as the development progresses.
(3) The developer shall enter into an appropriate development
agreement, in recordable form, with the Village to guarantee the
implementation and continued maintenance of the development
according to the terms of the conditions established as part of the
development plan approval. Any change or modifications to such
approvals or the development itself shall be accompanied by an
amendment to the development agreement in recordable form,
which amendment shall leave in full force and effect all prior
development contract terms not specifically amended. Such
contracts shall be binding upon the developer's successors and
assigns and shall run with the land.
(4) Any subsequent change or addition to an approved plan shall first
be submitted for approval to the Plan Commission, and if in the
Commission's opinion such change or addition is not substantial, it
may recommend approval to the Village Board. If such change or
addition is construed to be substantial, a public hearing shall be
held prior to affirmative action by the Village Board on such
recommendation.
(5) Failure to comply with the conditions and regulations as herein
established and as specifically made applicable to a specific project
development shall be cause for termination of the approval for said
project. At least 15 days' notice shall be given to the developer to
appear before the Plan Commission and answer any such charge of
noncompliance. If the Plan Commission finds the charges
substantiated, they shall then submit to the Village Board
recommendations as to specific steps to be taken to terminate the
development as rapidly as possible if the situation is not
satisfactorily adjusted within a specific period. Such a termination
should be in a manner which will achieve the maximum degree of
the intended development objectives consistent with
§ 745-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-21
1:535
§ 745-22. Cultural Overlay District.
environmental compatibility with the neighborhood and with the
general welfare of the community.
G. Signage.
(1) Where the planned development is a residential use, signs for the
purpose of identification of the development may be erected and
maintained in conformity with the procedure, requirements and
standards set forth in Chapter 540 for signs in an institutional
district.
(2) Where the planned development use is commercial, signs or other
devices for advertising the business conducted on the premises
may be erected and maintained in conformity with the procedure,
requirements and standards set forth in Chapter 540 for signs in a
business district.
(3) Signs indicating that a lot, parcel of real estate, or building is for
sale or lease or has been sold may be erected and maintained in
conformity with the procedure, requirements and standards set
forth in §§ 540-4 and 540-5, except that each for sale or lease sign
may have a total area of not to exceed 32 square feet.
A. Uses.
(1) The basic zoning in a Cultural Overlay District continues in effect
and any and all uses as authorized by such basic district continue to
be authorized subject to the provisions of this chapter in respect to
such basic district.
(2) In addition to uses authorized by the basic district, the following
uses may be permitted in a Cultural Overlay District conditioned on
compliance with the provisions of this section:
(a) Art gallery.
(b) Museum.
(c) Library.
B. Procedure. The procedure hereinafter set forth shall be followed before
any use permitted by Subsection A(2) above is authorized. The
applicant shall pay a fee described in Chapter 63 of this Code at the
time of filing the application. There shall be filed with the Village Board:
(1) A statement describing the general character of the intended use
under this section, including the days of the week and the hours of
day that people will be permitted in the premises.
(2) An accurate map of the project area, including its relationship to
surrounding properties.
§ 745-21 FOX POINT CODE § 745-22
1:536
(3) Statistical data on total size of project area, area of open space, and
impact upon municipal services.
(4) The pattern of public and private roads, driveways and parking
facilities.
(5) General landscape treatment.
(6) If a new building or addition or remodeling to an existing building
is considered, then also architectural drawings and sketches
illustrating the design and character of such proposed new building
or addition or changes.
(7) General outline of the intended organizational structure related to
ownership and operation of the project.
(8) Estimated financial factors, such as estimated cost of maintenance
and operation and estimated source or sources of income.
(9) Such other information as the Village Board or the Plan
Commission considers necessary to act under this section.
C. Referral to the Plan Commission. Upon receipt of the above material the
Village Board, if it believes the proposed project might be acceptable,
shall refer the matter to the Plan Commission for study and
investigation. Such Commission, if it desires, may have a public
hearing, formal or informal. The Plan Commission shall make its
recommendation to the Village Board as to the appropriateness and
desirability of the proposed use, and any changes or conditions which it
feels are necessary or advisable.
D. Public hearing. Upon receipt of the Plan Commission's
recommendation, the Village Board may or may not approve the
proposed use. Before taking action to approve such use, the Village
Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposal.
(1) Notice of such hearing shall include reference to the consideration
of the specific proposed project including a brief description
thereof.
(2) Notice of such hearing shall be given by:
(a) Publication once each week for two weeks, the first such
publication to be not less than three weeks prior to the date of
the hearing, and
(b) Mailing a copy of such notice to the owner of each lot or parcel
of real estate that is within 500 feet of the lot or parcel of real
estate on which the proposed use will be exercised. Such
mailing shall be made not lets than three weeks prior to the
date of the hearing. The owners of lots or parcels of real estate
to whom notice is to be given shall be determined from the
records of the Village for the levying of real estate taxes.
§ 745-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-22
1:537
E. Basis for approval. The Plan Commission, in making its
recommendation, and the Village Board, in making its determination,
shall give consideration to and satisfy themselves as to the following in
respect to the proposed use:
(1) That the proposed development is consistent with the spirit and
intent of this chapter; is in conformity with the general character of
the Village, and would not be contrary to the general welfare and
economic prosperity of the Village or the immediate neighborhood.
(2) That the project appears economically sound and that there are or
adequate arrangements have been made to reasonably assure the
continued maintenance of the development.
(3) That the contemplated use will not:
(a) Cause material depreciation in property values in the
immediate neighborhood, nor
(b) Materially adversely affect the use and enjoyment of property
in the immediate neighborhood.
(4) The setbacks will be maintained along any boundary street of the
project area as required by the basic zoning district.
(5) That no building will be permitted closer to the side or rear
boundary line of the project area than required by the applicable
side or rear yard requirements of the adjoining zoning district
abutting along a side or rear property line of the project.
(6) That no building shall exceed the height limitation of the basic
zoning district.
(7) That the project will not create traffic beyond the capacity of the
street system to reasonably serve it, and that there will be
adequate off-street parking based upon the need generated by the
proposed project.
(8) That the care and maintenance of the grounds and buildings
comprising such project will be assured by the establishment of an
appropriate management organization, or by the Village with the
cost to be charged as a special assessment, and that the Village
shall have the right to perform such maintenance work as it feels
reasonably necessary to properly maintain the building and
grounds, if this is not otherwise taken care of, and to levy the cost
thereof as a special assessment. Any such special assessment shall
be due and payable and collectible as all other special assessments,
even though the property may be exempt from general real estate
taxes, in whole or in part.
F. Determination. The Village Board, after due consideration, including
consideration of the report of the Plan Commission, may reject the
project or approve the project as originally proposed or approve it
§ 745-22 FOX POINT CODE § 745-22
1:538
§ 745-23. Wireless telecommunications mobile service facilities.
[Amended 12-10-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-10]
subject to certain changes, modifications, provisions and conditions as
the Board considers reasonably necessary.
G. Deed restrictions; contract. The Village Board shall require that the
owner of the property on which such project will be located and/or any
organization involved in the management and operation of such project
place on the property deed restrictions, or enter into such contract with
the Village as the Village Board determines reasonably necessary to
assure continued compliance with the provisions of this section, and
containing such provisions and conditions as the Village Board deems
proper to regulate the use and maintenance of any changes in the
project. The Village Board may require both deed restrictions and a
contract.
H. Change. No change or addition to any project approved under this
section shall be made without being first submitted to the Plan
Commission for its report to the Village Board and then approval by the
Village Board.
(1) As a condition to the approval of any such requested change or
addition to a project previously approved, the Village Board may
require so much of the procedure for original approval of a project
to be followed as it determines reasonably necessary in order to
make a determination as to the proposed change or addition and
may require modified or additional deed restrictions to be recorded
or an amendment to an existing contract or a new contract, or both
such deed restrictions and contract.
(2) If in the opinion of the Village Board a material change or addition
is proposed, the Village Board shall hold a public hearing in respect
thereto and give notice thereof as provided by Subsection D above
prior to giving approval to the proposed change or addition.
I. Building Board. Approval of a project pursuant to this section does not
affect the necessity of approval by the Building Board in respect to any
new construction or remodeling and the design and placement of any
sign on the premises.
A. Purpose. This section is intended to regulate mobile service facilities to
the full extent allowed by Wisconsin Statutes § 66.0404 and other
applicable laws. Nothing herein is intended to regulate or to authorize
the regulation of mobile service facilities in a manner that is preempted
or prohibited by Wisconsin Statutes § 66.0404 or other applicable laws.
These regulations apply equally to small wireless facilities, however,
nothing herein is intended to regulate or to authorize the regulation of
small wireless facilities in a manner that is preempted or prohibited by
Subpart U to Part 1 of Title 47 of the United States Code of Federal
§ 745-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-23
1:539
Regulations or other applicable laws or regulations. [Amended
4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
B. Definitions. All terms used herein shall have the meaning described in
Wisconsin Statutes § 66.0404(1). Mobile service support structures and
mobile service facilities are referred to herein in some cases as "MSSF."
"Small wireless facilities" as used herein shall have the meaning
described in Part 1 Title 47 CFR Subpart U, § 1.6002(1). [Amended
4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
C. New towers and facilities. The siting and construction of new mobile
service support structures and facilities whether intended to serve
small wireless facilities or any other MSSF, shall be subject to the
following requirements: [Amended 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
(1) Application process. The applicant shall submit a written
application which shall include all of the following information:
(a) The name and business address of, and the contact individual
for, the applicant.
(b) The location of the proposed tower.
(c) The location of the mobile service facility.
(d) A construction plan which describes the tower, equipment,
network components, antennas, transmitters, receivers, base
stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment to be
placed on or around the new tower.
(e) An explanation as to why the applicant chose the proposed
location, and why the applicant did not choose co-location,
including a sworn statement from the responsible party
attesting that co-location within the applicant's service area
would not result in the same mobile service functionality,
coverage, and capacity; is technically infeasible; or is
economically burdensome.
(2) Determination of completeness within 10 days of submittal. The
Village Building Inspector shall review the application and
determine whether the application is complete. If the application
includes all of the foregoing information, the application shall be
found to be complete. The Village Building Inspector shall notify
the applicant in writing within 10 days of receiving the application
if it is found not to be complete, and such notice shall specify in
detail the required information that was incomplete. Applicants are
allowed to resubmit their applications as often as necessary until it
is complete.
(3) Conditional use review procedure. The MSSF shall be a conditional
use, and shall be reviewed pursuant to the following procedures:
§ 745-23 FOX POINT CODE § 745-23
1:540
(a) Plan Commission review. After an application and all required
information has been filed, the Plan Commission shall review
the matter and shall make a recommendation to the Village
Board.
(b) Fee. Any petition shall be accompanied by a fee as set from
time to time by the Village Board to defray the cost of
notification and holding of public hearing. Costs incurred by
the Village in obtaining legal, planning, engineering and other
technical and professional advice in connection with the review
of the conditional use and preparation of the conditions to be
improved shall be charged to the petitioner. Such fee shall not
exceed the limits established by Wisconsin Statutes
§ 66.0404(4)(d).
(c) Determination. The Village Board shall hold a public hearing,
upon Class 2 notice as described in Chapter 985, Wisconsin
Statutes. The Village Board shall make a decision on the
application within a reasonable time after receipt of the Plan
Commission recommendations, provided further that final
action shall be taken within 90 days of receipt of a complete
application unless the time extended by the petitioner. Said
decision shall be stated in writing and a copy made a
permanent part of the Village records. If conditional use status
is not granted, the reasons therefor will be included in such
record. A grant of conditional use status, subsequent changes
or additions thereto and terminations thereof shall be recorded
as follows:
[1] An official record of such conditional grant shall be
prepared by the Village Clerk/Treasurer on a form
prescribed therefor which shall include the description of
the use for which the grant is given and all conditions
attached thereto. A copy of the completed form shall be
recorded at the Milwaukee County Register of Deeds as a
covenant on the title for the premises for which the
conditional use was granted.
[2] The occupancy permit shall be appropriately noted as to
the conditional status granted.
[3] Indication shall also be made on the Zoning Map by
appropriate code number or symbol.
(4) Requirements.
(a) Siting standards.
[1] AMSSF shall:
§ 745-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-23
1:541
[a] Be substantially screened from public view and rightsof-
way by trees, mature vegetation, natural features or
structures on the subject property;
[b] Be completely camouflaged in a manner that is
architecturally compatible with the structure on which
it is mounted and integrated as an integral
architectural element of the structure; or
[c] Not contain guyed towers or lattice towers.
[2] The screening required in this section may exist on the
subject property or be installed as part of the proposed
MSSF or a combination of both.
[3] No MSSF shall be located on a site containing a dwelling,
nor be closer than 500 feet from a property line of an
existing dwelling. No MSSF shall be closer than 500 feet
from the property line of a vacant lot or vacant parcel in a
residentially zoned district or a school, except as follows:
The minimum setback from dwellings and schools may be
reduced to no less than 100 feet for communications
facilities that are up to 100 feet in height that are located
on lots that have existing public utility, state, federal,
Milwaukee County, or Village government structure(s) at
the time of the application, and provided further that the
Board finds in its consideration of the conditional use
order that this reduction is appropriate and consistent
with the intent of the Code under all of the facts and
circumstances presented. [Amended 10-13-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-03]
[4] A MSSF shall be set back from all property lines a distance
equal to the height of the MSSF and comply with any other
zoning setback requirements, subject to the following. If
an applicant provides the Village with engineering
certification showing that the tower is designed to collapse
within a smaller area than the radius equal to the height of
the tower, the smaller area shall be used unless the Village
has and provides to the applicant substantial evidence that
the engineering certification is flawed. The front, side, or
rear setbacks, building size, open space requirements, and
use limitations of Chapter 745, may be modified by the
Village Board in its consideration of the application and
the standards of § 745-23, and shall be determined by the
grant or denial of the conditional use permit. Due to the
constraints of § 66.0404, Wis. Stats., and other laws, the
conditional use approval procedures of this § 745-23 shall
be the exclusive zoning approval procedure for a new or
substantially modified MSSF, eliminating the need for any
other procedural reviews or approvals described in
§ 745-23 FOX POINT CODE § 745-23
1:542
Chapter 745, including but not limited to the review and
approval procedures described §§ 745-18, 745-19 and
745-20; although the intent of such sections may be
considered to the extent that they are relevant to the
standards of this § 745-23. [Amended 10-13-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-03]
[5] A side-mounted MSSF shall not project more than 42
inches from the side of a non-dwelling unit facade, shall
not extend above the highest point of the roof of the
structure and shall be screened and camouflaged as
required herein. The MSSF shall not project into an
easement, driveway or setback unless otherwise specified
in the conditional use permit.
[6] An equipment cabinet shall be located within or adjacent
to the structure on which a MSSF is placed, or located
below natural grade underground, if site conditions permit
and if technically feasible. An equipment cabinet shall be
completely screened from view by compatible wall, fence
or landscaping consistent with Village landscaping
guidelines, except that an equipment cabinet larger than
144 cubic feet may not be required to be totally screened
from view if the Village Board finds, at its discretion, that
the cabinet has been designed with a structure or facade,
materials, colors or detailing that effect a structure which
emulates the residential character of the area.
[7] A security barrier shall be screened from view through the
use of appropriate landscaping materials consistent with
Village landscaping guidelines.
(b) Design standards. The following design criteria apply to
consideration of a conditional use permit for a MSSF, in
addition to others which may be identified and utilized by the
Village Board in its consideration of the conditional use permit
or amendment thereto:
[1] Appearance. The degree to which the MSSF "blends with"
or "disturbs" the setting, the subject property and its
character and use, or neighboring properties and their
character and use; and to the extent allowed by law, the
Village shall consider the cumulative visual effects of
MSSFs and any mount, specifically their appearance or
domination of the skyline, natural and structural features
or terrain, in determining whether to approve a
conditional use permit;
[2] Form. The degree to which the shape of the MSSF and any
equipment cabinet relates to its surroundings;
§ 745-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-23
1:543
[3] Color. A MSSF shall be in natural tones and a nonreflective
color or color scheme appropriate to the background
against which the MSSF would be viewed from a majority
of points within its viewshed. "Natural" tones are those
reflected in the natural features and structural
background against which the MSSF is viewed from a
majority of points within its viewshed. Final colors and
color scheme must be approved by the Village Board;
[4] Size. The silhouette of the MSSF shall be reduced to
minimize visual impact.
[5] Materials. Materials will be durable and maintain their
aesthetic appearance.
(c) Noise and environmental standards.
[1] To the extent allowed by law, the following noise and
environmental standards apply to consideration of a
conditional use permit for a MSSF in addition to the
monitoring requirements of this section:
[a] MSSF shall not generate noise in excess of 50 decibels
(dba).
[b] An environmental assessment is required by the
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) for any
MSSF prior to commencing operations where any of
the following exist: wilderness area; wildlife preserve;
endangered species; historical site; Indian religious
site; floodplain; high intensity white lights in
residential neighborhoods. An environmental
assessment which, at a minimum, conforms with FCC
requirements shall be submitted to the Village for
each MSSF where any of the above exists, and when
the FCC requires such an environmental assessment
to be submitted to the FCC. If the applicant has
determined that an environmental assessment is not
required pursuant to FCC rules, this article and
applicable state law and Village Code, a written
certification to that effect must be submitted to the
Village. If an application has not included an
environmental assessment that the Village finds to be
necessary under the National Environmental Policy
Act, the Village may prepare, or cause to be prepared,
such an environmental assessment at the applicant's
expense. The environmental assessment shall be
amended or revised by the applicant within 30 days
after notice to do so from the Village when
modifications are made or occur on the MSSF. Failure
to amend or revise shall constitute grounds for
§ 745-23 FOX POINT CODE § 745-23
1:544
revocation of the conditional use permit or
amendment.
[2] Within 90 days after the approval of the conditional use
permit, and annually from the date of approval of the
permit or amendment, the permittee shall submit existing
and maximum future projected measurements of noise
from the MSSF for the following:
[a] Existing MSSF: maximum noise from the MSSF.
[b] Existing MSSF plus cumulative: maximum estimate of
noise from the existing MSSF plus the maximum
estimate of noise from the total addition of co-located
MSSFs.
[c] Certification, signed by an acoustical engineer, stating
that noise measurements are accurate and meet
Subsection C(4)(c)[2](a) above.
(d) Co-location and limitations.
[1] A permittee shall cooperate with other personal wireless
service carriers in co-locating antennas and mounts,
provided the proposed co-locators have received a
conditional use permit for the use at such site from the
Village. A permittee shall exercise good faith in co-locating
other personal wireless service carriers and sharing the
permitted site, provided such shared use does not give rise
to a substantial technical level impairment of the ability to
provide the permitted use (i.e., a significant interference
in broadcast or reception capabilities).
[2] All applicants shall demonstrate reasonable efforts in
developing a co-location alternative for their proposal.
Applicants choosing to construct a new mobile service
support structure must provide an explanation as to why
the applicant chose the proposed location and why the
applicant did not choose co-location. Such explanation
shall include a sworn statement from an individual who
has responsibility over the placement of the mobile service
support structure attesting that co-location within the
applicant's search ring would not result in the same mobile
service functionality, coverage, and capacity; is technically
infeasible ; or is economically burdensome to the mobile
service provider.
[3] Failure to comply with the co-location requirements of this
section may result in the denial of a permit request or
revocation of an existing permit.
§ 745-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-23
1:545
(e) Aesthetic requirements. The following aesthetic standards
apply:
[1] In areas where facilities are currently nonexistent or
underground, undergrounding is required.
[2] No new aboveground structures, including colocations on
existing structures, shall be placed within 500 feet of an
historic structure recognized as a historic landmark by the
U.S. Department of the Interior, or the State of Wisconsin
Historical Society. The 500-foot separation is waived for
installations that are completely concealed from view, or
are not visible from locations where the historic structure
can be observed.
[3] Attachments to existing structures shall be designed to be
flush with the existing structure as much as can
reasonably be done, shall be a color that matches the
existing structure and shall be the smallest size possible to
reasonably accommodate the intended purpose. If the
structure to which the attachment is made changes color
due to repainting, resurfacing or other means, the
attachment shall be modified to match the new color.
[4] Any party objecting to the requirements of this Subsection
C(4)(e) shall have an opportunity to demonstrate that the
requirement constitutes an effective prohibition in
violation of state or federal law, upon application to the
Village Board, and the Village Board shall waive the
requirement if it finds the standard to effectively prohibit
the expansion of wireless technology in the Village or
otherwise violate state or federal law.
(5) Permit limitations and general conditions.
(a) In addition to the general authority of the Village to review a
conditional use permit, the conditional use shall be reviewed in
each of every fifth year after the date of permit approval.
Continuation of the use after each such review shall be
specifically conditioned upon continued compliance with all
existing regulations affecting the MSSF.
(b) The conditional use permit shall become null, void and
nonrenewable if the permitted facility is not constructed and
placed into use within one year of the date of Village Board
permit approval, provided that the conditional use permit may
be extended one time for six months if construction has
commenced before expiration of the initial year.
(c) The permit shall expire and the permittee must remove the
MSSF if the use is discontinued for a period in excess of 90
days in any three-hundred-sixty-five-day period. A permittee
§ 745-23 FOX POINT CODE § 745-23
1:546
shall notify the Village in writing at least 30 days prior to
abandonment or discontinuance of the conditional use permit.
(d) If the conditional use permit expires, terminates, is abandoned
or revoked for any reason pursuant to this section, if removal of
the MSSF is required in this article, or if the use is
discontinued pursuant to this section, the MSSF shall be
removed as required herein. If the MSSF is not so removed, the
Village may cause the facility to be removed and all expenses of
removal shall be paid by the owner of the land where the
facility is located. If not paid by the owner within 30 days of
notice by the Village, the Village's costs shall be charged
against the property pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes Section
66.0627, and shall constitute a lien against the subject
property. The term "remove" shall include but not be limited to
the following:
[1] Removal of antenna, equipment cabinet, security barrier
from the site;
[2] Transportation of the antenna, mount, equipment,
equipment cabinet or security barrier to a location off-site;
if the location is within the Village limits, it is subject to
approval by the Village.
[3] Restoration of the site of the MSSF to its natural condition,
except that any landscaping and grading shall remain in
finished condition.
(e) The permittee(s) and the personal wireless service carrier shall
jointly and severally warrant and represent to the Village and
its residents the safety of the MSSF. The personal wireless
service carrier and the permittee(s), upon granting of a
conditional use permit or amendment for a MSSF use, shall
indemnify, protect and hold harmless the Village, its officers
and agents and residents, from and against any and all
liabilities, losses, damages, demands, claims and costs,
including court costs and attorney fees (collectively
"liabilities") incurred by the Village arising directly or
indirectly from: the MSSF use as contemplated herein and
within the conditional use permit; and the installation and
operation of the MSSF. The personal wireless service carriers'
compliance with this section is an express condition of the
conditional use permit and is binding on any and all of personal
wireless service carriers or permittee(s) successors and
assigns. The requirements of this section shall survive the
termination of any such permit or amendment.
(f) The permittee shall carry a commercial general liability
insurance policy with limits of liability not less than $1,000,000
general aggregate, $1,000,000 personal injury and $1,000,000
§ 745-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-23
1:547
each occurrence. Permittee shall also carry umbrella liability
insurance with limits of liability not less than $10,000,000 each
occurrence, $10,000,000 aggregate. Coverage under either
policy shall not contain a standard form pollution exclusion,
nor shall it exclude claims or suits that arise from the effects
of electromagnetic fields or radiation, if such coverage is
available. The maximum deductible shall be $5,000 per
occurrence.
(g) The permittee shall maintain the MSSF to standards that are
imposed by the Village at the time of granting of a permit or
amendment thereto. Such maintenance shall include, but shall
not be limited to, maintenance of the paint, structural integrity
and landscaping. If the permittee fails to maintain the facility,
the Village may undertake the maintenance at the expense of
the permittee or terminate or revoke the permit, at its sole
option. If such maintenance expense is not paid by the owner
within 30 days of notice by the Village, the permittee agrees
that the Village's costs shall constitute a lien upon the subject
property upon its execution and filing with the county
recorder's office.
(h) A conditional use permit or amendment granted to a permittee
is specific to the owner and personal wireless service carrier
and may not be assigned; provided, however, that the personal
wireless service carrier may assign its interest in the permit to
any subsidiary or other affiliate of the personal wireless service
carrier. In the event of such assignment, the assignee shall reexecute
the conditional use permit or amendment thereto
within 30 days of the effective date of the assignment or the
permit shall automatically expire. Permittee shall notify the
Village of any change in ownership or operations of the MSSF
at least 90 days prior to such change taking place for approval
by the Village, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
(i) Where the Village Board finds that strict compliance with the
requirements of this section may result in extraordinary
hardship or are needed to ensure the Village's compliance with
federal or state law, the Village Board may modify such
requirements only upon a written showing by the permittee(s)
of noncompliance with applicable law or extraordinary
hardship so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured. "Hardship," as used herein, shall include, but
not be limited to, a finding that special circumstances
applicable to the property, including its size, shape,
topography, location or surroundings, will deprive such
property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the same
classification in the same zoning district through the strict
application of this chapter. In granting such modifications, the
§ 745-23 FOX POINT CODE § 745-23
1:548
Village Board may require such conditions as will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the objective of the standards
or requirements so varied and modified.
(j) Any violation of the terms of this section or the conditional use
permit may result in revocation by the Village of the
conditional use permit. The Village may revoke the conditional
use permit upon 60 days' prior notice, if, in its sole judgment, it
determines the MSSF poses a safety risk. If such safety risk(s)
are not cured by the permittee within 60 days after notice from
the Village, the Village may revoke or modify the conditional
use permit. Acceptance of any portion of the conditional use
permit is acceptance of the entire conditional use permit and
the terms of this section.
(k) Within 90 days after issuance of the FCC operational permit,
the personal wireless service carrier shall provide a copy of
such permit to the Village and register the MSSF, providing
information and data as may be requested by the Village. Any
change in the permit or registration data shall be filed with the
Village within 30 days after the change is made. The personal
wireless service carrier shall submit to the Village a copy of its
FCC Form 600 prior to the Village's approval of final inspection
of a building permit for the MSSF or portion thereof.
(l) The Village and its agents are authorized to enter on the
subject property and MSSF site for the purpose of inspection
and determining compliance with this section and the
provisions of the conditional use permit.
(6) Limitations upon authority. The Village review and action in the
matter shall be subject to the limitations imposed by Wisconsin
Statutes Section 66.0404(4). In the event the applicant believes the
Village has exceeded its authority in this regard, the applicant shall
notify the Village Board in writing and the Village Board reserves
the right to reconsider the matter, to ensure that applicable laws
are followed.
D. Modifications. The construction of modifications to an existing mobile
service support structure or mobile service facility, and any installation
of a small wireless facility on an existing structure, shall be subject to
the following requirements: [Amended 4-9-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-03]
(1) Substantial modification.
(a) Application and review process. A substantial modification is
regulated the same as a new structure or facility, as described
in Subsection C above, except that the required plans should
describe the proposed modifications, rather than describe the
new structure or facility.
§ 745-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-23
1:549
§ 745-24. Setback exceptions.
(2) Not substantial modifications.
(a) Application information. The applicant shall submit a written
application that describes the applicant's basis for concluding
that the modification is not substantial, and all of the following
information:
[1] The name and business address of, and the contact
individual for, the applicant.
[2] The location of the affected support structure.
[3] The location of the proposed facility.
(b) Completeness determination within five days. The Village
Building Inspector will determine whether the application is
complete. If the application includes all of the foregoing
information, the application shall be found to be complete. The
Village Building Inspector must notify the applicant in writing
within five days of receiving the application if it is found not to
be complete, specifying in detail the required information that
was incomplete. The applicant may resubmit as often as
necessary until it is complete.
(c) Fee. Any petition shall be accompanied by a fee as set from
time to time by the Village Board to defray the cost of review.
Costs incurred by the Village in obtaining legal, planning,
engineering and other technical and professional advice in
connection with the review of the conditional use and
preparation of the conditions to be improved shall be charged
to the petitioner. Such fee shall not exceed the limits
established by Wisconsin Statutes § 66.0404(4)(d).
(d) Determination. The Village Board shall make a decision on the
application within a reasonable time after receipt of the Plan
Commission recommendations, provided further that final
action shall be taken within 45 days of receipt of a complete
application unless the time is extended by the petitioner. Said
decision shall be stated in writing and a copy made a
permanent part of the Village records. If approval is not
granted, the reasons therefor will be included in such record.
(e) Limitations upon authority. The Village review and action in the
matter shall be subject to the limitations imposed by Wisconsin
Statutes § 66.0404(4), and such other laws as may apply which
may include 47 U.S.C.A. § 1455. In the event the applicant
believes the Village has exceeded its authority in this regard,
the applicant shall notify the Village Board in writing and the
Village Board reserves the right to reconsider the matter, to
ensure that applicable laws are followed.
§ 745-23 FOX POINT CODE § 745-24
1:550
§ 745-25. Special exceptions at boundary of zoning district.
A. Where the side or rear yard of a lot abuts on the east right-of-way of
I-43, the setback required for either such side yard or rear yard as
provided by the zoning district in which said lot is located shall be
maintained except as hereinafter provided.
B. On application to and approval by the Building Board, a building or
structure for an accessory use may be located within the area otherwise
required for a side yard or rear yard setback, provided it is not closer to
the right-of-way line of I-43 than three feet, and landscaping adequate
to shield such accessory building or structure from said right-of-way is
planted and maintained.
C. Application for approval of the construction of such building or
structure shall be made to the Building Board along with such drawing
or plat as said Board considers adequate to show the proposed location
of such building or structure, and also to show the proposed location
and type of planting that will be made and maintained to shield such
proposed building or structure from the right-of-way. If the Building
Board determines such planting is adequate to so screen said proposed
building or structure and the building or structure otherwise complies
with the Code of the Village of Fox Point, it shall approve the
construction of such accessory building or structure and the
landscaping; otherwise, it shall disapprove. The planting approved for
such screening shall be done not later than one year after the granting
of a building permit for the building or structure, and after being
planted shall be maintained in a neat manner, and in the event of the
death of any such planting, replacement shall be made.
D. Failure to make the planting within the time herein provided or to
maintain the same as herein provided shall constitute a violation of this
section, and each day such condition continues to exist shall be a
separate violation. In the event the Building Board determines that the
planting does not meet the standards herein established, an appeal may
be taken to the Board of Appeals as in other cases.
E. The Building Inspector shall not issue a building permit for the
construction of a building or structure located as authorized by this
section until the landscaping required by this section has been
approved as above provided.
A. Where a use of property exists which is authorized in a zoning district
(hereinafter referred to as "basic district") as a special exception, such
use may be authorized to extend, not to exceed 40 feet, into property in
a bordering zoning district (hereinafter referred to as "bordering
district"), even though such use would not otherwise be permitted in
the bordering district.
B. Application shall be made to the Village Board requesting such
extension. Such application shall be in writing signed by the owner of
§ 745-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-25
1:551
the property in the bordering district and shall set forth the use which
exists in the basic district and which it is desired to extend into the
bordering district and the reason such extension is requested. A filing
fee as described in Chapter 63 of this Code shall be paid to the Village
at the time of filing the application.
C. The Village Board shall refer such application to the Plan Commission
for its consideration. The Plan Commission shall consider the matter
and report to the Village Board making its recommendation as to
whether or not such extended use should be authorized, and may
recommend that such extended use be subject to conditions and
safeguards which it considers necessary to or desirable for the public
interest, and to meet the requirements of this section.
D. The Plan Commission in acting on the request shall take into
consideration:
(1) Uses authorized in the basic district.
(2) The particular use existing on the property involved in the basic
district.
(3) Uses authorized in the bordering district.
(4) The particular use existing on the property involved in the
bordering district.
(5) The character and use requested for the extended use, including
proposed buildings and traffic layout.
(6) The character and use of property and buildings in the vicinity of
the property which would be subject to the extended use.
(7) Such other matters as the Plan Commission considers germane to
the question.
E. The Plan Commission may recommend the authorization of the
extended use if it is of the opinion that the extended use:
(1) Will not be injurious to the other properties in the neighborhood
and will not interfere with the use and enjoyment of their property
by persons residing or working on other property in the
neighborhood;
(2) Will not cause a substantial depreciation in the property value in
the neighborhood; and
(3) Will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
chapter.
F. On the receipt of the recommendation of the Plan Commission, the
Village Board shall review the same and, applying the standards above
set forth for the Plan Commission in considering the matter, shall make
its own determination as to whether or not to authorize the extended
§ 745-25 FOX POINT CODE § 745-25
1:552
§ 745-26. Modification of open area.
use, and the Village Board may authorize such use or may deny it, or
may authorize it subject to conditions and safeguards as above provided
in respect to the Plan Commission in making its recommendation.
G. Before taking action to authorize such use, the Village Board shall hold
a public hearing on the proposal.
(1) Notice of such hearing shall include reference to the consideration
of the specific proposed extended use, including a brief description
thereof.
(2) Notice of such hearing shall be given by:
(a) Publication once each week for two weeks, the first such
publication to be not less than three weeks prior to the date of
the hearing; and
(b) Mailing a copy of such notice to the owner of each lot or parcel
of real estate that is within 500 feet of the real estate on which
the proposed use will be exercised. Such mailing shall be made
not less than three weeks prior to the date of the hearing. The
owners of lots or parcels of real estate to whom notice is to be
given shall be determined from the records of the Village for
the levying of real estate taxes.
H. Any extended use so granted is limited solely to that use. If the use of
the property in the basic district is changed, this does not authorize the
changed use in the bordering district.
I. The above provision shall apply when the basic district is in another
municipality, as well as when it is in the Village of Fox Point.
J. Discontinuance of an extended use for a period of six months or failure
to comply with all conditions and safeguards specifically made
applicable to the extended use shall be cause for termination of the
authorization of said extended use. At least 15 days' notice shall be
given to the owner of the real estate on which the extended use is
authorized to appear before the Village Board and answer any charge of
noncompliance. If the Village Board finds the charges substantiated, it
may terminate the authority for such extended use.
K. Any person feeling aggrieved by the action of the Village Board in
authorizing, including the authorization subject to conditions and
safeguards, or refusal to authorize an extended use, or the termination
of such authorization as provided in Subsection J above, may appeal to
the Board of Appeals in the same manner provided by Wisconsin
Statutes for appeals to the Board of Appeals.122
122. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 14.25, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
4-11-2006. See now § 745-4B.
§ 745-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-26
1:553
A. The open area, but not the setback requirement, for a lot in any
residence district may be reduced as set forth herein, below the open
area required by this chapter.
B. Application shall be made to the Building Board which, along with other
papers required for a building permit, shall include a plat plan showing,
among other things, the location of the proposed structure on the lot,
all in such detail as the Building Board may reasonably require.
C. If the erection of the proposed structure will reduce the open area of
the lot on which it is to be built more than 5% below the open area
requirement for the lot, then the following additional obligations shall
apply:
(1) The application to the Building Board shall include a plan, in such
detail as the Building Board may require, showing: the location and
type (Genus and species) of all trees six inches in diameter at
breast height (dbh) or larger that are within the greater of the
following areas (whether located on the subject parcel or
elsewhere):
(a) Within 20 feet of the proposed structure; or
(b) Within an area that is affected in any manner by the proposed
construction activity.
(2) Except as to any tree that is being removed, the "tree protection
zone" of all trees that are three inches or larger dbh shall be
preserved and protected from any disturbance, by the exclusion of
all heavy equipment and heavy machinery. The tree protection zone
shall be marked on the property. The tree protection zone shall
mean that area around a tree trunk that extends vertically from the
top of the tree canopy to 36 inches below ground level and
horizontally in all directions from the outer edge of the tree trunk
one foot for every inch of the tree's diameter at breast height (dbh).
(3) If any tree that the Village Forester deems to be desirable, and that
is three inches or larger dbh, will be removed in conjunction with
the construction, whether the tree is on public or private property,
tree replacement is required. The Village Forester shall determine
what replacement tree(s) is required. The replacement tree(s)
required by the Village Forester shall have a total diameter at
breast height (dbh) of 50% up to 100% of the total dbh of the
removed tree(s). No replacement tree shall have a dbh of less than
1.5 inches.
D. The reduction of open area shall be authorized when the Building
Board, after its examination of the application and accompanying
documents and after viewing the site of the proposed structure, has
found as a fact:
§ 745-26 FOX POINT CODE § 745-26
1:554
§ 745-27. Public utility buildings.
Any building any portion of which will be above the grade of the lot on
which it is erected which will be used by a public utility may be erected in
any district in the Village, provided the provisions of this chapter, except
the purpose for which the building is to be used, are complied with, and
provided further the application for the building permit is referred by
the Building Inspector to the Plan Commission and the Plan Commission
determines that the building, when erected, is reasonably necessary for the
public convenience and welfare and in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this chapter, and the Plan Commission may authorize the
issuance of a permit subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards to
accomplish such purpose.
§ 745-28. Property not in specified district.
In the event that there is any land in the Village of Fox Point which, as
shown by the Official Zoning Map or amendments thereto, is not included
in a zoning district, or if the provisions of the ordinance placing any land in
a zoning district are held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, either
in its entirety or as to a specific lot, piece or parcel of land, then each such
lot, piece or parcel of land shall be considered as in a C Residence District.
§ 745-29. Enforcement by Building Inspector.
It shall be among the duties of the Building Inspector of the Village of Fox
Point to see that the requirements of this chapter are met and the provisions
thereof enforced insofar as lies within his power under the laws of the State
of Wisconsin and the ordinances of the Village of Fox Point. Appeals from
the decisions of the Building Inspector involving this chapter shall be taken
to the Board of Appeals as provided for in § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., and acts
amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto.
§ 745-30. Filing plans and specifications.
A copy of the complete plans and specifications for the erection or alteration
of any permanent structure within the Village of Fox Point, including
sewage disposal and water system, with all information necessary for the
completion of the work, together with a statement of ownership and a
survey of the property showing thereon the exact location of all existing and
proposed buildings and systems, shall be filed with the Building Inspector,
but no such work shall be commenced by any person without first receiving
(1) That the reduction of open area of the lot resulting from the
erection of the proposed structure will not cause a substantial
depreciation of the property values of the neighborhood; and
(2) That the erection of the proposed structure will not reduce the
open area of the lot on which it is to be built more than 15% below
the open area requirement for the lot.
§ 745-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-30
1:555
a permit from the Building Inspector, who shall issue or refuse such permit
in writing within 20 days after proper application therefor.
§ 745-31. Certificate of occupancy.123
No premises shall be occupied or used and no buildings now or hereafter
erected or altered shall be occupied, used or changed until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Inspector of the Village
of Fox Point stating that the building or proposed use of the building or
premises complies with the provisions of the laws of the State of Wisconsin
and the ordinances of the Village of Fox Point with respect to the health,
building and zoning regulations.
§ 745-32. Enforcement by peace officers.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any officer of the
Village of Fox Point with the powers of a peace officer from instituting
proper proceedings for the restraint of violation of this chapter or the
apprehension and punishment of a person violating any of the provisions
of this chapter in the manner provided by law. Furthermore, the proper
authorities or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who shall be
specially damaged by violation of this chapter may, in addition to other
remedies, institute an action or other proceeding pursuant to the provisions
of § 62.23(7)(f), Wis. Stats., and all acts amendatory thereof and
supplementary thereto.
§ 745-33. Continuing violations.
Each day during which a violation of this chapter exists, regardless of
whether the violation occurred by reason of an act of commission or a mere
failure to act or an act of omission, shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 745-34. Violation and penalties.
A. Any person violating, disobeying, circumventing, neglecting or refusing
to comply with or resisting the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of violation of this chapter, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to all provisions, remedies, and
penalties as set forth in § 1-4 of the Village Code.
B. If any person shall sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of any portion of a
lot subsequent to the application for and during the life of a building
permit for the erection of a building upon said lot, issued pursuant to an
application for such permit, or after the erection of a building whereby
the area of said lot is reduced below the minimum requirement of this
chapter, said person shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and
subject to the penalty therefor hereinabove provided.
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 745-30 FOX POINT CODE § 745-34
1:556
§ 745-35. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended from time to time following the procedure
as provided by Wisconsin Statutes then in effect for amendment of zoning
ordinances.
§ 745-36. Board of Appeals. [Amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-12]
C. No person purchasing land within the Village of Fox Point whereby the
transferor violates this chapter as specified in § 745-30 may include the
area of the land so purchased as a portion of his lot for the purpose of
computing the area thereof on application for a building permit, except
insofar as the land so purchased was in excess of the amount required
by the transferor at the time of the transfer in order that the
transferor's lot might comply with the minimum requirements of this
chapter applicable thereto.
A. The Village President, pursuant to the Wisconsin Statutes, shall, subject
to the confirmation by the Board of Trustees, appoint members and
alternate members of a Board of Appeals with terms of office
commencing April 1 and shall designate one of the members as
Chairperson.
B. The Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and authority vested in
such a board by § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., and all acts amendatory
thereof and supplementary thereto.
C. In addition to the authority granted under § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., the
Board of Appeals shall have the power and authority to grant a special
exception from the dimensional requirements of this chapter where the
Board of Appeals finds it necessary, based upon the facts of an
individual case, to provide a reasonable accommodation to a disabled
person, subject to the following. A special exception under this section
may waive or modify the dimensional requirements of applicable zoning
regulation(s) only to the extent reasonably required to provide a
reasonable accommodation for the disability. A special exception shall
not fundamentally alter the nature of a program (e.g., altering the
fundamental purpose of the zoning regulation) or impose undue
financial or administrative burdens on the Village of Fox Point.
Dimensional requirements for which a special exception may be
granted under this section are limited to open area, front yard, rear
yard and side yard requirements of applicable zoning district
regulations. A special exception granted under this section should
generally expire upon the termination of the occupancy of the property
by the disabled person, and the Board of Appeals may so condition the
grant of the special exception and require the recording of a deed
restriction setting forth the terms of the special exception and the
termination thereof. For purposes of this section, "disability" shall be
construed to have the meaning set forth in 42 U.S.C. § 12102, Title II of
§ 745-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 745-36
1:557
§ 745-37. Variances.
As a special exception, where there is a violation of this chapter and no
order or decision of the Building Inspector has been made in respect to such
violation, application may be made to the Board of Appeals for variance,
and the Board shall hear and decide such application as though it was an
appeal from an order of the Building Inspector requiring compliance with
this chapter.
Part VII: Building Codes
Chapter 756
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 738.
Zoning — See Ch. 745.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 770.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 781.
Plumbing — See Ch. 825.
Swimming pools, wading pools and
spas — See Ch. 842.
the Americans With Disabilities Act, and regulations pertaining thereto,
as amended from time to time.
D. The Board of Appeals may adopt such rules or regulations with respect
to the time of its meetings and the procedure at its meetings as it may
deem appropriate and shall, subject to the Wisconsin Statutes
applicable thereto, specify the procedure pursuant to which appeals
shall be taken to it, be heard and disposed of by it. All rules or
regulations adopted by the Board of Appeals shall be reduced to written
form, and the original thereof, identified by signature of the
Chairperson of the Board, shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk/
Treasurer.
E. Wherever in the ordinances of the Village of Fox Point reference is
made to a Board of Appeals, it shall be deemed to refer to the Board
appointed pursuant to this section of this chapter.
F. In Board of Appeals actions involving special exceptions and variances,
in addition to any notice requirements under any applicable state or
federal law, or as otherwise provided in the Village of Fox Point Code,
the Village Clerk/Treasurer, or his or her designee, shall provide notice
by first class mailing to the owners or occupants of all properties within
500 feet of the subject property at least 21 days prior to any hearing or
proceeding.
G. A filing fee as described in Chapter 63 of this Code shall be paid to the
Village at the time of filing any application with the Board of Appeals.
§ 745-36 FOX POINT CODE § 745-37
1:558
ARTICLE I
General
§ 756-1. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the design, construction,
alteration, demolition and moving of all buildings and structures.
§ 756-2. Title.
These regulations shall be known and cited as "Municipal Building Code"
and shall be construed to secure their expressed intent and to ensure public
safety, health and welfare insofar as they are dependent upon building
construction.
§ 756-3. Application of Wisconsin Commercial Building Code.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-07]
The Wisconsin Commercial Building Code, Chapters SPS 361 through 366
of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, inclusive, and all amendments,
renumbering, or reassignment to other administrative agencies regarding
such administrative authority, are hereby made a part of this chapter by
reference with respect to those classes of buildings to which such provisions
apply. A copy of said code is on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk/
Treasurer.
§ 756-4. Application of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code.
The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, Chapters SPS 320 through 325,
inclusive, and all amendments thereto are hereby made a part of this
chapter by reference and shall apply to all one- and two-family dwellings
and alterations and additions thereto, the initial construction of which
was commenced after the effective dates of the various chapters of the
Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. A copy of said code is on file in the office
of the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 756-5. Application of Wisconsin Uniform Building Code.
All buildings and structures hereafter erected, altered, repaired, moved or
demolished that are used or designed to be used for the purpose herein
defined shall comply in full with the requirements of this chapter.
A. Zoning laws. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to repeal,
modify or constitute an alternative to any lawful zoning regulations.
B. New buildings. The construction requirements of the Wisconsin
Uniform Building Code shall apply to all buildings not covered under
§§ 756-3 and 756-4.
C. Existing buildings. This chapter shall also apply to buildings and
conditions described in this section.
§ 756-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-5
1:559
(1) An existing building to be occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling
which building was not previously so occupied.
(2) An existing structure that is altered or repaired, when the cost of
such alterations or repair during the life of the structure exceeds
50% of the equalized value of the structure, said value to be
determined by the Assessor of the municipality.
(3) Additions and alterations, regardless of cost, made to an existing
building shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. The
provisions of Subsection D of this section shall also apply.
(4) Roof coverings. Whenever more than 25% of the roof covering of a
building is replaced in any twelve-month period, all roof covering
shall be in conformity with applicable sections of this chapter.
(5) Additions and alterations. Any addition or alteration, regardless of
cost, made to a building shall be made in conformity with
applicable sections of this chapter.
D. Alterations and repairs. The following provisions shall apply to
buildings altered or repaired:
(1) Alterations. When not in conflict with any regulations, alterations
to any existing building or structure, accommodating a legal
occupancy and use but of nonconforming type of construction
which involve either the structural members of floors or roofs,
beams, girders, columns, bearing or other walls, room heating and
air-conditioning systems, arrangement, light and ventilation,
changes in location of exit stairways or exits or any of the above,
then such existing construction shall be made to conform to the
minimum requirements of this chapter applicable to such
occupancy and use and given type of construction.
(2) Repairs. Repairs for purposes of maintenance or replacements in
any existing building or structure which do not involve the
structural portions of the building or structure or which do not
affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or
efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection or exterior
aesthetic appearance and which do not increase a given occupancy
and use shall be deemed minor repairs.
(3) Alterations when not permitted. When an existing building or
structure, which for any reason whatsoever does not conform to the
regulations of this chapter, has deteriorated from any cause
whatsoever to an extent greater than 50% of the equalized value of
the building or structure, no alterations or moving of such building
or structure shall be permitted. Any such building or structure shall
be considered a menace to public safety and welfare and shall be
ordered vacated and thereafter demolished and debris removed
from the premises.
§ 756-5 FOX POINT CODE § 756-5
1:560
(4) Alterations and repairs required. When any of the structural
members of any building or structure have deteriorated from any
cause whatsoever to less than their required strength, the owner of
such a building or structure shall cause such structural members to
be restored to their required strength, failing in which the building
or structure shall be considered a menace to public safety and shall
be vacated and thereafter no further occupancy or use of the same
shall be permitted until the regulations of this chapter are complied
with.
(5) Extent of deterioration. The amount and extent of deterioration of
any existing building or structure shall be determined by the
Building Inspector.
(6) Use of unsanitary building. It shall be unlawful to occupy or use or
permit the occupancy or use of any building or structure that is
unsanitary or dilapidated, or deteriorated, or out of repair, thereby
being unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use until the
regulations of this chapter have been complied with.
§ 756-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-5
1:561

ARTICLE II
Building Inspector and Permits
§ 756-6. Building Inspector.
There is hereby created the Department of Building Inspection. The
Building Inspector, appointed by the municipality, shall act as head of this
Department.
§ 756-7. Permits.
A. Duties. The Building Inspector is vested with the authority and
responsibility to enforce all laws controlling safe building construction.
He shall make periodic inspection of existing public buildings to
determine their safety. He shall make inspections at the site of buildings
damaged, by any cause whatsoever, to determine the safety of buildings
affected thereby.
B. Rights. The Building Inspector, or his authorized agent, shall have the
power and authority, at all reasonable hours, for any proper purpose, to
enter upon any public or private premises and make inspection thereof
and to require the production of the permit for any building, plumbing,
electrical or heating work being done or the required license therefor.
No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such
premises to the above-described representatives of the municipality
while in the performance of their duties.
C. Records. There shall be kept, in the Department of Building Inspection,
a record of all applications for building permits in a book for such
purpose, and each permit shall be regularly numbered in the order of
its issue. Also, a record showing the number, description and size of all
buildings erected, indicating the kind of materials used and the cost of
each building and aggregate cost of all buildings in the various classes,
shall be kept. There shall be kept, in the Department of Building
Inspection, a record of all inspections made and of all removal and
condemnation of buildings and a record of all fees collected showing
the date of their receipt. The Building Inspector shall make a written
annual report to the governing body of the municipality relative to these
matters.
A. Permits required. No building or structure, or any part thereof, shall
hereafter be built, enlarged, altered or demolished within the
municipality or moved into, within or out of the municipality except as
hereinafter provided, unless a permit therefor shall first be obtained by
the owner or his agent from the Building Inspector. Permits required
are as follows:
(1) Building.
(2) Air conditioning. See § 756-34A(2).
(3) Wrecking or razing.
§ 756-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-7
1:563
(4) Heating.
(5) Moving of buildings.
(6) Occupancy.
(7) Reroofing and residing.
(8) Other permits as required by governing municipality.
B. Application for permits. Application for a building permit shall be made
in writing upon a blank form to be furnished by the Building Inspector,
by the owner of the subject property, the owner's agent who shall
provide proof of such agency to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector, or a person having a legal and enforceable right to procure
title or interest in the property as would allow the right to build
thereon. With such application, there shall be submitted to the Building
Inspector three complete sets of plans, specifications and three copies
of a survey. A building permit shall be issued to an individual or entity
who has acquired title in the property.
(1) Survey. The survey shall be prepared and certified by a surveyor
registered by the State of Wisconsin; shall be made, in no case,
prior to one year prior to the issuance of a building permit; and
shall bear the date of the survey. The certified survey shall also
show the following:
(a) Location and dimensions of all buildings on the lot, both
existing and proposed.
(b) Dimensions of the lot.
(c) Dimensions showing all setbacks to all buildings on the lot.
(d) Proposed grade of proposed structure, to city or village datum.
(e) Grade of lot and of road opposite lot.
(f) Grade and setback of adjacent buildings. If adjacent lot is
vacant, submit elevation of nearest buildings on same side of
the road.
(g) Type of monuments at each corner of lot.
(h) Watercourses or existing drainage ditches.
(i) Seal and signature of surveyor.
(j) A clear delineation of the private property line adjacent to the
Village right-of-way.
(2) Plans and specifications. All plans and specifications must be
drawn at a scale that adequately illustrates all of the required
information in sufficient detail to demonstrate code compliance, to
the satisfaction of the Village staff reviewing the application, on
§ 756-7 FOX POINT CODE § 756-7
1:564
paper or cloth in ink, or by some other process that will not fade or
obliterate, and shall disclose the existing and proposed provisions
for water supply, sanitary sewer connections and surface water
drainage. All dimensions shall be accurately figured. Drawings that
do not show all necessary detail shall be rejected.
(a) A complete set of plans for residential construction shall
consist of:
[1] All elevations.
[2] All floor plans.
[3] Complete construction details.
[4] Fireplace details (3/4 inch per foot) showing cross-section
of fireplace and flues.
[5] Plans of garage when garage is to be built immediately or
location of garage when it is to be built at a later date.
(b) All plans shall remain on file in the office of the Building
Inspector until at least one year after the completion of the
building, after which time the Building Inspector may return
the same to the owner, may keep them for public record or may
destroy them.
C. Waiver of some requirements. At the option of the Building Inspector,
plans, data, specifications and survey need not be submitted with an
application for permit to execute minor alterations and repairs to any
building, structure or equipment, provided the proposed construction is
sufficiently described in the application for permit.
D. Seal of registered engineer or architect. All plans, data and
specifications for the construction of any building or structure or for
any construction in connection with existing buildings and structures,
other than one- and two-family residences, containing more than
50,000 cubic feet, total volume, submitted with an application for
permit shall bear the seal of the registered architect or engineer. The
plans shall also be stamped as approved as required by the Department
of Safety and Professional Services of the State of Wisconsin. Such
building or structure shall be constructed under the supervision of an
architect or engineer who shall be responsible for its erection in
accordance with the approved plans. No permit shall be granted for
such structure unless such construction will be under the supervision of
an architect or engineer, as required by the Wisconsin Statutes. A
written statement to this effect shall be filed by the architect or
engineer, with the Building Inspector, with the application for permit.
E. Drainage.
(1) Grading of lots.
§ 756-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-7
1:565
(a) A drainage plan is required:
[1] For applications for the construction of a new principal
building;
[2] For applications for land disturbing activity requiring a
permit that affects the surface area of 4,000 square feet or
more;
[3] For applications for land disturbing activity (other than
tree removal) on the face of a ravine bluff or lake bluff;
[4] For all circumstances where a fill permit is required
pursuant to Chapter 272 of this Code; and
[5] When required by the Village in particular cases due to
particular concerns arising in the application.
(b) The plans shall show the present and proposed grades of the
lot on which it is proposed to erect the building for which a
building permit is sought and of the immediately adjoining
property in sufficient detail to indicate the surface water
drainage before and after the completion of grading. No permit
shall be issued if the erection of the building and the proposed
grade shall unreasonably obstruct the natural flow of water
from the surface of adjoining property or obstruct the flow of
any existing ravine, ditch, drain or stormwater sewer draining
neighboring property, unless suitable provision is made for
such flow by means of an adequate ditch or pipe, which shall be
shown on the plans and shall be constructed so as to provide
continuous drainage at all times. The plan shall include a preand
postdevelopment flow analysis which must address all of
the following issues:
[1] Flows off the property in the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events in both conditions.
[2] If there will be fill brought to the site, where the excavated
soils will be stockpiled until grading activities occur; also,
if soils will be delivered to the site and stockpiled prior to
grading, identify these locations.
[3] Identify the cuts and fills on the property.
[4] Identify the depth and width of flows at the property line,
in both conditions.
[5] Identify how the stormwater that drains toward the road
will be tied into the Village system.
(2) Stormwater drains. No dwelling shall be erected nor shall existing
provisions for conveyance of water from the roof of any dwelling be
altered or replaced unless provision is made to convey water from
§ 756-7 FOX POINT CODE § 756-7
1:566
the roof of the dwelling in such a manner that such water will not,
directly or indirectly, pass thence into the sanitary sewer system.
No stormwater or surface water drains may be connected with
the sanitary sewer system, whether installed above or below the
surface of the ground.
F. Building Inspector to issue permit.
(1) If the Building Inspector finds that the proposed building will
comply in every respect with this chapter, other municipal
ordinances, and all laws of the State of Wisconsin, and lawful
orders issued pursuant thereto, he shall issue a building permit.
After being approved, the plans and specifications shall not be
altered in any respect which involves any of the above-mentioned
ordinances, laws or orders or which involves the safety of the
building, except with the written consent of the Building Inspector
filed with such application.
(2) In case adequate plans are presented, the Building Inspector, at his
discretion, may issue a permit for a part of the building before
receiving the plans and specifications of the entire building. It shall
be unlawful to commence work on any building or alteration before
the building permit has been issued. The issuance of a permit upon
the plans and specifications shall not prevent the Building
Inspector from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said
plans and specifications or from preventing building operations
being carried on thereunder when in violation of any ordinances of
the municipality or laws of the State of Wisconsin or lawful orders
issued pursuant thereto.
(3) For the construction of buildings requiring approval of the
Department of Safety and Professional Services of the State of
Wisconsin, no permit shall be issued until such approved plans are
received by the Building Inspector.
G. Inspector may revoke permits.
(1) The Building Inspector may revoke any permit, occupancy permit
or approval issued under the regulations of this chapter and may
stop construction or use of approved new materials, equipment,
methods of construction, devices or appliances for any of the
following reasons:
(a) Whenever there is a violation of any regulation of this chapter
or of any other ordinance, law or lawful orders or Wisconsin
Statute relating to the same subject matter.
(b) Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes
dangerous to life or property.
(c) Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provision of
the application for permit or of the permit.
§ 756-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-7
1:567
(d) Whenever, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, there is
inadequate supervision provided on the job site.
(e) Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been
made in the application for permit, plans, drawings, data,
specifications or certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance
of the permit or approval was based.
(f) Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of an
approval or occupancy given by the Building Inspector for the
use of any new materials, equipment, methods of construction
devices or appliances.
(2) The notice revoking a permit, occupancy permit or approval shall
be in writing and may be served upon the applicant for the permit,
owner of the premises and his agent, if any, and on the person
having charge of construction.
(3) A revocation placard shall also be posted upon the building
structure, equipment or premises in question by the Building
Inspector.
(4) After the notice is served upon the persons as aforesaid and posted,
it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any
construction operation whatsoever on the premises and the permit
which has been so revoked shall be null and void, and before any
construction or operation is again resumed, a new permit, as
required by this chapter, shall be procured and fees paid therefor,
and thereafter the resumption of any construction or operation
shall be in compliance with the regulation of this chapter.
H. Fees. Before receiving a building permit, the owner or his agent shall
pay the applicable fee as described in Chapter 63 of this Code. In
applying the provisions of this chapter in respect to new work, existing
buildings, alterations and repairs, the physical value of the work shall
be determined by the Building Inspector on the basis of current costs or
as otherwise provided in the local ordinance.
I. Expiration and renewal. [Added 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
(1) Permit expiration. Permits that are subject to the Wisconsin
Administrative Code SPS Chapter 320 shall expire as described
therein. All other permits shall expire 24 months from the date of
issuance of the permit, unless a shorter duration is prescribed by
other applicable laws or ordinances. All work depicted in the
approved plans shall be completed prior to the expiration of the
permit, except as follows. The Building Inspector may extend in
writing the duration to no later than June 1 following the expiration
date, for the sole purpose of completing exterior seeding, sodding,
planting and related site work depicted in the approved plans, in
the event the Building Inspector finds that weather conditions
§ 756-7 FOX POINT CODE § 756-7
1:568
§ 756-8. Approved plans.
unreasonably inhibit or prevent completion of such work during the
term.
(2) Permit renewal. In the event the work is not completed as required
prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit may be renewed
pursuant to this subsection if all of the conditions and requirements
of this subsection are satisfied. The permit holder must apply for
renewal prior to the expiration of the permit, or within 30 days
following the expiration of the permit. The renewal application
must be for completion of the same work, with the same plans, as
was initially approved when the initial permit was issued; unless
such initial plans were later revised and approved by all applicable
authorities of the Village, in which case the renewal application
shall be for completion of the revised work and revised plans, as
previously approved by the Village. The fee described in Chapter 63
of this Code shall be paid for the renewal permit, except that the
amount shall be calculated based upon the work that remains to be
done, not based upon all of the work contemplated by the initial
permit application. No more than one renewal permit may be
granted for any project. The Village Building Inspector may grant
renewal permit applications upon finding that the conditions of this
subsection are satisfied, without conducting further review or
referral of the matter, and in particular, the review and referral
contemplated by Chapter 19, Article II, Building Board, of this Code
shall not apply to a renewal application under this subsection. All
conditions imposed on the initial permit shall carry forward and
apply to the renewal permit, even if not specifically stated therein.
The Building Inspector may impose reasonable conditions upon any
renewal permit granted pursuant to this subsection, including, but
not limited to, conditions designed to ensure that all exterior site
work and exterior structure work on the project is promptly
completed, and conditions designed to eliminate or reduce any
adverse impacts of the construction project on surrounding
properties.
A. A weatherproof card, signed by the Building Inspector, indicating the
permit has been issued shall be posted at the job site during
construction. After issuance of a building permit, the approved plans
shall not be altered unless any proposed change is first approved by the
Building Inspector as conforming to the provisions of this chapter.
B. The building permit shall become void unless operations are
commenced within four months from the date thereof or if the building
or work authorized by such permit is suspended at any time after work
is commenced, for a period of 60 days. The period of time may be
extended by the Building Inspector if the delay was due to conditions
beyond the control of the applicant.
§ 756-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-8
1:569
§ 756-9. Regulations for moving buildings.
C. Before any work is commenced or recommenced after the permit has
lapsed, a new permit shall be issued at the regular fee rate. In any
event, all work shall be completed within 18 months from the date of
issuance of the permit.
A. General. No person shall move any building or structure upon any of
the public rights-of-way of the municipality without first obtaining a
permit therefor from the Building Inspector and upon the payment of
the required fee. Every such permit issued by the Building Inspector for
the moving of a building shall designate the route to be taken, the
conditions to be complied with and shall limit the time during which
said moving operations shall be continued.
B. Moving damaged buildings. No building shall be repaired, altered or
moved within or into the municipality that has deteriorated or has been
damaged by any cause (including such moving and separation from its
foundation and service connections in case of moved buildings) 50% or
more of its equalized value and no permit shall be granted to repair,
alter or move such building within or into the municipality.
C. Continuous movement. The movement of buildings shall be a
continuous operation during all the hours of the day, and day by day and
at night, until such movement is fully completed. All of such operations
shall be performed with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares.
No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street
crossing or intersection, or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to
any fire hydrant or any other public facility. Lighted lanterns shall be
kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building during the night.
D. Street repair. Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall,
within one day after said building reaches its destination, report the
fact to the Building Inspector, who shall thereupon in the company of
the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer inspect the streets and
highways over which said building has been moved and ascertain their
condition. If the removal of said building has caused any damage to any
street or highway, the person to whom the permit was issued shall
forthwith place them in good repair as they were before the permit was
granted. On the failure of the said permittee to do so within 10 days
thereafter to the satisfaction of the governing body, said body shall
repair the damage done to such streets and hold the person obtaining
such permit and the sureties on his bond responsible for the payment of
same.124
E. Conformance with chapter. No permit shall be issued to move a building
within or into the municipality and to establish it upon a location within
said municipality until the Building Inspector has made an investigation
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-8 FOX POINT CODE § 756-9
1:570
of such building at the location from which it is to be moved and
is satisfied from such investigation that said building is in a sound
and stable condition and of such construction that it will meet the
requirements of this Building Code in all respects. A complete plan of
all further repairs, improvements and remodeling, with reference to
such building, shall be submitted to the Building Inspector, and he shall
make a finding of fact to the effect that all such repairs, improvements
and remodeling are in conformity with the requirements of this Building
Code and that when same are completed, the building, as such, will so
comply with said Building Code. In the event a building is to be moved
from the municipality to some point outside of the boundaries thereof,
the provisions with respect to the furnishing of plans and specifications
for proposed alterations to such building may be disregarded.
F. Bond.
(1) Before a permit is issued to move any building over any public way
in this municipality, the party applying therefor shall give a bond to
the municipality in a sum, to be fixed by the Building Inspector, and
which shall not be less than $1,000, said bond to be executed by a
corporate surety or two personal sureties to be approved by the
governing body or designated agent conditioned upon, among
other things, the indemnification to the municipality for any costs
or expenses incurred by it in connection with any claims for
damages to any persons or property, and the payment of any
judgment, together with the costs or expenses incurred by the
municipality in connection therewith, arising out of the removal of
the building for which the permit is issued.
(2) Unless the Building Inspector, upon investigation, shall find it to be
a fact that the excavation exposed by the removal of such building
from its foundation shall not be so close to a public thoroughfare as
to permit the accidental falling therein of travelers or the location,
nature and physical characteristics of the premises and the falling
into such excavation by children under 12 years of age unlikely, the
bond required by Subsection F(1) shall be further conditioned upon
the permittee erecting adequate barriers and, within 48 hours,
filling in such excavation or adopting and employing such other
means, devices or methods approved by the Building Inspector and
reasonably adopted or calculated to prevent the occurrences set
forth herein.
G. Insurance. The Building Inspector shall require, in addition to said bond
above indicated, public liability insurance covering injury to one person
in the sum of not less than $100,000 and for one accident in a sum not
less than $200,000, together with property damage insurance in a sum
not less than $50,000, or such other coverage as deemed necessary.
H. Plan Commission or other assigned board or commission.
§ 756-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-9
1:571
§ 756-10. Razing of buildings.
(1) No such permit shall be issued unless it has been found as a fact by
the Plan Commission of the municipality by at least a majority vote,
after an examination of the application for the permit which shall
include exterior elevations of the building and accurate
photographs of all sides and views of the same and in case it is
proposed to alter the exterior of said building, plans and
specifications of such proposed alterations and after a view of the
building proposed to be moved and of the site at which it is to be
located, that the exterior architectural appeal and functional plans
of the building to be moved or moved and altered will not be so at
variance with either the exterior architectural appeal and
functional plan of the buildings already constructed or in the
course of construction in the immediate neighborhood or the
character of the applicable district established by the zoning
ordinances of the municipality or any ordinance amendatory
thereof or supplementary thereto as to cause a substantial
depreciation in the property values of said neighborhood within
said applicable district. In case the applicant proposes to alter the
exterior of said building after moving the same, he shall submit,
with his application papers, complete plans and specifications for
the proposed alterations. Before a permit shall be issued for a
building to be moved and altered, the applicant shall give a bond to
the municipality's Plan Commission, which shall not be less than
$1,000, to be executed in the manner provided in Subsection F
hereof to the effect that he will, within a time to be set by the Plan
Commission, complete the proposed exterior alterations to said
building in the manner set forth in his plans and specifications. This
bond shall be in addition to any other bond or surety which may be
required by other applicable ordinances of the municipality. No
occupancy permit shall be issued for said building until the exterior
alterations proposed to be made have been completed.
(2) Upon application being made to the Building Inspector, he shall
request a meeting of the Plan Commission to consider applications
for moving permits which he has found comply, in all respects, with
all other ordinances of the municipality. The Plan Commission may,
if it desires, hear the applicant for the moving permit in question
and/or the owner of the lot on which it is proposed to locate the
building in question, together with any other persons, either
residents or property owners, desiring to be heard, giving such
notice of hearing as they may deem sufficient. Such hearing may be
adjourned for a reasonable length of time and within 48 hours after
the close of the hearing, the Plan Commission shall, in writing,
make or refuse to make the finding required by Subsection H(1)
hereof and file it in the office of the Clerk/Treasurer, who shall send
a copy of it to the Building Inspector.
§ 756-9 FOX POINT CODE § 756-10
1:572
§ 756-11. Inspections.
A. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to act for the municipality
under the provisions of § 66.0413, Wis. Stats., relating to the razing of
buildings and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto.
The Municipal Clerk/Treasurer is authorized to place the assessment
and collect the special tax as therein provided.
B. Before a building can be demolished or removed, the owner or agent
shall notify all utilities having service connections within the building,
such as water, electric, gas, sewer and other connections. A permit to
demolish or to remove a building shall not be issued until it is
ascertained that service connections and appurtenant equipment, such
as meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in
a safe manner. Excavations shall be filled with solid fill to match lot
grade within five days of removal of the structure. Any excavation shall
be protected with appropriate fences, barriers and/or lights.
A. Notification. Upon notification from the permit holder or his agent,
required inspections of the construction of any buildings, structures or
equipment shall be made as follows:
(1) Inspection to determine if the location on the premises is in
compliance with approved certified lot or plot plan of the premises
and the terms of the permit.
(2) Inspection to determine if the construction of footings as to
thickness, width, placing of reinforced steel, if required, and
foundation walls is in compliance with approved plans, data and the
terms of the permit. Recertification of the footings and foundation
location and elevation shall be provided to the Building Inspector
prior to pouring concrete.
(3) Inspection of all wall, floor and roof framing, fire stopping and
bracing, when completed, and of all pipes, chimneys, ventilating
and other ducts, shafts and equipment, when in place but before
any such work is covered, enclosed or concealed by other
construction.
(4) Inspection prior to laying concrete for basement floor to inspect
subgrade, drain tile and forms.
(5) Final inspection. Upon the completion of any building, structure,
equipment or construction for which a permit was issued and
before the same is occupied or used, a final inspection shall be
made by the Building Inspector and until such building, structure
or equipment is in compliance with all the requirements of this
chapter and terms of the permit, no occupancy shall be maintained.
If the construction conforms to the requirements of this chapter, an
occupancy permit shall be issued.
§ 756-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-11
1:573
§ 756-12. Stop-work order.
Whenever the provisions of this chapter or of the plans approved
thereunder are not complied with, a stop-work order shall be served on the
owner or his representative and a copy thereof shall be posted at the site
of the construction. Such stop-work order shall not be removed except by
written notice of the Building Inspector after satisfactory evidence has been
supplied that the violation has been corrected.
§ 756-13. Occupancy permit.
B. Coordinated inspections. All provisions of the laws and regulations of
the municipality and of legally adopted rules of local fire and health
officials in respect to the operation, equipment, housekeeping, fire
protection, handling and storage of flammable materials, liquids and
gases and the maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions of use in
occupancy in all buildings shall be strictly enforced by the
administrative officials to whom such authority is delegated. Whenever
inspection by any authorized enforcement officer discloses any violation
of the provisions of this chapter, or of any other rules, regulations or
laws, he shall immediately notify the administrative officer having
jurisdiction of the violation.
C. Certified report. The Building Inspector may require a certified report
of all required inspections as regulated by this chapter from the
registered architect or registered engineer supervising the
construction of any building, structure or equipment requiring their
supervision. Such certified report shall state, in detail, that all
construction work has been executed in accordance with all of the
regulations of this chapter, approved plans, specifications, terms of the
permit and, further, that such construction work was executed in
accordance with accepted architectural and engineering standard
procedures.
D. Board of Appeals or other assigned board or commission. Any person
feeling himself aggrieved by any order or ruling of the Building
Inspector may appeal from such ruling to the Board of Appeals within
30 days from the date of refusal to issue a permit or from the date of the
making of any order, ruling, decision or determination on which appeal
is taken. Such appeal is to be in writing, setting forth the order
appealed from and the respects in which said person feeling aggrieved
claims that said order or ruling is erroneous or illegal. Said appeal shall
be filed in the manner and form required by the Rules of Procedure for
the Fox Point Board of Appeals. Said Board of Appeals, after
consideration thereof, shall affirm, reverse or modify said ruling as is
just in the premises. The ruling or order of the Inspector shall be
enforced until changed by said Board of Appeals. [Amended
8-13-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
A. Inspections.
§ 756-11 FOX POINT CODE § 756-13
1:574
(1) The Building Inspector shall make a final inspection of all new
buildings, additions and alterations. If no violations of this or any
other ordinance be found, the Building Inspector shall issue an
occupancy permit, stating the purpose for which the building is to
be used.
(2) No building, nor part thereof, shall be occupied until such
certificate has been issued, nor shall any building be occupied in
any manner which conflicts with the conditions set forth in the
occupancy permit.
B. Use discontinued.
(1) Whenever any building or portion thereof is being used or occupied
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the Building Inspector
shall order such use or occupancy discontinued and the building, or
portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person using or
causing such use or occupancy to be continued and such person
shall vacate such building or portion thereof within 10 days after
receipt of the notice or make the building, or portion thereof,
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Any building, structure or premises, or any part thereof, hereafter
vacated or damaged by any cause whatsoever so as to jeopardize
public safety or health shall not hereafter be occupied or used
under an existing occupancy permit or without the same, until an
application has been filed and a new occupancy permit issued.
C. Change. It shall be unlawful to change the use of any building,
structure, premises, or part thereof without first obtaining, from the
Building Inspector, an approval of such change in the occupancy or use
and an occupancy permit therefor.
D. Hardship. The Building Inspector shall have the authority and power to
permit the occupancy of any building or structure in the municipality,
prior to issuance of an occupancy certificate, in all such cases of
hardship, as in his judgment and discretion warrant occupancy before
final stage of completion as set forth in this chapter. Before granting
such permission, the Building Inspector shall first examine the
premises and determine if it is safe and sanitary. The Building Inspector
shall determine the time within which such building or structure can be
completed. Such time should not exceed 120 days.
§ 756-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-13
1:575

ARTICLE III
Terminology
§ 756-14. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings assigned to them in this section. Words and phrases
not herein otherwise defined shall have the meanings accepted by common
usage.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A detached building, not used as a dwelling unit,
the use of which is incidental to the use of the main building and which is
located on the same lot as the main building. "Accessory building" does not
mean farm building.125
ADDITION — Any new construction whereby an existing building or
structure, or building or structure in the course of construction, is increased
in area or cubical content.
ADJOINING LOT LINE — The line between adjoining lots, plots of land or
parcels of land of different or same ownership.
ALLEY — A municipal right-of-way which affords a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting properties. A street shall not be considered an
alley.
ALLOWABLE STRESS — The specified maximum permissible stress of a
material expressed in load per unit area.
ALTERATION — A substantial change or modification other than an addition
or repair to a dwelling or to systems involved within a dwelling.
APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms which is occupied or which is
intended or designed to be occupied by one family for living or sleeping
purposes.
APPROVED or APPROVAL — An approval of the Department or its
authorized representative. (Approval is not to be construed as an
assumption of any legal responsibility for the design or construction of the
dwelling or building component.)
AREA — As applied to dimensions, means the maximum horizontal
projected area of a building, structure, room, apartment or open space, not
including overhangs.
ATTIC — A space, not suitable for human occupancy, under the roof and
above the ceiling of the topmost story of any building or part thereof.
BALCONY — A landing or porch projecting from the wall of a building.
BASEMENT — That portion of a dwelling between floor and ceiling which is
below or partly below and partly above grade but so located that the vertical
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-14
1:577
distance from the grade to the floor below is more than the vertical distance
from grade to ceiling.
BEARING — That area of any structural unit of a building or structure which
is in direct contact with the supports which receive the loads from that unit.
BUILDING — Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING COMPONENT — Any subsystem, subassembly or other system
designed for use in or as part of a structure which may include structural,
electrical, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems and other
systems affecting health and safety.
BUILDING, EXISTING — A building erected prior to adoption of this chapter
or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The officer charged with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter or his regularly authorized deputy.126
BUILDING SYSTEM — Plans, specifications and documentation for a system
of manufactured building or for a type or a system of building components
which may include structural, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and
variations which are submitted as part of the building system.
CEILING HEIGHT — The clear vertical distance from the finished floor to
the finished ceiling.
CEMENT or CEMENT LIME MORTAR — See § 756-24.
CHIMNEY — One or more vertical, or nearly so, passageways or flues for
the purpose of conveying flue gases to the atmosphere.
CHIMNEY CONNECTOR — Same as smoke pipe.
CLOSED CONSTRUCTION — Any building, building component, assembly
or system manufactured in such a manner that it cannot be inspected before
installation at the building site without disassembly, damage or destruction.
COEFFICIENT OF PERFORMANCE (COP), COOLING OR HEATING — The
ratio of the rate of net heat removal or net heat output to the rate of total
energy input, expressed in consistent units and under designated rated
conditions.
COMBUSTION EFFICIENCY — Combustion efficiency is expressed in
percentage and is defined as 100% minus stack losses in percent of heat
input. Stack losses are:
A. Loss due to sensible heat in dry flue gas;
B. Loss due to incomplete combustion; and
Loss due to sensible and latent heat in moisture formed by combustion
of hydrogen in the fuel.
C.
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-14 FOX POINT CODE § 756-14
1:578
COMPLIANCE ASSURANCE PROGRAM — The detailed system
documentation and methods of assuring that manufactured dwellings and
dwelling components are manufactured, stored, transported, assembled,
handled and installed in accordance with this chapter.
COOLING LOAD — The rate at which heat must be removed from the space
to maintain a selected indoor air temperature during periods of design
outdoor weather conditions.
CUBIC CONTENTS — The actual cubic space enclosed within the outer
surfaces of the outside or enclosed walls, outer surfaces of the roof and the
finished surfaces of the lowest floors of a building or structure. Does not
include the contents of courts which are open to the sky.127
DEGREE DAY, HEATING — Degree days are figured as the number of
degrees the mean outdoor temperature deviates from 65° F. each day
during the heating season.
NOTE: For example, if, on December 15, the low temperature was +30° F.
and the high temperature was +50° F., the mean temperature would equal
(30° + 50°) ÷ 2 = 40°; therefore, 65° - 40° = 25° days.
DEPARTMENT — The State of Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services.
DETACHED BUILDING — Any building which is not physically connected to
the dwelling.
DWELLING — A building which is designed or used or which is intended to
be used as a residence or place of abode.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY RATIO — The ratio of net cooling capacity in BTU
per hour to total rate of electric input, in watts, under designated operating
conditions.
EQUIPMENT — As specifically regulated by this chapter, includes heating,
cooling, air conditioning and ventilating systems, plumbing and sanitary
systems, electric light and power systems, telephone, electronic and radio
signal and annunciator systems, dry cleaning, dyeing and washing
machines, elevators and dumb waiters, gas pipe systems, standpipes,
sprinkler systems, fire protection apparatus, fire extinguishers and pumps,
oil burners, stokers and conveyors, refrigerating systems, devices,
machinery and apparatus of every description, furnaces, boilers, high- or
low-pressure steam systems, gasoline pumps, all movable or portable
containers of every description, all air pressure or other tanks and all other
self-contained systems used in conjunction with buildings or structures.
ESTABLISHED GRADE — The grade of the street as established by the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer.
FAMILY — As defined in § 745-2.128
127. Editor's Note: The original definition of "dead load," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-14
1:579
FARMING — The operation of a farm premises owned or rented by the
operator.
FARM OPERATION — The planting and cultivating of the soil and growing
of farm products, substantially all of which have been planted or produced
on the farm premises.
NOTE: According to § 102.04(3), Wis. Stats., the farm operation includes
the management, conserving, improving and maintaining of the farm
premises, tools, equipment improvements and the exchange of labor or
services with other farmers; the processing, drying, packing, packaging,
freezing, grading, storing, delivery to storage, carrying to market or to
a carrier for transportation to market and distributing directly to the
consumer; the clearing of such premises and the salvaging of timber
and the management and use of wood lots thereon but does not include
logging, lumbering and wood-cutting operations, unless the operations are
conducted as an accessory to other farm operations.
FARM PREMISES — The area which is planted and cultivated. The farm
premises does not include greenhouses, structures or other areas unless
used principally for the production of food or farm products.
FARM PRODUCTS — Agricultural, horticultural and arboricultural crops.
Animals considered within the definition of agricultural include livestock,
bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife or aquatic life.
FIREBOX — That part of the fireplace used as a combustion chamber.129
FIRE DISTRICT — Zoned areas of the municipality within which wood frame
construction is limited, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter.
FLOOR AREA — The net area of any floor space enclosed by exterior walls,
fire walls or absolute fire separation, exclusive of open spaces.
FOOTINGS — That portion of the foundation of a structure which spreads
and transmits loads directly to the soil or the piles.
FOUNDATION — The supporting structure as a whole, below the lowest
floor, upon which rests the superstructure of a building or structure.
GARAGE — A building or portion thereof in which a motor vehicle
containing gasoline, distillate or other volatile flammable liquid in its tank
is stored, repaired or kept.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or a portion of a building in which only
motor vehicles used by the tenants of the building or buildings on the
premises are stored or kept.
GAS APPLIANCE — Any furnace or heater, air conditioner, refrigerator,
stove having an electrical supply cord, dishwasher, dryer, swimming pool
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-14 FOX POINT CODE § 756-14
1:580
heater or other similar appliance or device used in a dwelling or dwelling
unit which uses a gaseous fuel for operation.
GRADE, BUILDING — Elevation of ground adjacent to the structure.
GRADE, LUMBER — The classification of lumber in regard to stress and
grade.
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room used for sleeping, living, dining or for food
preparation, excluding such enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or
toilet rooms, hallways, laundries, storage spaces, utility rooms and similar
spaces.
HEARTH — The floor of the fireplace. The inner part of the hearth is located
within the fireplace opening. The outer part of the hearth is outside the
fireplace opening.
HEATED SPACE — Any space provided with a supply of heat to maintain the
temperature of the space to at least 50° F. Heat supplied by convection from
the energy-consuming systems may satisfy this requirement in basements,
if the energy-consuming systems are not insulated.
HEATING LOAD — The probable heat loss of each room or space to be
heated, based on maintaining a selected indoor air temperature during
periods of design outdoor weather conditions. The total heat load includes
the transmission losses of heat transmitted through the wall, floor, ceiling,
glass or other surfaces; the infiltration losses or heat required to warm
outdoor air which leaks in through cracks and crevices around doors and
windows, or through open doors and windows; or heat required to warm
outdoor air used for ventilation.
INDEPENDENT INSPECTION AGENCY — Any person, firm, association,
partnership or corporation certified by the Department to perform certified
inspections under this chapter.
INITIAL CONSTRUCTION — The date of issuance of the Wisconsin Uniform
Building Permit.
INSTALLATION — The assembly of a manufactured building on site and the
process of affixing a manufactured building to land, a foundation, footing or
an existing building.
INTERMITTENT IGNITION DEVICE — An ignition device which is actuated
only when a gas appliance is in operation.
LANDING — The level portion of a stairs located within a flight of stairs or
located at the base and foot of a stairs.
LINTEL — The beam or girder placed over an opening in a wall which
supports the wall construction above.
LISTED and LISTING — Equipment or building components which are
tested by an independent testing agency and accepted by the Department.
§ 756-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-14
1:581
LOADS —
LOFT — An upper room or floor which is open to the floor below.
LOT — A parcel of land in a single ownership, occupied or to be occupied by
not more than one principal or main building and the accessory buildings or
uses customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as are required
by this or other codes and having its principal frontage upon a street.
LOT LINE — A line or lines dividing one lot, plot of land or parcel of land
from an adjoining lot, plot of land or parcel of land.
MANUFACTURE — The process of making, fabricating, constructing,
forming or assembling a product from raw, unfinished, semifinished or
finished materials.
MANUFACTURED BUILDING —
MASONRY —
MULTI-WYTHE WALL — A masonry wall composed of two or more wythes
of masonry units tied or bonded together.
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Fox Point, Milwaukee County,
Wisconsin.130
DEAD LOAD — The weight of the walls, floors, partitions, roofs, and
other structural parts of a building or structure.
A.
LIVE LOAD — All imposed, transient, moving loads or loads due to
impact and including movable partitions in a building or structure other
than dead loads.
B.
Any structure or component thereof which is intended for use as a
dwelling and:
Is of closed construction and fabricated or assembled on site in
manufacturing facilities for installation, connection or assembly
and installation at the building site; or
(1)
Is a building of open construction which is made or assembled in
manufacturing facilities away from the building site for installation,
connection or assembly and installation on the building site and for
which certification is sought by the manufacturer.
(2)
A.
The term "manufactured building" does not include a building of open
construction which is not subject to Subsection A(2) above. A single- or
double-width mobile home is not considered a manufactured home and
is not subject to this chapter.
B.
HOLLOW UNIT — A masonry unit in which the net cross-sectional area,
parallel to the bearing face, is less than 75% of the gross cross-sectional
area.
A.
SOLID UNIT — Masonry units having net cross-sectional areas of 75%
or more of the gross cross-sectional area are classified as solid units.
B.
§ 756-14 FOX POINT CODE § 756-14
1:582
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A lawfully existing building, premises,
structure, use, materials or equipment which does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
OCCUPANCY or USE — The purpose for which a building, structure,
equipment, materials or premises, or part thereof, is used or intended to be
used as regulated by this chapter.
OPEN CONSTRUCTION — Any building, building component, assembly or
system manufactured in such a manner that it can be readily inspected at
the building site without disassembly, damage or destruction.
OWNER — Any person having a legal or equitable interest in the dwelling.
PERM — The designation for the unit permeance which is a substitute for
the unit, one grain per (hour) (square foot) (inch of mercury vapor pressure
difference).
PERSON — Any individual, person, partnership, firm, organization,
association or corporation, their agents, heirs or assigns.
PILASTER — A projection of masonry or a filled cell area of masonry for the
purpose of bearing concentration loads or to stiffen the wall against lateral
forces.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A single main building or structure on a lot for
specific use or occupancies.
RECREATIONAL DWELLING UNIT — A permanent structure occupied
occasionally or seasonally solely for recreational purposes and not used as
a principal residence.
REPAIR — The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building
for the purpose of its maintenance. The word "repair" or "repairs" shall not
apply to any change of construction.
REQUIRED — Mandatory by provisions of this chapter.
RESISTANCE, THERMAL (R) — A measure of the ability to retard the
flow of heat. The R value is the reciprocal of a heat transfer coefficient,
expressed by U (R = 1/U). The higher the R value of a material, the more
difficult it is for heat to flow through the material.
ROOM — A space within a building or structure completely enclosed with
walls, partitions, floor and ceiling except for necessary openings for light,
ventilation, ingress and egress.
SHALL — As used herein, is mandatory. Same for "must."
SINGLE-WYTHE WALL — A masonry wall consisting of one unit thickness.
SMOKE CHAMBER — That part of a fireplace which acts as a funnel to
compress the smoke and gases from the fire so that they will enter the
chimney above.
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-14
1:583
SMOKE PIPE — A connector between the solid or liquid fuel-burning
appliance and the chimney.
SQUARE FOOTAGE OF BUILDING — The actual area in square feet
enclosed by the exterior perimeter of the building walls on each separate
floor level.
STAIRWAY — One or more flights of steps, and the necessary platforms or
landings connecting them, to form a continuous passage from one elevation
to another.
STEP(S) — A unit(s) consisting of one riser and one tread, alone or in series.
STORY — That portion of a building located above the basement, between
the floor and the ceiling.
STOVE — A nonportable, solid-fuel-burning, vented, nonducted, heatproducing
appliance located in the space that it is intended to heat. This
definition does not include cooking appliances.
STOVEPIPE — Same as smoke pipe.
STRAIN — A change in the physical shape of a material caused by stress.
STRESS — Internal resistance to an external force expressed in load per
unit area; stresses acting perpendicular (compression or tension) to the
surface, shear stresses acting in the plane of the surface, or bending
stresses which cause curving.
STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS — A branch of the physical sciences which uses
the principles of mechanics in analyzing the impact of loads and forces and
their effect on the physical properties of materials in the form of internal
stress and strain.
STRUCTURE — As specifically regulated by this chapter, anything which is
constructed, erected and framed of component parts and which is fastened,
anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground for any
occupancy or use whatsoever.
THERMAL TRANSMITTANCE (U) — Thermal transmittance (U) is the
coefficient of heat transmission or thermal transmission (air to air)
expressed in units of BTU per (hour) (square foot) (degree F). It is the time
rate of heat flow. The U value applies to combinations of different materials
used in series along the heat flow path and also to single materials that
comprise a building section and includes cavity air spaces and surface-air
films on both sides. The lower the U value of a material, the more difficult it
is for heat to flow through the material.
THROAT — The throat of a fireplace is the slot-like opening above the
firebox through which flames, smoke and other products of combustion pass
into the smoke chamber.
UNUSUAL CONSTRUCTION — Any construction methods or materials not
covered in this chapter.
VENT — A vertical flue or passageway to vent fuel-burning appliances.
§ 756-14 FOX POINT CODE § 756-14
1:584
VENT CONNECTOR — A connector between a fuel-burning appliance and
the chimney or vent.
WALLS — As follows:
WINDOW — A glazed opening in an exterior wall, including glazed portions
of doors within a conditioned space.
WISCONSIN INSIGNIA — A device or seal approved by the Department to
certify compliance with this chapter.
BEARING WALL — A wall which supports any load in addition to its own
weight.
A.
CAVITY WALL — A wall built of masonry units or of plain concrete, or a
combination of these materials, so arranged as to provide an air space
within the wall and in which the facing and backing (inner and outer
parts) of the wall are tied together with metal ties.
B.
C. CURTAIN WALL — A nonbearing wall between columns or piers.
D. EXTERIOR WALL — An outer enclosing wall of a building or structure.
FACED WALL — A wall in which the masonry facing and backing are so
bonded as to exert common action under load.
E.
NONBEARING WALL — A wall which supports no load other than its
own weight.
F.
PANEL WALL — A nonbearing wall in skeleton construction, built
between columns or piers and wholly supported at each story.
G.
PARTITION — An interior vertical structure, usually of light
construction, serving to enclose an area, room, space or division,
extended from floor to ceiling and having wall surfaces of approved
materials as permitted by this chapter.
H.
I. RETAINING WALL — Wall used to resist laterally imposed pressures.
VENEERED WALL — Wall having masonry facing which is attached to
the backing but not so bonded as to exert common action under load,
also having outer facing for the purpose of providing ornamentation,
protection or insulation.
J.
§ 756-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-14
1:585

ARTICLE IV
Design
§ 756-15. General requirements.
A. Application. All buildings or structures shall follow the applicable
requirements of §§ 756-3, 756-4 and 756-5.
B. Minimum floor areas.
(1) One and 1 1/2 stories. The first floor area of a one-story or one-andone-
half-story dwelling shall be not less than 1,200 square feet
exclusive of porches, garages, and other outbuildings, except on
lots less than 70 feet at the building line, in which case the
requirement shall be 1,000 square feet.
(2) Two or more stories. The first floor area of a dwelling of two stories
or more shall be not less than 1,000 square feet exclusive of
porches, garages, and other outbuildings, except on lots less than
70 feet at the building line in which case the requirement shall be
800 square feet.
C. Room areas. Room sizes for one- and two-family dwellings shall be
equal to or greater than those listed in Table No. 2. Multiple-family
buildings shall have room sizes as approved by the municipality.
(1) Minimum dimension of living rooms shall be 11 feet, and of
kitchens, six feet. Minimum room areas shall not include areas
used for storage or closet purposes.
(2) Rooms and spaces not herein regulated as to area shall be
connected to a living or other habitable room. Rooms and spaces
not herein regulated and of areas less than the minimum areas
herein required shall not be used for living, dining, sleeping or
kitchen purposes.131
(3) No additional dwelling units shall be created or maintained by
rearranging room suites, by subdividing rooms or by alterations in
any existing building or structure unless such dwelling units have
been authorized by permit and comply with this and other
applicable regulations.
131. Editor's Note: Original § 30.15(2)(c), which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted by Ord. No. 2007-17.
§ 756-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-15
1:587
Table No. 2
Room Areas
Category
Requirement
(square feet)
Minimum
Dimension
(feet)
Living room 160 11
Living room with dining
space
180
Dining room 80
Kitchen — usable floor
area
60 6
Bedroom 100
Other habitable rooms 70
Bathroom See § 756-15G(3)
D. Ceiling heights.
(1) Except as otherwise permitted by local requirements, the minimum
clear ceiling height of all habitable rooms in one- and two-family
homes shall be seven feet six inches. Basement ceiling height shall
be a minimum of six feet 10 inches under joists.
(2) Sloping roofs may penetrate rooms provided that any portion of any
room under a sloping roof having a height of less than five feet shall
not be considered as part of the floor area in computing areas or
volumes of such rooms. Rooms under a sloping roof shall have a
minimum ceiling height of seven feet six inches for not less than
half of the required area of the room.
(3) Rooms in any building or structure having ceiling heights or areas
which do not conform to the regulations of this section shall not be
used for human habitation. For ceiling heights of bath and toilet
rooms, see Subsection G(3).
E. Light and ventilation.
(1) Natural light. All habitable rooms shall be provided with natural
light by means of glazed openings of at least 8% of the net floor
area.
(2) Ventilation. Natural or mechanical ventilation shall be provided as
follows:
(a) Natural ventilation. All habitable rooms, except kitchens and
bathrooms, shall be provided with natural ventilation by means
of openable exterior doors or windows of at least 3.5% of the
net floor area.
§ 756-15 FOX POINT CODE § 756-15
1:588
(b) Mechanical ventilation. Where a mechanical ventilation system
is provided in lieu of openable exterior openings providing
natural ventilation, the system shall be capable of providing at
least one air change per hour. Exhaust ventilation shall
terminate outside the building.
(3) Cold-side venting. Cold-side venting of insulation shall be provided
at roof/attic, flat roof/ceiling and sloping roof/ceiling assemblies.
Ventilation shall be provided at the rate of one square foot of free
ventilating area for each 300 square feet of area. At least 50% of
the vents shall be located at the soffit area.
(4) Crawl space venting. Unheated crawl spaces shall be provided with
a minimum of two ventilators located at opposite sides of the crawl
space.
(5) Exhaust fan venting. Exhaust fans are required in all bathrooms
which have bathtubs, shower or water closets and in utility rooms,
when no openable window is available.
(6) Safety glass. Glass in entrance and exit doors, sliding glass doors,
storm doors, bathtub enclosures, shower doors and fixed glass
panels immediately adjacent to doors shall be safety glass.
F. Stairways, landings, platforms and roof decks. Every exit stairway shall
not be less than three feet in width and no more than four inches on one
side may be used for handrails. Every platform shall be at least as wide
as the stairway, measured at right angles, to the direction of travel.
Whenever a door opens onto a stairway, a platform shall be provided
extending at least the full width of the door in the direction of travel.
(1) If stairways are provided in addition to those required by code,
such additional stairways need not conform to the width
requirements of this chapter.
(2) All stairway landings, platforms, roof decks or similar elevations or
depressions more than two feet above or below adjacent grade or
floor level shall have a guard rail on the open sides thereof, at least
36 inches in height, with an intermediate rail at midheight or
vertical rails at 11 inches maximum spacing on center.
(3) Stairways on the outside of buildings and an integral part thereof,
having more than three risers, shall have a handrail on each side.
NOTE: All exterior doors which swing outwards where there is
more than eight inches above grade shall have a platform with
minimum dimensions of three feet, supported on a foundation wall
or other approved supports to a minimum depth of 48 inches
below grade.
(4) Risers and treads. All stairways and steps shall have a uniform rise
of not more than eight inches and a minimum tread width of nine
§ 756-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-15
1:589
inches. Risers shall be measured from tread to tread and treads
shall be measured from rise to rise. There shall be no more than 18
risers in any one run.
(5) The continuous clear head room measured perpendicularly from
the nosing shall not be less than six feet eight inches, except for the
basement stairways, such head room may be six feet four inches.
(6) Winders may be used, provided that such winders are designed so
the tread width, 18 inches from the converging end, will not be less
than nine inches.
(7) Handrails. Handrails, except those serving fire escapes, shall not
be less than 30 inches, nor more than 34 inches above the nosing of
the treads on stairways or above the surface of ramps.
(8) Spiral stairs. Spiral stairs may be used as interior exit stairs. The
tread shall measure at least 26 inches from the outer edge of the
supporting column to the inner edge of the handrail and at least
seven inches in width from nosing to nosing to a point one foot from
the narrow end of the tread; provided, however, that each habitable
room be provided with an egress window per § SPS 321.03(6), Wis.
Adm. Code. [Added 4-11-1995 by Ord. No. 65-914]
G. Toilets, bathrooms and kitchens.
(1) In every dwelling, there shall be provided, in each dwelling unit,
and connected to a plumbing system, at least one kitchen sink, one
water closet, one bathtub or shower and one lavatory.
(2) There shall be provided on the premises, for each dwelling unit,
means for sanitary disposal of sewage without health hazards or
nuisance and in conformity with generally accepted standards.
(3) Bathrooms for required toilets, tubs or showers or lavatories shall
have a minimum floor area of not less than 12 square feet for each
water closet and each tub and 10 square feet for each shower,
lavatory or other sanitary plumbing fixture or equipment installed
herein. The ceiling height of the required bathroom shall be not
less than seven feet. Powder rooms or second baths are not subject
to the above but shall have a minimum floor area of 14 square feet
with a minimum dimension of three feet in one direction.
(4) Each bathroom or toilet room shall be provided with a door. No
bathroom or toilet room shall open directly into a kitchen, nor shall
such room provide sole access to any habitable room.
(5) Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with means of
ventilation as required by this chapter for habitable rooms or
positive mechanical ventilation providing one air change every five
minutes.
§ 756-15 FOX POINT CODE § 756-15
1:590
(6) All mechanical ventilation shall be ducted directly to the outside.
Exception: Exhaust fans with filters may be used without
terminating to the outside if approved by the Department of Safety
and Professional Services.
H. Exits and openings.
(1) Exterior stairways, other than to the first floor and basement, shall
not be allowed. Every residential home shall have two exits on the
first floor. Duplexes shall have two separate stairways or one
stairway and an outside porch, not more than 10 feet above the
ground.
(2) Access to each dwelling unit shall be provided without passing
through any part of any other dwelling unit. In dwelling units, every
habitable room shall have access to every other habitable room
without passing through a bathroom or toilet room.
(3) Doors or openings.
(a) Exterior doors. The minimum size for at least one main
entrance door to a residence shall be three feet wide by six feet
eight inches high. The rear or side door shall be two feet eight
inches wide by six feet eight inches high.
(b) Interior doors. Minimum size door serving as exit from any
habitable rooms shall be two feet six inches wide by six feet six
inches high. Bathrooms and closets, other than linen and
broom closets, can be served by a door a minimum of two feet
wide.
(c) An opening used without a door shall be the same size as the
required minimum size of door.
(4) Corridors and hallways between rooms shall be not less than 36
inches wide.
(5) Exits, floors, and hallways shall be constructed as specified in § SPS
321.03, Wis. Adm. Code, including such amendments as may be
made thereto from time to time in the future.
I. Attics, access thereto. In every building and structure having an attic,
there shall be provided permanent access thereto by means of a scuttle,
disappearing or permanently installed stairway; minimum size opening
shall be 24 inches by 20 inches.
J. Insulation. Insulation in all buildings or structures and additions
thereto shall be installed as required by Chapter SPS 322 of the
Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code.
§ 756-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-15
1:591

ARTICLE V
Soil and Excavation Requirements
§ 756-16. Soil requirements.
§ 756-17. Excavations.
A. Soil-bearing capacity. No footing or foundation shall be placed on soil
with a bearing capacity of less than 2,000 pounds per square foot unless
the footing or foundations have been designed through structural
analysis. The soil-bearing values of common soils may be determined
through soil identification.
Type of Soil PSF
Quick sand, alluvial and filled soils, determined by
test but not more than
1,000
Wet, soft clay; very loose silt; silty clay 2,000
Loose, fine sand; medium clay; loose sandy clay
soils
2,000
Stiff clay; firm inorganic silt 3,000
Medium (firm sand; loose sandy gravel; firm sand
clay soils; hard dry clay)
4,000
Dense sand and gravel; very compact mixture of
clay, sand and gravel
6,000
Rock 12,000
(1) Minimum soil-bearing values. If the soil located directly under a
footing or foundation overlies a layer of soil having a smaller
allowable bearing value, the smaller soil-bearing value shall be
used.
(2) Unprepared fill material, organic material. No footing or
foundation shall be placed upon unprepared fill material, organic
soil, alluvial soil or mud, unless the load will be supported. When
requested, soil data shall be provided.
NOTE: The decomposition of organic material in landfill sites
established for the disposal of organic wastes may produce
odorous, toxic and explosive concentrations of gas which may
seep into buildings through storm sewers and similar underground
utilities unless provisions are taken to release the gases to the
atmosphere.
B. Boring and tests.
(1) When required. When the safe sustaining power of the soil is in
doubt, the Building Inspector shall direct that the necessary boring
and test be made by a qualified engineer and at the expense of the
owner or agent to determine the safe value of the soil.
§ 756-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-17
1:593
A. All excavations for buildings and structures and parts thereof shall be
protected and guarded against danger to life or injury to persons or
property.
B. No trench for sewer or other excavations shall be made below any
foundation wall nearer than three feet to any corner of said foundation.
No trench for sewer or other excavations shall be made nearer to any
column or pier footing than 1 1/2 times the depth of the excavation
below the footing.
C. Protection of adjoining property.
(1) Any property owner (owner of an interest in land) making or
causing an excavation to be made to a depth of 12 feet or less below
the grade, shall protect the excavation so that the soil of adjoining
property will not cave in or settle, but shall not be liable for the
expense of underpinning or extending the foundation of buildings
on adjoining properties. Before commencing the excavation, the
person making or causing the excavation to be made shall notify, in
writing, the owners of adjoining buildings not less than 30 days
before such excavation is to be made and that adjoining buildings
should be protected. The owners of the adjoining property shall be
given access to the excavation for the purpose of protecting such
adjoining buildings.
(2) Exception. The thirty-day limit for written notification may be
waived if such waiver is signed by the owner of adjoining
properties.
(3) Property owners (owners of an interest in land) making or causing
an excavation to be made exceeding 12 feet in depth below the
grade shall protect the excavation so that the soil of adjoining
property will not cave in or settle and shall extend the foundation of
any adjoining buildings below the depth of 12 feet below grade at
their own expense, as provided in the preceding subsection.
D. Whenever an excavation or foundation for building purposes has
remained open for a period of 30 days with no work having been done at
the site for said period, the Building Inspector shall serve a notice upon
the owner of the property that the work at the site be commenced
forthwith or that the excavation be filled to grade. The order shall be
served upon the owner or his agent and upon the holder of any
encumbrance of record as provided in § 66.0413, Wis. Stats. If the
owner fails to comply with the order within 15 days after the service
thereof, the excavation is to be filled to grade and the cost charged
against the real estate as a special charge as provided by
§ 66.0413(1)(f), Wis. Stats. In addition to filling the excavation, any
person who violates this section is subject to the provisions of § 756-42.
§ 756-17 FOX POINT CODE § 756-17
1:594
ARTICLE VI
Footings and Foundations
§ 756-18. Footings.
A. General. Footings shall be of adequate bearing area to safely distribute
all live and dead loads to the supporting soil without exceeding the
bearing capacity of the soil. Footings placed in unstable soils shall be
formed.
B. Type and size. Concrete footings, unless designed by structural
analysis, shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Continuous footings. The minimum width on each side of the
foundation wall shall measure at least four inches wider than the
wall and the minimum depth shall be eight inches.
(2) Pier and column footings. The minimum horizontal dimensions of
column or pier footings shall be two feet by two feet and shall be at
least 12 inches in depth.
(3) Stepped footings.
(a) Where variations in the elevations of the bottom wall footings
are necessary, it shall be spanned with an approved lintel.
(b) Exception. A vertical connection between the footings at the
step may be constructed of concrete, eight inches thick and of
the same width as the footings, if there is less than two feet
difference in elevation.
(4) Chimney and fireplace footings. Footings for chimneys or fireplaces
shall be at least four inches wider than the outside dimension of the
chimney or fireplace foundation and at least 12 inches thick.
(5) Trench footings. Footings poured integrally with the wall, at least
eight inches wide, may be used for a one-story structure when soil
conditions assure that trench walls will not collapse.
C. Frost protection. The bottom of all footings shall be a minimum of four
feet below grade. Footings shall not be placed upon frozen material.
D. Curing. Concrete footings shall cure at least 24 hours before foundation
wall or wall forms are begun to be constructed.
E. Drain tiles. All foundation walls of basements, cellars or other occupied
spaces shall have drain tiles on each side of such walls. [See
§ 756-21B(3) for basementless spaces.] Bleeder tiles shall be placed in
the foundation footing at not more than eight-foot centers. Drain tiles
shall be connected to a sump pit, provided with a pump to discharge the
water at grade or shall be connected to the storm sewer house drain.
Drain tiles shall be covered with 12 inches of No. 2 washed stone or
§ 756-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-18
1:595
§ 756-19. Foundations.
other approved porous material. Drain tile and stone shall be placed
prior to starting the fourth foundation block course.
A. General.
(1) Foundation walls shall be of masonry and shall be continuous under
all areas of the principal building including attached garage and
shall be designed and constructed to support the loads placed
thereon without exceeding the allowable stresses of the materials
therein.
(2) Exceptions. Overhanging bays and projecting floors are permitted,
providing that such cantilevered floors do not exceed four feet.
Cantilevered porches and balconies may project six feet, providing
they do not support a roof. In each case, the joists must return
twice the distance they project. Clear minimum space of eight
inches shall be provided below the bottom of joists to grade.
B. Strength. Structural analysis shall be submitted to the Building
Inspector when requested.
C. Decay and termite protection.
(1) The top of foundation walls under all buildings or structures of
wood frame construction shall be at least eight inches above lot
grade at all exterior walls and no exterior wood siding or
construction shall be less than six inches above grade.
(2) Exception.
(a) Wood pressure treated with a preservative, or naturally
durable decay-resistant species and grade of lumber or
protected against decay and termites, may be used for:
[1] Sills which rest on concrete or masonry walls and are less
than eight inches from exposed earth.
[2] Ends of wood girders entering masonry or concrete walls
and having clearances of less than 1/2 inch on top, sides
and ends.
[3] Wood siding less than six inches from the earth.
[4] Wood embedded in earth.
(b) All pressure-treated wood shall be identified.
D. Foundation wall thickness.
(1) Concrete foundation walls. Unless designed through structural
analysis, the minimum thickness of concrete foundation walls shall
§ 756-18 FOX POINT CODE § 756-19
1:596
be determined from Table 756-19A, but in no case shall the
thickness be less than the thickness of the wall it supports.
(2) Masonry foundation walls. Unless designed through structural
analysis, the masonry foundation walls shall be constructed in
accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Unreinforced masonry walls; thickness. The minimum
thickness of unreinforced masonry foundation walls shall be
determined by Table 756-19B, but in no case shall the
thickness be less than the thickness of the wall it supports.
(b) Reinforced masonry walls; thickness. Reinforced masonry
walls shall be reinforced in accordance with the requirements
of Tables 756-19C and 756-19D. In partially reinforced
masonry walls, vertical reinforcement shall be provided on
each side of any opening, at each wall corner and at intervals
indicated in the tables.
E. Pilasters. When a girder whose span exceeds 12 feet frames into a
masonry wall, pilasters of a minimum size of four inches by 12 inches,
built integrally with the wall, shall be provided.
F. Girder bearing. Four inches of end bearing shall be provided for girders
framing into foundation wall, and when wood girders are used, an air
space shall be provided between the foundation walls and the ends and
sides of the girder.
G. Damp-proofing. Masonry foundation walls of basements and crawl
spaces shall be made damp-proof by the application to the exterior
surfaces thereof of a continuous coat of three-eighths-inch thick
waterproof cement mortar or portland cement mortar plus a coat of
bituminous damp-proofing material over the parging from top of stone
to finish grade. One coat of bituminous damp-proofing material shall be
applied to concrete foundation wall from the top of the stone to finish
grade. When a minimum of one-eighth-inch thickness of an approved
surface bonding cement is applied to exterior masonry foundation wall,
it shall qualify as damp-proof.
Table 756-19A
Concrete Wall Thickness
Type of Concrete
Nominal
Thickness
(inches)
Maximum Height of
Unbalanced Fill1 for
Wood Frame Wall
Being Supported
(feet)
3,000 psi 6 6.5
Unreinforced concrete 8 8
§ 756-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-19
1:597
Table 756-19A
Concrete Wall Thickness
Type of Concrete
Nominal
Thickness
(inches)
Maximum Height of
Unbalanced Fill1 for
Wood Frame Wall
Being Supported
(feet)
10 9
122 10
14 11.5
NOTES:
1 Unbalanced fill is the difference in elevation between the outside
grade and the basement floor.
2 The maximum height of unbalanced fill for a twelve-inch thick plain
concrete wall may be increased to 12 feet, provided the wall is
constructed of concrete with a minimum compressive value of 6,000
psi at 28 days.
Table 756-19B
Maximum Depth Below Grade* (Height of Fill) and
Thickness for Various Concrete Masonry Foundation
Walls Without Pilasters
Maximum Depth Below Grade (feet) When
Wall Supports
Type of Unit
Wall Construction
Nominal Thickness
(inches)
Frame
Construction
Masonry or Masonry
Veneer Construction
Hollow — load
bearing
8 5 (6) 6
10 6 (7) 7
12 7 7
Solid — load bearing
8 5 (7) 7
10 6 (7) 7
12 7 7
§ 756-19 FOX POINT CODE § 756-19
1:598
NOTES:
* In well-drained sand and gravel soils, the height of the unbalanced
fill may be increased to the values in parentheses.
Table 756-19C
Maximum Depth Below Grade (Height of Fill)
for Various Concrete Masonry Foundation Walls With Pilasters
Type of Unit
Wall
Construction
Nominal
Thickness
(inches)
Total
Height of
Wall
(feet)
Maximum
Pilaster
Spacing O.C.
(feet)
Pilaster
Size
(Nominal)
(inches)
Maximum
Depth
Below
Grade
(feet)
8 hollow loadbearing
7.5 11 16 x 16 6.5
8 hollow loadbearing
with
solid pilasters
or filled cells of
hollow units
7.5 20 16 x 16 6.5
Table 756-19D
Maximum Depth Below Grade for Partially Reinforced Masonry
Walls
Type of Unit
Wall
Construction
Nominal
Thickness
(inches)
Total
Height of
Wall
(feet)
Reinforcement
Size and
Spacing (feet)
Center to
Center
Maximum Depth
Below Grade
(feet)
8 hollow loadbearing
7.0 to 8.5 No. 5 Bars at 8 6.5
No. 6 Bars at 8 7.5
No. 7 Bars at 8 7.5
§ 756-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-19
1:599

ARTICLE VII
Masonry and Concrete Construction
§ 756-20. Masonry and hollow masonry units.
§ 756-21. Basements and basementless buildings.
A. Building brick. By building brick is meant a structural unit of burned
clay or shale, sand, lime or concrete.
(1) All building brick shall be free from cracks, laminations or other
defects which may interfere with proper laying of the brick or
impair the strength or permanence of the structure.
(2) Concrete building brick shall be manufactured from a mixture of
Portland cement and approved aggregates, such as sand, gravel,
crushed stone, bituminous or anthracite cinders, burned clay or
shale, or blast furnace slag.
(3) All building brick shall be a distinctive design or appearance or
marked so that the identity of the manufacturer may be known at
any time.
(4) The strength and absorption of all building brick manufactured
from burned clay or shale shall conform to the minimum
requirements of Chapter SPS 362, Buildings and Structures, of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code.132
B. Hollow building units.
(1) Hollow tile are the product of surface clay, shale, fireclay or
admixtures thereof, molded to permanent hollow form for use as
masonry units in building construction.
(2) Hollow concrete masonry units are the products of portland cement
and suitable aggregates such as sand, gravel, crushed stone,
bituminous or anthracite cinders, burned clay or shale or blast
furnace slag, moulded to permanent hollow form for use as
masonry units in building construction.
(3) All hollow concrete masonry units and all hollow tile shall conform
to the provisions of Chapter SPS 362, Buildings and Structures, of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code.133
A. General. All basements/cellars shall be provided with a minimum of
three-inch concrete floor placed on a minimum of three inches of gravel
or equivalent. An inspection shall be called for and made prior to laying
concrete to construct the basement floor.
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-21
1:601
§ 756-22. Concrete construction.
§ 756-23. Masonry walls.
Masonry walls shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of
this section.
B. Basementless spaces. Basementless spaces may be used or constructed
according to the following specifications:
(1) The ground level shall be at least two feet below any part of the
wood construction.
(2) In such spaces, all debris, sod, tree stumps and other organic
materials shall be removed and smooth surface, free of pockets,
shall be provided. A concrete slab, a minimum of two inches thick,
shall be installed.
(3) Where the floor level within the foundation walls is below the
outside grade, drain tile shall be provided around the exterior of
the walls and connected to the house drain tile.
(4) All basementless spaces shall be provided with a minimum access
opening of four square feet. If access opening is in the basement
wall and is kept clear and open, except for screening which allows
for air movement, this opening may be substituted for the above
required ventilation area. [See § 756-15E(4).]
C. Slab construction. The entire area shall consist of a base of three inches
in thickness of gravel or other approved material, well tamped in place,
over which there shall be placed a vapor barrier covered with a layer
consisting of four inches in thickness of concrete.
A. General. All building materials shall be good quality, conforming to
general accepted standards.
B. Portland cement, concrete aggregates and lightweight aggregate for
concrete shall conform to the provisions of Chapter SPS 362, Buildings
and Structures, of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.134
C. Air-entrained concrete. Air-entrained concrete shall be used when
concrete is to be exposed to the elements.
A. Erection precautions.
(1) Cold weather work. In cold weather, provisions shall be taken to
prevent masonry from being damaged by freezing.
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-21 FOX POINT CODE § 756-23
1:602
NOTE: It will be the practice to accept conformance with
"Recommended Practices for Cold Weather Masonry
Construction," available from International Masonry Institute, 823
- 15th Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20005.
(2) In warm weather, all clay or shale units of high absorption
characteristics shall be thoroughly wet before laying in the wall. All
other masonry units, except gypsum units laid in other than lime
mortar, shall be wetted before laying in the wall if the absorption
resulting from partial immersion in 1/8 inch of water for one minute
is less than 1%.
(3) All masonry construction shall be adequately braced and supported
to insure its stability during construction.
B. Masonry units. All masonry units shall be free from physical defects
which interfere with laying of the unit and impair the compressive
strength of the unit.
C. Types of mortar. The type masonry mortar to be used for various kinds
of masonry work shall be determined from Table 756-23A. The mortar
shall be mixed in accordance with the proportions specified in Table
756-23B.
(1) Surface bond mortars. Surface bond mortars for masonry walls
shall be mixed in accordance with the proportions specified on the
bag.
D. Mortar components. Mortar components shall comply with the
following requirements:
(1) Water. Water shall be clean and free of deleterious amounts of
acids, alkalies or organic materials.
(2) Admixtures or mortar colors. Admixtures or mortar colors shall not
be added to the mortar unless the resulting mortar conforms to the
requirements of the mortar specifications. Only calcium chloride
may be used as an accelerant and shall be limited to 2% by weight
of the cement used. Calcium chloride may not be used for any other
purpose. Only mineral oxide may be used as mortar color and shall
not exceed 10% by weight of the cement used.
(3) Mixing. Mortar shall be mixed for at least three minutes after all
ingredients have been added with the maximum amount of water to
produce a workable consistency. Mortars that have stiffened due to
water evaporation shall be retempered by adding water as
frequently as needed to restore the required consistency. Mortars
shall be used and placed in final position within 2 1/2 hours after
mixing.
NOTE: To ensure proper mortar mixing, machine mixing is
recommended.
§ 756-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-23
1:603
Table 756-23A
Types of Mortar for Various Kinds of Masonry
Kind of Masonry Types of Mortar
Foundations
Footings M, S
Walls of solid units M, S, N
Walls of hollow units M, S
Hollow walls M, S
Masonry other than foundation masonry
Piers of solid masonry M, S, N
Piers of hollow units M, S
Walls of solid masonry M, S, N, O
Walls of solid masonry, not less than 12
inches thick or more than 35 feet in
height, supported laterally at intervals
not exceeding 12 times the wall thickness
M, S, N, O
Walls of hollow units; load-bearing or
exterior and hollow walls 12 inches or
more in thickness
M, S, N
Hollow walls, less than 12 inches thick M, S, N
Linings of existing masonry, either above
or below grade
M, S
Masonry other than above M, S, N
Table 756-23B
Mortar Specifications by Proportion1
Parts by Volume
Mortar
Type, ASTM
C 270
Portland
Cement
Masonry
Cement
Hydrated
Lime
Sand,
Damp
Loose
Volume
M 1 — 1/4
1 1 (Type II) —
1 — 1/4 to 1/2
S 1/2 1 (Type II) —
1 — 1/2 to 1 1/4
N2 — 1 (Type II) —
Not less
than 2 1/4
and not
more than 3
times the
sum of the
volumes of
the cements
and lime
§ 756-23 FOX POINT CODE § 756-23
1:604
NOTES:
1 All cements are one cubic foot per sack; lime equals 1 1/4 cubic
feet per sack.
2 Limited to walls with a maximum depth of five feet below grade.
(4) Cementitious material. Cementitious material shall conform to the
standards approved by the Department.
NOTE: The Department will accept cementitious material
conforming to the following standards: ASTM C91, Masonry
Cement; ASTM C150, Portland Cement; ASTM C595, Portland
Blast-Furnace Slag Cement; ASTM C207, Hydrated Lime for
Masonry Purposes; and ASTM C5, Quick Lime for Structural
Purposes.
(5) Aggregates. Aggregates for use in masonry mortar shall consist of
natural sand or manufactured sand and shall be graded.
NOTE: The Department will accept aggregates in accordance with
ASTM C144.
E. Cavity wall.
(1) Corbeling. Cavity wall construction may be supported on an eightinch
foundation wall, provided the eight-inch wall is corbeled with
solid masonry to the width of the cavity wall. Individual corbels
shall not exceed two inches nor more than 1/3 the height of each
corbeled unit.
(2) Projections. The projection of a wall beyond the edge of a
supporting member, other than masonry such as a shelf angle or
edge of a beam, shall not exceed 1 1/4 inches, unless at least 2/3
the mass of the wythe of masonry involved is located directly over
the load-carrying member.
F. Openings and lintels.
(1) Openings. The masonry above openings shall be supported. The
bearing length of structural elements which support the masonry
above the opening shall be not less than four inches.
(2) Lintels. Unless designed through structural analysis, lintels shall
be provided in accordance with Table 756-23C.
G. Masonry veneers.
(1) Veneer over frame construction.
(a) Masonry veneers may be corbeled over the foundation wall,
but the corbeling shall not exceed one inch.
§ 756-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-23
1:605
(b) An air space shall be provided between the veneer and the
sheathing.
(c) Where no brick ledge is formed in the foundation wall, a thirtypound
asphalt-saturated felt or corrosion-resistant metal base
flashing shall extend over the top of the foundation wall from
the outside face of the wall and shall extend at least six inches
up on the wood sheathing under the building paper or waterresistant
sheathing.
(2) Veneer over masonry backup. A thirty-pound asphalt-saturated felt
or corrosion-resistant metal base flashing at the bottom of the
veneer shall extend over the top of the foundation and up at least
six inches and be embedded in the backup course.
H. Veneer anchorage. All veneers, supports and attachments shall be
mechanically or adhesively anchored.
(1) Mechanical anchorage. All anchors shall be corrosion-resistant.
(a) Conventional size veneer (one square foot or less) shall be
securely attached to its backing by anchors, the equivalent of
No. 22 U.S. gauge corrugated sheet steel 7/8 inch wide with at
least one such tie located in every two square feet of wall. Ties
shall be embedded two inches in a masonry joint and nailed to
the framing with an 8d nail.
(b) Larger size veneer (greater than one square foot) shall be
securely attached with anchors, the equivalent of not less than
1/4 inch diameter bolts in accordance with either of the
following:
[1] Each unit individually anchored to the supporting
framework with at least three anchors.
[2] Individual units doweled to each other at all horizontal and
vertical joints so that one anchor is provided for every six
square feet of wall surface.
(2) Adhesive anchorage. Veneer may be cemented to a masonry or
concrete wall or to exterior portland cement plaster in high rib
galvanized metal lath with an adhesive, provided that the bond is
sufficient to withstand a shearing stress of 50 psi after curing for
28 days.
I. Bearing.
(1) Concentrated loads. Beams, girders, trusses, joists and other
members producing concentrated loads shall bear a minimum of
three inches on one of the following:
(a) Concrete beam. The equivalent of a nominally reinforced 2,500
psi concrete beam, eight inches in height.
§ 756-23 FOX POINT CODE § 756-23
1:606
(b) Solid masonry. At least eight inches in height of masonry
composed of solid masonry units with all voids and joints
completely filled with mortar.
(c) Metal plate. A metal plate of sufficient thickness and size to
distribute the load to masonry units. For piers and columns,
the bearing plate shall not exceed 60% of the cross-sectional
area of the pier or column and the resultant reaction of all
vertical and horizontal loads shall fall within the middle third of
the member.
(d) Bond beam. The bond beam shall be equivalent of not less than
an eight-inch lintel (bond beam) block with two No. 4 bars
embedded in high-strength mortar fill or equivalent. The loads
shall bear on the fill.
(2) Continuous loads. Joists, trusses and beams, other than wood,
spaced four feet or more on center and 40 feet in length, slabs or
other members causing continuous loads shall be transmitted to
masonry with a minimum bearing of three inches upon solid
masonry at least 2 1/2 inches in height, or as indicated for
concentrated loads.
(3) Stack bond walls. Concentrated loads shall be distributed into
masonry laid in stack bond by a concrete beam or bond beam [as
defined in Subsection I(1)]. For masonry of solid units, two
additional rows of a continuous tie assembly may be used instead of
a concrete beam or bond beam.
(4) Support of wood floor members. Where a wood structural member
is buried in masonry for support, it shall be firecut or a selfreleasing
device shall be used. Where the end of a wood structural
member is built into an exterior wall, a one-half-inch air space shall
be provided at the sides, top and end of such member.
J. Bonding. Unless designed through structural analysis, all masonry
walls shall be bonded as follows:
(1) Single-wythe walls. Masonry units in single-wythe walls shall be
lapped at least two inches or 1/3 the height of the masonry unit,
whichever is greater, or through the use of continuous tie
assemblies spaced at sixteen-inch vertical intervals.
(2) Multi-wythe walls. Adjacent wythes shall be bonded with
continuous tie assemblies spaced at vertical intervals not
exceeding 16 inches; or individual ties of at least 3/16 inch
diameter for each 4 1/2 square feet of wall area, spaced at a
maximum vertical distance of 18 inches and a maximum horizontal
distance of 36 inches; or bonded with a full course of masonry
headers every seventh course. The clear distance between bond
courses shall not exceed 16 inches for solid masonry units and 24
§ 756-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-23
1:607
inches for hollow masonry units. Hollow walls shall not be bonded
with headers.
K. Bolts and anchors. The allowable shear on steel bolts and anchors shall
not exceed the values given in Table 756-23D.
L. Joints.
(1) The maximum thickness of a mortar joint shall be 1/2 inch.
(2) Except for head joints used for weepholes and ventilation, solid
masonry units shall be laid to achieve full head and bed joints.
(3) Hollow masonry units shall be laid with full head joints and full
bearing areas of the face shells and under webs where the adjacent
cells are to be filled with grout.
M. Cleaning. Chemical cleaning agents shall be prevented from harming
the metal reinforcement of structural components and shall not be of a
strength which will adversely affect the mortar.
Table 756-23C
Allowable Spans for Lintels Supporting Masonry Veneer
Size of Steel
Angle1,3
No Story
Above
1 Story
Above
2 Stories
Above
Number if
1/2" or
Equivalent
Reinforcing
Bars2
L 3 x 3 x 1/4 6' 0" 3' 6" 3' 0" 1
L 4 x 3 x 1/4 8' 0" 5' 0" 3' 0" 1
L 6 x 3 1/2 x 1/4 14' 0" 8' 0" 3' 6" 2
2 - L 6 x 3 1/4 x
1/4
20' 0" 11' 0" 5' 0" 4
NOTES:
1 Long leg of the angle shall be placed in a vertical position.
2 Depth of reinforced lintels shall be not less than eight inches and
all cells of hollow masonry lintels shall be grouted solid. Reinforcing
bars shall extend not less than eight inches into the support.
3 Steel members indicated are adequate typical examples; other steel
members meeting structural design requirements may be used.
§ 756-23 FOX POINT CODE § 756-23
1:608
§ 756-24. Concrete requirements.
The design and construction of structures in concrete of cast-in-place or
precast construction, plain, reinforced or prestressed, shall conform to the
rules and principles of the following standards:
§ 756-25. Fireplace requirements.
Table 756-23D
Allowable Shear on Bolts and Anchors
Bolt or Anchor
Diameter
(inches)
Embedment1
(inches)
Allowable Shear
(pounds)
1/4 4 270
3/8 4 410
1/2 4 550
5/8 4 750
3/4 5 1,100
7/8 6 1,500
1 7 1,850
1 1/8 8 2,250
NOTES:
1 Bolts and anchors shall be solidly embedded in mortar or grout.
A. ACI Std. 318, Building Code Requirements for Reinforced Concrete.
B. ACI Std. 512, Recommended Practice for Manufactured and Reinforced
Concrete Floor and Roof Units.
C. ACI Std. 525, Minimum Requirements for Thin Section Precast
Concrete Construction.
A. Masonry fireplaces. Masonry fireplaces shall be constructed of
masonry, stone or reinforced concrete.
(1) Flue size. The fireplace flue size shall be based on the type of flue
and the fireplace opening indicated in Table 756-25A.
§ 756-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-25
1:609
Table 756-25A
Minimum Flue Size for Masonry Fireplaces
Type of Flue
Minimum Cross-Sectional
Area
Round 1/12 of fireplace opening
Square or rectangular 1/10 of fireplace opening
Lined with firebrick 1/8 of fireplace opening
(2) Termination of chimney. Masonry chimneys shall extend at least
three feet above the highest point where the chimney passes
through the roof and at least two feet higher than any portion of the
dwelling within 10 feet of the chimney.
(3) Firebox materials. The firebox shall be of the preformed metal type,
at least 1/4 inch thick, or shall be lined with firebrick, at least two
inches thick and laid in thin joints of refractory cement. The back
and sidewalls of the firebox, including the lining, shall be at least
eight inches nominally thick; at least four inches shall be solid
masonry.
(4) Lintel. Masonry over the fireplace opening shall be supported by a
lintel of noncombustible material.
(5) Ducts. Warm-air circulating ducts used with steel fireplace units
shall be constructed of masonry or metal.
(6) Hearth. Fireplace hearth extensions shall be provided of approved
noncombustible material for all fireplaces. Where the fireplace
opening is less than six square feet, the hearth extension shall
extend at least 16 inches in front of and at least eight inches
beyond each side of the fireplace. Fireplace openings over six
square feet shall be provided with a hearth extension of 20 inches
in front of and 12 inches beyond each side of the fireplace opening.
All combustible materials shall be kept a minimum of eight inches
from the fireplace opening.
(7) Dampers. Dampers shall be made of cast iron or at least No 12
gauge sheet metal. The area of the damper opening shall be at least
90% of the required flue area when in the open position.
(8) Hoods. Metal hoods, used as a part of a fireplace, shall be
constructed of at least No. 19 gauge corrosion-resistant metal with
all seams and connections of smokeproof construction. The hood
shall be sloped at an angle of 45° or less from the vertical and shall
extend horizontally at least six inches beyond the firebox limits.
Metal hoods shall be kept a minimum of 18 inches from the
combustible materials unless approved for reduced clearances.
§ 756-25 FOX POINT CODE § 756-25
1:610
NOTE: The Department will accept dampers and hoods listed by
nationally recognized laboratories.
(9) Flue liners. Masonry chimneys shall be provided with fireclay flue
liners of at least 5/8 inch thickness. The thickness of the masonry
chimney wall shall be at least four inches. Flue liners shall be laid
in a full mortar bed of refractory cement. If the flue liners are
separated from the exterior shell by more than four inches, each
individual flue shall be wrapped by four inches of masonry.
(10) Cleanout openings. Fireplaces with ash dumps shall be provided
with cleanout openings at the base. Doors and frames of the
opening shall be made of ferrous materials.
(11) Mantel shelves. Woodwork or other combustible materials shall not
be placed within six inches of the fireplace opening. Combustible
materials located within 12 inches of the fireplace opening shall not
project more than 1/8 inch for each inch distance from the opening.
(12) Chimney caps. Precast or cast-in-place concrete caps shall have a
minimum thickness of two inches and a minimum of one-inch
overhang. A minimum of a 1/4 inch soft joint shall be used between
flues and caps and shall be caulked or sealed.
(13) Framing around fireplaces. All wood headers, joists, beams, rafters
and studs shall be located at least two inches from the outside face
of the chimney or fireplace masonry and at least six inches from the
inside surface of the flue lining. All spaces between the framing and
the fireplace shall be firestopped with noncombustible material.
B. Factory-built fireplaces. Factory-built fireplaces consisting of a fire
chamber assembly, one or more chimney sections, a roof assembly and
other parts shall be tested and listed by a nationally recognized testing
laboratory.
(1) Fireplace assembly and maintenance. The fireplace assembly shall
be erected and maintained in accordance with the conditions of the
listing.
(2) Distance from combustibles. Portions of the manufactured chimney
extending through combustible floors or roof/ceiling assemblies
shall be installed in accordance with the distances listed on the
chimney in order to prevent contact with combustible materials.
(3) Hearth extensions. Hearth extensions of not less than threeeighths-
inch thick hollow metal, stone, tile or other approved
material shall be provided.135
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-25
1:611
NOTE: Hearth extensions should extend not less than 16 inches in
front of and at least eight inches beyond both sides of the fireplace
opening.
C. Factory-built fireplace stoves. Factory-built fireplace stoves, consisting
of a freestanding chamber assembly, shall be tested and listed by a
nationally recognized testing laboratory. The assembly shall be erected
and maintained in accordance with the listing.
§ 756-25 FOX POINT CODE § 756-25
1:612
ARTICLE VIII
Frame Construction
§ 756-26. Structural framing.
Unless designed through structural analysis, wood frame construction shall
be of either balloon, post and beam, platform or other approved system and
shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Grades and sizes. All lumber used for framing shall be sound, free from
rot and large or loose knots and damaging diagonal or spiral grain and
shall be of the structural grade corresponding to the stresses used in
design. All lumber sizes herein specified are nominal sizes and apply to
surfaced (S4S) lumber having dimensions which conform to the
American Softwood Lumber Standard Sizes, PS 20-70. All structural
wood framing shall be a minimum of two inches in nominal thickness
except for approved composite or built-up integrated units.
B. Stress and loading requirements.
(1) Allowable stresses. Lumber used in frame construction shall be in
accordance with such values as established by the National Design
Specification for Wood Construction.
(2) Live loads. One- and two-family residential construction shall be
designed and constructed to support the following live loads
without exceeding the allowable stresses:
(a) Floors: 40 pounds per square foot.
(b) Garage floors: 60 pounds per square foot.
(c) Ceilings (with storage): 20 pounds per square foot.
(d) Ceilings (without storage): 10 pounds per square foot.
(e) Roofs (slope 3 in 12 or less): 40 pounds per square foot.
(f) Roofs (slope over 3 in 12): 30 pounds per square feet.
C. Wood structural design requirements.
(1) Tabulated information. As contained in the "Span Tables for Joists
and Rafters, American Softwood Lumber Sizes, PS 20-70" and in
the supplement "Design Values for Joists and Rafters," is based on
the National Design Specification for Wood Construction and is an
acceptable authority under the provisions of this code. Both
publications may be obtained from the National Forest Products
Association, 1619 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, D.C.
20036.
(2) Plywood. As used for siding, roof and wall sheathing, subflooring,
diaphragm, built-up members and other such structural
application, shall conform to the performance standards for its type
§ 756-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-26
1:613
as contained in "U.S. Products Standards PS-1-74 for Softwood
Plywood/Construction and Industrial." Specifications for the use of
plywood products published by the American Plywood Association
and based on the requirements of PS-1-74 are acceptable design
authority under the provisions of this chapter. Plywood panels
identified under the grade trademark of the APA are approved
when used in accord with APA recommended specifications for
the intended use. PS-1-74 and APA specifications may be obtained
from the American Plywood Association, 1119 A Street, Tacoma,
Washington 98401.
D. Girders and beams.
(1) Girders and beams for uniformly loaded one- or two-story buildings
may be selected from the table below:
Minimum Size Girder or Beam of A-36 Steel
Span C to C
of Bearing
(feet)
Width of Floor
Tributary to
Beam
(feet)
One-Story
Building*
Two-Story
Building**
8 10 to 12 W 6 x 12 W 8 x 13
8 12 to 18 W 6 x 13 W 8 x 17
9 10 to 12 W 8 x 10 W 8 x 15
9 12 to 14 W 8 x 13 W 8 x 17
9 14 to 18 W 8 x 15 W 8 x 20
10 10 to 12 W 8 x 10 W 8 x 15
10 12 to 14 W 8 x 13 W 8 x 20
10 14 to 18 W 8 x 17 W 10 x 21
11 10 to 12 W 8 x 13 W 10 x 17
11 12 to 14 W 8 x 17 W 10 x 21
11 14 to 18 W 8 x 20 W 10 x 25
12 10 to 12 W 10 x 11.5 W 10 x 21
12 12 to 14 W 10 x 17 W 12 x 25
12 14 to 18 W 10 x 17 W 12 x 27
NOTES:
* One-story building: Assumes combined live and dead loads of
100 psf imposed on the supported first-floor joists - no roof
loading.
** Two-story building: Assumes combined live and dead loads for
both floor levels of 170 psf imposed on the supported first-floor
joists - no roof loading.
§ 756-26 FOX POINT CODE § 756-26
1:614
(2) Extreme load conditions. Where concentrated loads or uniform
loads exceeding the table are supported, calculations shall be
submitted to prove acceptable performance. Calculations shall be
required for girders or beams of reinforced concrete, solid wood or
built-up wood members.
(3) Wood girder and beam joints. Joints of abutting wood beam or
girder members shall be made over column or pier supports. Where
wood girders and beams frame into concrete or masonry, a
minimum of 1/2 inch air space shall be provided at ends and sides
unless treated wood is used. Wood shims are not acceptable under
wood girders or beams.
E. General framing requirements.
(1) Structural strength impaired. Structural framing members shall
not be spliced between bearing points. Where structural strength is
impaired by cutting, drilling or inherent defects, such members
shall be reinforced in a manner acceptable to the Building
Inspector.
(2) Cutting and notching. Bored holes in joists, girders or beams shall
be no greater than 2 1/2 inches in diameter and shall be located in
the end 1/4 of span and shall not be more than 1/4 of the joist
depth. The top or bottom edges of joists may be notched in the
outer 1/4 of the length not to exceed 1/6 of the joist depth.
Notching the top or bottom edge of joists will not be permitted in
the middle half of the length of any joist. In studs of walls or
partitions, holes and notches made to receive piping or duct work,
or for other fabrication purposes, shall be cut not more than 1/2 the
depth of the stud. Not more than two successive studs shall be so
cut or bored unless they are doubled or otherwise reinforced as
required by the Building Inspector.
(3) Connections and fastenings. All structural members shall be
connected and fastened at their junctions with connectors, bolts,
lag screws, spikes, nails, straps or other approved devices or by
approved gluing and in accordance with the recommended nailing
schedule in Table No. 4.136
(4) Bridging. In all ceilings, floors, attic and flat roof joist framing,
there shall be not less than one line of bridging for each eight feet
of span and the bridging shall not be less than one-inch-by-threeinch
lumber double-nailed at each end, or equivalent metal lateral
bracing of equal rigidity secured at the intersections. A line of
bridging shall also be required at supports where adequate lateral
stiffness is not otherwise provided. Solid bridging is also
acceptable. Where two-by-six-inch ceiling joists are used, a
minimum two-by-four-inch stay-lathe may be substituted for
136. Editor's Note: Table No. 4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 756-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-26
1:615
required bridging. Such stay-lathe shall be spiked securely at each
joist and at each end to either stud or rafter.
(5) Fire stopping. Fire stopping shall be provided at all intersections of
interior and exterior walls with floors, ceilings and roof in such a
manner as to effectively cut off communication by fire through
hollow concealed spaces and prevent both vertical and horizontal
drafts. Furred walls shall have fire stops above and below the
junction of any floor construction with the walls.
(6) Fire-stopping materials. Wood fire stops shall be of lumber not less
than two inches in nominal thickness or 3/4 inch thick plywood and
not less in width than the enclosed space within the partition
except as provided for chimneys. Space between the chimney and
wood framing shall be solidly filled with noncombustible materials
at floor or ceiling levels. Fire stops may also be of gypsum board,
mineral wool or other approved noncombustible materials securely
fastened in place.
F. Floor and ceiling framing.
(1) Joist, spans and sizing. For ordinary conditions of use and live
loads, the spans of joists shall be limited by the following tables:
(a) Table (J-1) Living Areas.
(b) Table (J-4) Limited Attic Storage.
(c) Table (J-6) No Attic Storage.
(2) Truss joist design. Truss joists shall be designed through structural
analysis and such design shall bear the seal of an architect or
engineer registered in the State of Wisconsin.
(3) Bearing and anchorage. Floor joists framing into walls or girders
shall be anchored, tied or nailed to secure continuity. The ends of
each joist or truss shall have not less than one-and-one-half-inch
length of bearing on wood or metal nor less than three-inch length
on hollow or solid masonry units. The ends of beams or girders
shall have not less than four-inch length of bearing. Beams or joists
framing from opposite sides shall either lap not less than six inches
nor more than 12 inches and be securely bolted or spiked together.
When framing end to end, all joists, beams and girders shall be
secured together by approved metal ties, strap or scabs.
(4) Multiple joists. Floor joists under terrazzo, tile, bathtubs or other
unusual loading conditions shall be doubled or otherwise
reinforced to support the load. Floor joists under partitions running
parallel thereto shall be doubled or formed of built-up sections or
may be replaced by a solid section of adequate strength to support
the loads.
§ 756-26 FOX POINT CODE § 756-26
1:616
(5) Joist headers and trimmers. All joist headers more than four feet in
length and their trimmers shall be doubled. All tail beams or joists
which are more than six feet in length shall be hung in approved
joist or beam hangers or shall be fastened by approved metal
connectors. All double trimmer joists shall be spiked together. A
minimum two-inch-by-two-inch ledger strip may be used in lieu of
hangers or connectors.
(6) Hung ceiling. Ceiling joists, when parallel to roof joists, shall be
two inches by four inches at the same spacing as the joists above
and hung by not less than one-inch-by-four-inch hangers spaced at
not more than six feet. Ceiling joists, when at right angles to roof
joists, shall be two inches by four inches spaced 16 inches on center
and hung by not less than two-inch-by-two-inch hangers spaced at
not more than six feet.
G. Wall framing.
(1) Design loads. Walls shall be designed to support all superimposed
loads from floors and roof. Exterior walls shall be designed to
withstand a horizontal wind pressure of at least 20 pounds per
square foot.
(2) Stud size and spacing. For ordinary conditions of use, wood studs
shall comply with the size and spacing requirements of the
following table:
Maximum Spacing and Height of Studs
Spacing
(inches)
Size Grade
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Supporting
Roof and
Ceiling
Only
Supporting
1 Floor,
Roof and
Ceiling
Supporting
2 Floors,
Roof and
Ceiling
Interior
and Non-
Load
Bearing
2 x 3 Standard
and better
8 16 N/P N/P 24
2 x 4 or
larger
Utility 8 24 16 12 24
2 x 4 Standard
and better
12 24 24 12 24
2 x 6 or
larger
No. 3 and
better
18 24 24 16 24
N/P = Not Permitted
NOTE: A three-story frame house with walls constructed of twoby-
four studs would require a twelve-inch stud spacing on the
lowest level, a sixteen-inch stud spacing on the intermediate level
and a twenty-four-inch stud spacing on the upper level.
§ 756-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-26
1:617
(3) Plates and ribbon boards. All walls shall be provided with a single
bottom plate and double top plate. Top plates shall be lapped no
closer than 32 inches at all intersecting walls and corners. Plates
shall be of the same width as the supporting stud and each not less
than two inches thick. Plates shall be spliced above studs. Ribbon
boards, which support floor or roof joists, shall not be less than one
inch by four inches in size and shall be notched into the studs and
nailed thereto as required by the nailing schedule.
(4) Stud walls. All walls and partitions shall be constructed using studs
of continuous length. Nonbearing partitions only may be
constructed with the smaller dimension perpendicular to the wall.
Studs cut so as to impair their structural strength shall be
reinforced as required by the Building Inspector.
(5) Wood posts. The load-bearing value of isolated post or studs shall
be verified by calculations submitted to prove acceptable
performance. All wood posts used in basements or cellars shall
have concrete bases which extend not less than three inches above
the finished floor and bear directly on the post footing. In cellars or
basements, all wall plates or stair stringers shall rest on top of the
finished concrete floor.
(6) Bracing. Corner posts shall be the equivalent of not less than three
pieces of two-inch by four-inch studs braced with not less than one
piece of one-inch by four-inch diagonal let into the wall framing.
Diagonal bracing shall be fastened at each bearing point with the
studs and with the sole and top wall plates. Diagonal bracing may
be omitted when approved plywood sheathing is installed or when
one-inch board sheathing is placed diagonally. Equivalent metal
bracing products may be used when approved by the Building
Inspector.
(7) Framing of opening. All windows and door openings shall have
double studs for the full height of the door openings at jambs, with
double headers or truss construction over the opening, or by other
approved methods or connection devices to support the
superimposed loads. The jamb studs shall be a minimum of twoinch-
by-four-inch studs double with the inner stud extending in one
piece from header to bearing securely spiked to the outer stud.
(8) Headers. All headers over openings in bearing walls or partitions
shall consist of double joists on edge not less than herein specified
or truss construction bearing on jack studs or other approved
construction affording adequate strength.
(a) Wood headers for one- and two-story buildings may be selected
from the table below:
§ 756-26 FOX POINT CODE § 756-26
1:618
Wood Headers for Bearing Walls
Span Minimum Header Size
Less than 4' 0" Two (2" x 4")
4' 0" to 5' 6" Two (2" x 6")
5' 6" to 7' 0" Two (2" x 8")
7' 0" to 8' 6" Two (2" x 10")
8' 6" to 10' 0" Two (2" x 12")
(b) Where headers support greater or lesser uniform or
concentrated loads, or are subject to other unusual loading
conditions, calculations shall be submitted to prove acceptable
performance.
H. Roof framing.
(1) Rafter spans and sizing. For ordinary conditions of use and live
loads, the spans shall be limited by the following tables:
(a) Table R-9 (slope 3 in 12 or less).
(b) Table R-11 (slope over 3 in 12).
(2) Rafter support and collar ties. Roof rafters shall be vertically
supported with two-by-fours spaced not more than 32 inches on
center, at the ridge when the slope of the roof is less than four
inches per foot. When the slope is more than four inches per foot,
roof rafters shall be vertically supported at the ridge or shall be
adequately trussed or tied together with not less than one-inch-bysix-
inch collar beams spaced not more than 32 inches on center,
located a minimum of 1/3 the rafter length below the ridge, and
each rafter shall be fastened to the wall plate or special plate
provided. Roof rafters shall be framed opposite each other at the
ridge.
(3) Collar beams. When collar beams are above the lower third of the
rafters and ties are not provided at the plate line, provision shall be
made for tying the lower end of the ceiling or wall construction.
(4) Ridge boards. The depth of ridge boards shall not be less than the
cut end of the rafter.
(5) Double rafters. Dormer windows and other openings in roofs shall
be framed with double rafters and headers. Valley rafters on spans
over 12 feet, measured horizontally, shall be doubled.
(6) Valley and hip rafter size. The depth of valley or hip rafters shall not
be less than the cut end of the rafter. The thickness of valley or hip
rafters shall not be less than two inches.
§ 756-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-26
1:619
§ 756-27. Exterior sheathing.
Sheathing shall provide a flat base upon which the exterior finish can be
applied. Common types permitted include boards, plywood, structural or
nonstructural insulating boards and gypsum sheathing. Installation shall
serve to minimize air infiltration and shall be in accord with the
manufacturer's recommendations.
(7) Dormers or gables. If over six feet in width, the valley rafters shall
run through to the ridge of the main roof. Where the ridge of the
dormer or gable is below the ridge of the main roof, one valley
rafter shall run through to the ridge of the main roof.
(8) Factory constructed trusses. Factory constructed trusses, approved
by the State of Wisconsin, Department of Safety and Professional
Services, may be used as an approved roof framing system. The
building plans shall indicate the approval number assigned by the
Department of Safety and Professional Services. The maximum
spacing of trusses shall be two feet on center.
A. Wall sheathing.
(1) Sheathing required. Except as otherwise regulated, the outside of
all frame exterior walls shall be covered with an approved wall
sheathing material.
(2) Approved wall sheathing. Approved wall sheathing may be selected
from the following table:
Exterior Wall Sheathing Table
Type
Minimum
Thickness
(inches)
Maximum Stud
Spacing
(inches o.c.)
Board - square edged 1 nom. 16
Board - edge matched 1 nom. 24
Plywood 5/16 16
Plywood 1/2 24
Gypsum - exterior
grade
1/2 16
Approved fiber board 1/2 16
Expanded
polystyrene*
1 24
High-density
fiberglass*
1 24
§ 756-26 FOX POINT CODE § 756-27
1:620
NOTES:
* Expanded polystyrene or high-density fiberglass sheathing is
not suitable as a nailing base; exterior finish materials shall
be attached with appropriate length fasteners and only at stud
locations.
Materials other than listed may be approved upon submission
of manufacturers published technical information and the
approval of the Building Inspector.
(3) Joints of sheathing. Joints of sheathing shall be centered over studs.
Sheathing shall be installed with tight-fitted joints and shall be
fastened at each stud. Board sheathing shall be double nailed and,
if wider than eight inches, be triple nailed at each stud. Plywood
shall be fastened six inches o.c. at panel edges and 12 inches o.c. at
intermediate supports. Fastening of other materials shall be in
accord with the manufacturers published recommendations.
(4) Building paper. Building paper shall be used to cover any sheathing
not water-resistive. All water-resistive sheathing shall be identified
as such by the manufacturer's label on each piece of material. In all
other cases, a minimum of 15 pounds saturated felt or paper shall
be applied with a lap of four inches. Papers with vapor resistance
exceeding 0.5 perm shall not be used as a covering on exterior
walls.
B. Roof sheathing and roof decking.
(1) Roof sheathing.
(a) Roof sheathing installed 24 inches o.c. or less may be selected
from the following table:
Roof Sheathing Table
Type of Material
Minimum Measured
Thickness
(inches)
Plywood (flat roofs of less than 2
1/2:12 pitch)
5/8
Plywood (sloped roofs of 2 1/2:12
or over pitch)
1/2
Boards (solid sheathing) 5/8
Boards (spaced sheathing) 3/4
(b) Materials and installation methods other than listed may be
approved upon submission of the manufacturers published
recommendations and the approval of the Building Inspector.
Such approval shall be limited to installations resulting in a
§ 756-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-27
1:621
§ 756-28. Floor sheathing and underlayment.
Subfloor material shall provide a structurally adequate and suitable surface
upon which finish floor covering shall be applied. Common materials
permitted are board and plywood sheathings, planking, plywood and wood
product underlayments.
uniform load deflection limit of 1/180 of span under live load
plus dead load, 1/240 of span under live load only.
(2) Roof decking.
(a) Wood planks shall be tongue-and-groove or splined and at least
two inches, nominal, in thickness. Planks shall terminate over
supports unless the joints are end matched. All joints shall be
parallel to and over the center of roof supports with not more
than two adjacent planks breaking joints over the same
support except at ends and at openings.
(b) Maximum span of two-inch plank shall not exceed the
following:
[1] Planks continuous over two supports, eight feet.
[2] Planks over a single span, six feet.
[3] Other spans or thicknesses may be used when calculated
according to standard engineering practice. Deflection
shall be limited to 1/240 of span.
(3) Vapor barrier for roof decking. Vapor barrier for roof decking shall
be installed between roof decking and insulation when the roof
deck is to remain exposed as the finished ceiling.
(4) Fastening of sheathing and decking. Fastening of sheathing and
decking shall be to each rafter, truss or roof support. Board
sheathing shall be double-nailed and, if wider than eight inches, be
tripled-nailed at each support. Plywood shall be fastened six inches
o.c. at panel edges and 12 inches o.c. at intermediate supports.
Roof decking shall be blind and surface-nailed and, if wider than
eight inches, shall be tripled-nailed at each support.
A. Board subfloor.
(1) Minimum thickness. Minimum thickness shall be one inch nominal
for joists spaced a maximum of 16 o.c.; width shall not exceed eight
inches.
(2) Subfloor direction. Boards may be installed diagonal or at right
angles to joists. When installed at right angles to joists, finish floor
shall be installed across subfloor.
§ 756-27 FOX POINT CODE § 756-28
1:622
(3) Joints of subflooring. Joints of subflooring shall be centered over
joists with cuts made parallel to joists. Not more than two adjacent
boards may break joints on the same joist except at ends and at
opening.
(4) Minimum clearance. Minimum clearance of at least 1/2 inch shall
be maintained between subflooring and masonry or concrete walls.
(5) Subfloor as ceramic tile base. Joists may be beveled and ledger
strips used to support subfloor for concrete setting bed. [Refer to
§ 756-26F(4) for method of reinforcing joists to support concrete
setting bed.]
B. Plywood subfloor.
(1) Plywood. Plywood used for structural subflooring shall be of
construction grades and shall be grade-stamped on each panel. The
allowable loads and spans shall be limited to those identified on
each panel, as follows:
Allowable Loads for Plywood Floor
Panel Identification
Index
Thickness
(inches)
Maximum Floor
Span
(inches o.c.)
30/12 5/8 12*
32/16 1/2, 5/8 16**
36/16 3/4 16**
42/20 5/8, 3/4, 7/8 20
48/24 3/4, 7/8 24
NOTES:
* May be 16 inches o.c. if 25/32" stripflooring is installed at right
angles to joists.
** May be 24 inches o.c. if 25/32" stripflooring is installed at right
angles to joists.
(2) Direction of installation. Plywood subflooring shall be applied
continuously over two or more spans with the direction of the face
grain perpendicular to the supporting joists.
C. Underlayment for resilient flooring.
(1) Underlayment shall be minimum 1/2 inch structural interior type or
exterior type plywood or particle board. Particle board may not be
used for underlayment except under carpeting. Other materials
may be used when approved as suitable by the Building Inspector.
(2) Plywood shall be of at least "C plugged" grade.
§ 756-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-28
1:623
(3) Hardboard shall be installed with smooth surface up.
(4) Nailing to subfloor shall be by type of nail and spacing
recommended by the underlayment manufacturer.
D. Plank subfloor.
(1) Planks. Plank shall be tongue and groove or splined and at least
two inches in thickness. Maximum width eight inches. Square-edge
planks may be used where strip flooring with T and G edges is
installed at right angles to plank or where a separate underlayment
is provided.
(2) Joints. Joints shall be cut parallel to and over center of floor beams
with not more than two adjacent planks breaking joists over the
same support except at ends or openings.
(3) Maximum span. For two-inch plank, deck shall not exceed the
following:
(a) Plank continuous over two spans: seven feet.
(b) Planks over single spans: five feet.
(c) Other spans may be used when calculated according to
standard engineering practice. Deflection shall be limited to 1/
360 of span.
(4) Nailing. Plank floor shall be blind and face nailed to floor beams in
accord with the nailing schedule, Table No. 4.137
(5) Other loads. From bearing partitions, interior columns or other
concentrated loads shall be supported independent from plank
deck.
E. Combined thickness. Combined thickness of subfloor and underlay shall
be minimum of one inch except as permitted by this chapter as single
floor systems.
F. Single floor system.
(1) Plywood combination subfloor/underlayment, designed for a single
floor system, shall be grade-stamped and comply with the following
table:
Spans for Plywood Combination Subfloor/Layment
Species Group Maximum Joist Spacing (o.c.)
16 20 24
1 1/2" 5/8" 3/4"
2, 3 5/8" 3/4" 7/8"
137. Editor's Note: Table No. 4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 756-28 FOX POINT CODE § 756-28
1:624
Spans for Plywood Combination Subfloor/Layment
Species Group Maximum Joist Spacing (o.c.)
16 20 24
4 3/4" 7/8" 1"
(2) Wider spans may be permitted of 1 1/8 inch thick panels when
installed according to manufacturers' published recommendations
and when approved by the Building Inspector.
§ 756-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-28
1:625

ARTICLE IX
Exterior Coverings, Roofing, Interior Finishings
§ 756-29. Exterior coverings.
A. General requirements. All exterior wall coverings shall be of approved
moisture- and weather-resisting materials of sufficient stiffness and
properly attached to resist rain and wind. All exterior intersections
between wood or metal and masonry veneer shall be caulked with
elastic waterproofed material, except where metal-flashed. The bottom
edge of the exterior siding immediately over any exterior wall opening
shall be so located as to permit the headflashing to extend under the
siding and to be turned up behind the siding.
B. Types of weather wall coverings. The following materials shall be
accepted as approved weather coverings of nominal minimum thickness
specified:138
(1) Brick masonry veneers: four inches.
(2) Stone veneers: two inches.
(3) Clay tile veneers: 3/8 inch.
(4) Stucco or exterior plaster: 3/4 inch.
(5) Wood siding - bevel: 1/2 inch at the butt.
(6) Wood siding - board: one inch.
(7) Precast stone facing: 5/8 inch.
(8) Protected combustible siding: requires approval.
(9) Wood shingles and shakes: 3/8 inch at the butt.
(10) Exterior plywood: 3/8 inch.
(11) Formed metal siding: 28 gauge.
(12) Fiberglass shingles: 5/32 inch.
C. Aluminum siding. Aluminum siding shall be allowed, subject to the
following conditions:
(1) Such siding shall have a minimum thickness of 0.025 inch;
provided, however, where insulation board is used as backing, the
minimum thickness shall be 0.020 inch. Furthermore, the minimum
thickness shall be 0.002 inch less to allow for rolling tolerance.
(2) All siding or material being covered by such aluminum siding shall
be in sound condition.
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-29
1:627
(3) Horizontal aluminum siding shall not exceed nine inches in width.
(4) All aluminum siding not backed shall be coated on both sides.
D. Nailing weather boarding, wall and roof covering.
(1) All weather boarding and wall and roof covering shall be securely
nailed with aluminum, copper, zinc, zinc coated or other approved
corrosion-resistive nails into the supporting structure in
accordance with the recommended nailing schedule or the
approved manufacturer's standards. Shingles and other weather
covering attached directly to the sheathing less than one inch thick
shall be secured with barbed or other mechanically bonding nails of
approved type or other common nails on furring strips attached to
studs.
(2) Combination wall sheathing/siding. In direct-to-stud applications,
panels 5/16 inch and 3/8 inch nominal thickness or more may be
used over studs spaced 16 inches o.c. with face grain applied
parallel to studs. Panel five-sixteenths-inch thick shall meet special
cross-band requirements, such as those given in American Plywood
Association Manufacturing Specification for Specialty Siding.
E. Exterior stucco. All stucco work shall be reinforced with approved
metal lath or wire fabric as herein specified; except when applied to a
masonry base. The reinforcing fabric shall be coated with zinc or other
approved rust-resistive coating or shall be manufactured from
corrosion-resistive alloys.
Type of
Reinforcement
Minimum
U.S. Gauge
Maximum
Mesh
Minimum Weight
(pounds per
square yard)
Metal lath — — 1.80
Expanded metal — — 3.40
Woven wire 18 1 inch 1.74
Woven wire 17 1 1/2
inches
1.41
Woven wire 16 2 inches 1.47
Welded wire 18 4 square
inches
0.67
Welded wire 17 4 square
inches
0.82
Welded wire 16 4 square
inches
1.10
F. Roofs, slope and covering.
§ 756-29 FOX POINT CODE § 756-29
1:628
(1) Roofing. All roofs shall be covered with wood, asphalt, tile or slate
shingles; or with a built-up asphalt; or tar coated with gravel or
capped with a mineral surface cap sheet; or with sheet metal,
fiberglass shingles or approved materials. All roofing shall be
placed and nailed in approved manner. Plain tar paper roll roofing
shall not be permitted.139
(2) Slope; rise. The slope of all roofs of buildings and structures when
tile, asphalt, fiberglass or slate shingles are used shall not be less
than four inches rise to 12 inches run, except as provided below:
(a) Where built-up roofing with gravel slag or mineral cap sheet is
used, the maximum rise shall be three inches to 12 inches run.
(b) Self-sealing or interlocking singles may be used when the slope
of the roof is a minimum of 2 1/2 inches rise to 12 inches run,
providing a double layer of fifteen-pound asphalt saturated felt
underlayment is hot-mopped on the roof overhang and extends
up to a point at least 24 inches inside of the exterior building
wall.
(3) Wood shingle roofing. If wood shingles are used, they shall be No. 1
grade, edge grain and shall be of such length, thickness and
exposure as shown in Tables G and H. Wood shingles shall not be
used on roofs having a slope of less than four inches rise per
twelve-inch run.
Table G
Wood Shingle Roof Covering
Minimum Length
(inches) Minimum Thickness
16 5 butts in 2 inches
18 5 butts in 2 1/2 inches
24 4 butts in 2 inches
Table H
Wood Shingle Roof Covering
Maximum Exposure for Shingle
Length
(inches)
Slope of roof to 12-inch
run
16 18 24
Rise 4 inches and over 5 5 1/2 7 1/2
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-29
1:629
§ 756-30. Wall and ceiling finish.
Every room used for sleeping, dining, cooking, toilet or bathing purposes
shall have the walls and ceiling of approved materials or finished in an
approved manner as regulated by this chapter. Approved materials shall
include plaster, tile, wood, gypsum wallboard and masonry units. All wall
(4) Asphalt shingles.
(a) Asphalt shingles shall be approved Class "C" label
(Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.) square butt strip shingles
weighing not less than 235 pounds per square or hexagonal
strip shingles weighing no less than 195 pounds per square,
interlocking shingles weighing not less 180 pounds per square
or individual shingles weighing no less than 250 pounds per
square laid over asphalt felt or similar felt of not less than 15
pounds per 100 square feet.
(b) Starting row of all asphalt shingles shall be doubled. Such
shingles shall be nailed with aluminum, copper or hot-dipped
galvanized nails. Nail according to manufacturer's
recommendations.
(5) Tile and slate shingles of durable quality shall be laid in an
approved manner over asphalt felt or similar approved felt of not
less than 30 pounds per 100 square feet.140
(6) Fiberglass shingles. Fiberglass shingles with an approved Class "A"
label (Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.) butt strip shingle weighing
not less than 225 pounds per square laid over felt or similar
approved felt of not less than 15 pounds per 100 square feet and
installed and nailed according to manufacturer's
recommendations.
(7) Flat roof coverings. Built-up roof covering for flat roofs, having a
pitch of not more than 2 1/2 inches rise to 12 inches run, shall be
approved Class "B" (Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.) minimum
three-ply roofing consisting of three layers of asphalt or tarsaturated
felt, each layer of not less than 15 pounds per 100 square
feet. Where tar or asphalt coating is used, the roof shall be surfaced
with pea gravel. All layers of felt shall be mopped solid.
(8) All other types of roof covering and manner of application shall be
approved by the Building Inspector.
(9) Reroofing. A new roof covering may be applied on top of an existing
roof covering. No more than two layers of roof covering will be
allowed. If additional layers of roofing material are requested,
calculations shall be submitted. A permit is required.
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-29 FOX POINT CODE § 756-30
1:630
and ceiling finishing materials shall have a minimum composite thickness of
1/2 inch, except that 1/4 inch plywood or hardboard paneling is acceptable.
Materials less than 1/4 inch shall be backed by 3/8 inch backer board.
A. Lathing.
(1) General requirements. All lath shall be nailed in accordance with
the nailing schedule, Table No. 4,141 tied, laced, clipped or
otherwise effectively secured. Internal angles, coves, arches and
junctures between wood, fiber insulation, gypsum lath and other
plaster bases shall be reinforced with cornerites of metal lath or
other similar approved material, except where metal or wire lath is
carried around such intersections. No interior lath shall be applied
until all exterior framing of buildings or structures is covered.
(2) Gypsum lath.
(a) Gypsum lath shall be nailed to wood supports or attached to
metal supports by means of clips in an approved manner. Such
supports shall be spaced not to exceed 16 inches on center for
three-eighths-inch gypsum lath and 24 inches on center for
one-half-inch gypsum lath.
(b) Joints of gypsum lath abutting walls and ceiling shall be
staggered. Gypsum lath shall be applied with the long
dimension at right angles to supporting members, with joints
broken in each course and shall not be abutted tightly together,
nor be more than 1/4 inch apart.
(3) Fiber insulation lath. Fiber insulation lath, when used as a plaster
base, shall have a rough, fibrous texture to insure mechanical and
suction bond and shall be nailed in an approved manner to wood
supports spaced not to exceed 16 inches on center. Such nails shall
be placed not less than 3/8 inch from the ends and not less than 1/2
inch from shiplapped, tongued and grooved, or interlocking type
lath. Shiplapped, tongued and grooved or interlocking edges shall
be fitted to contact.
(4) Metal and wire lath.
(a) The dimensions, sizes and application of expanded, ribbed and
sheet metal lath and all types of wire lath shall comply with
accepted engineering practice. Expanded, ribbed and sheet
metal lath shall provide a key sufficient to retain the plaster
and shall weigh not less than 2 1/2 pounds per square yard.
Such lath shall be fabricated from steel sheets, copper-bearing
steel or other approved corrosion-resistive metals and shall be
pierced to provide a mechanical key to retain the plaster by
slitting, punching, expansion and shall be given a protective
141. Editor's Note: Table No. 4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 756-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-30
1:631
coating of rust-inhibitive paint after fabrication or shall be
made from galvanized sheets.
(b) Wire lath shall be not lighter than Number 19 W. & M. gauge
wire, 2 1/2 meshes per inch coated with zinc and rust-inhibitive
paint.
(c) Stiffened wire lath shall not be lighter than Number 20 W. & M.
gauge wire, 2 1/2 meshes per inch, with number 24 U.S. gauge
V-rib stiffeners spaced not to exceed eight inches apart coated
with zinc or rust-inhibitive paint.
(5) Paper-backed lath. Expanded metal or wire fabric lath backed with
integral approved paper shall be fabricated from not lighter than
Number 24 U.S. gauge zinc-coated metal sheets with maximum
openings of 1 1/8 by 2 1/2 inches or Number 16 W. & M. gauge zinccoated
wire with not more than two-inch-by-two-inch mesh.
(6) Lathing accessories. All metal lathing accessories including corner
beads, base screeds, picture molds, metal casing and similar
accessories, shall be fabricated from not less than Number 26 U.S.
gauge zinc-coated steel sheets and shall be provided with
prefabricated or expanded deformations or otherwise formed to
insure complete embedment and keying of the plaster.
B. Plastering.
(1) Number of coats. Plastering with gypsum hard-wall, lime or
portland cement plaster shall be applied in not less than three
coats when applied over metal or wire lath and in not less than two
coats when applied over other plaster bases permitted in this code.
Lime or portland cement plaster shall not be applied directly to
fiber insulation lath or gypsum lath.
(2) Thickness.
(a) Grounds shall be installed to provide for the following
thicknesses of interior plaster, from face of plaster base to
finished plaster surfaces, as regulated in Table 1.
Table 1
Thickness of Plaster
(inches)
Type of Base Residential
Metal or wire lath 5/8 minimum
Other approved types of lath 3/8 minimum
Unit masonry and concrete
walls
1/2 minimum
Monolithic concrete ceiling 1/8 minimum; 3/8 maximum
§ 756-30 FOX POINT CODE § 756-30
1:632
§ 756-31. Nailing to connecting wood members.
The number of nails at each bearing and connecting wood member shall not
be less than the number shown in Table No. 4.142 A coated sinker may be
used in lieu of a common nail.
(b) If monolithic concrete ceiling surfaces require more than 3/8
inch of plaster to produce desired lines or surfaces, metal or
wire lath shall be attached thereto.
(3) Application to masonry or concrete base. When masonry walls are
plastered, they shall be stripped, lathed and plastered to protect
against moisture.
(4) Weather protection. When interior plastering work is in progress,
adequate ventilation shall be provided, and in freezing weather, the
enclosure shall be heated. Plaster shall not be applied to surfaces
that contain frost.
C. Drywall. All drywall shall be a minimum of one-half-inch gypsum board
applied and jointed per Gypsum Association Specifications Pamphlet
GA-216-74.
A. Staples. Power-driven, divergent chisel point galvanized wire staples
may be used for fastening plywood, fiberboard or gypsum wall
sheathing, plywood or hardboard underlayment, plywood roof
sheathing, plywood subflooring, gypsum lath, asphalt roof shingles and
the first ply only of two-ply system gypsum drywall finish, provided that
the gauge, crown, length and spacing of the staples for a particular
material and condition of use are in compliance with accepted
standards and as regulated herein, except that the gauge of staples
used for fastening structural wall sheathing, roof sheathing and
subflooring shall not be less than No. 14.
B. Power-driven, divergent chisel point galvanized wire staples or
equivalent nails not less than two inches long may be used in lieu of
nails for fastening wood boards one inch (nominal) in thickness to
studs, joists or rafters, provided the gauge of such staples is not less
than No. 14. The number of staples to be used at each stud, joist or
rafter shall be determined on the basis of one staple for each required
nail.
142. Editor's Note: Table No. 4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 756-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-31
1:633

ARTICLE X
Mechanical
§ 756-32. Heating, ventilating and air-conditioning standards.
The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, Chapter SPS 323 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, and all amendments thereto are hereby made a part of
this code by reference and shall apply to all one- and two-family dwellings
and alterations and additions thereto.
NOTE: Before proceeding with the construction, installation, erection,
alteration or remodeling of any boiler, furnace, incinerator, wood burner,
heat-producing apparatus, air-cooled, water-cooled or mechanically cooled
air conditioning or refrigeration system, storage tanks or other equipment
pertaining to the use of flammable liquids, a permit shall be first obtained
from the Building Inspector.
§ 756-33. Underground tanks, abandoned, out-of-service, removal.
A. Temporarily out-of-service. Tanks shall be rendered "temporarily out-ofservice"
only when it is planned that they will return to active service at
the location within 90 days. The following steps shall be carried
successively:
(1) Removal of a flammable liquid which can be pumped out with a
service pump.
(2) Cap or plug the fill line, gauge opening and pump suction, using
appropriate sealing compound on pipe fittings. If fill line and gauge
opening are equipped with caps which can be properly locked, the
secure locking of these caps is sufficient.
(3) Leave the vent line open.
B. Abandoned tanks. Tanks which are no longer in service may be
rendered "temporarily out-of-service" pending their removal in
accordance with the procedure outlined in Subsection E.
C. Leaking tanks. All tanks found to be leaking shall be removed as per
Subsection E(5). Such removal shall be completed within the time
required by the Village Building Inspector, and no later than 60 days
from the date of notice from the Building Inspector. [Amended
8-13-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
D. Change in use. Whenever there is a change in use of a premises which
no longer requires the use of existing underground tanks, they shall be
removed as per Subsection E(5). This shall apply to all premises where
the use has already changed and all future changes in use. Such
removal shall be completed within the time required by the Village
Building Inspector, and no later than 60 days from the date of notice
from the Building Inspector. [Amended 8-13-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-08]
§ 756-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-33
1:635
§ 756-34. Air conditioning and refrigeration systems and backup
generator installations.
E. Removal of tanks. Tanks shall be removed according to the following
successive steps:
(1) Remove all flammable liquid from connecting lines and tank.
(2) Disconnect and remove, insofar as possible, the suction, inlet,
gauge and vent lines.
(3) Cap or plug open ends of remaining lines.
(4) Close all openings in the tank with pipe plugs before the tank is
removed from the ground.
(5) Remove the tank from the premises within 72 hours from the time
the tank is uncovered. This seventy-two-hour period commences
upon the initial digging or excavation to remove the tank, and
terminates only when the tank is physically removed from the site.
[Amended 8-13-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
(6) Keep the tank tightly sealed with plugs or caps until it is removed
from the premises and during transportation upon its removal.
F. If removal of the tank from the ground would affect the structural
integrity of the building and if the Building Inspector and/or the Fire
Inspector determines a condition of hardship to exist, the tank may be
abandoned in place and filled with an inert material after emptying and
cleaning of the tank. The tank cleaning would be performed by a
certified tank cleaner. [Added 5-28-1991 by Ord. No. 91-574]
A. Permit requirements.
(1) Permit required. Except as hereinafter provided, before proceeding
with the construction, erection or installation of any air-cooled,
water-cooled or mechanically cooled air-conditioning or
refrigeration system or unit or backup generator installations, in or
to serve any building, a permit shall first be obtained from the
Building Inspector.
(2) Permits shall not be required for the installation of any airconditioning
or refrigeration system or unit that does not use water
for cooling and where the source of operating power is obtained by
plugging in an electrical cord connection to an electrical outlet.
This subsection shall be applicable to portable units.
(3) Application for a permit shall be made by the installing contractor
upon a form provided by the Building Inspector, shall be filled out
completely and shall provide the following information:
(a) Name and address of contractor.
§ 756-33 FOX POINT CODE § 756-34
1:636
§ 756-35. Domestic-type incinerators.
(b) Location of premises where installation is proposed.
(c) Name and address of owner.
(d) Location of unit on premises, including distance to lot lines for
exterior apparatus.
(e) Manufacturer's identification, classification and size of unit.
(f) Nature of coolant, if applicable.
(g) If water cooled, source of water and method of discharging
wastewater. (Refer to Department of Building Inspection.)143
(h) Where water conservation devices are required,
manufacturer's name, identification, classification and size of
equipment.
(i) Such additional information as shall be required by the
Building Inspector.
B. Exterior structures. Where any unit of an air-conditioning or
refrigeration system or backup generator installation is located outside
of the structure, said unit shall comply with setback requirements for
accessory structures as set forth in the Chapter 745, Zoning, and said
location shall be subject to approval of the Building Inspector. Said
location shall not, by noise or sight, be detrimental to adjoining
property. As an exception to the requirements of this subsection,
however, the Village Manager may authorize a temporary backup
generator installation to be located anywhere on a lot if the Village
Manager finds that the generator serves a public purpose and will be
removed no later than 12 months from the date of the approval, subject
to the temporary structure approval procedure described in § 745-7D of
this Code. [Amended 2-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
A. Domestic type incinerators shall meet the requirements of the State of
Wisconsin, Department of Natural Resources as contained in Chapter
NR 154, Wis. Adm. Code. Said Department shall have approving
authority for the equipment involved. Installation shall conform to the
following requirements, unless superseded by the manufacturer's
requirements.
B. Gas burner connections. Where a gas burner is used, a lever handle
shutoff cock shall be provided before the union at an accessible location
in the gas line at the rear of the burner. Incinerators furnished with
means for automatic ignition of the gas at the main burner shall be
equipped with a device which will automatically shut off the main gas
supply in the event the means of ignition becomes inoperative or the
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-35
1:637
means of keeping the valve of the device open becomes inoperative or
both.
C. Mounting.
(1) Domestic-type incinerators, except as hereinafter provided, shall
be mounted on floors of fire-resistive construction with
noncombustible flooring or surface finish and with no combustible
material against the underside thereof. Such construction shall
extend not less than 12 inches beyond the incinerator base on all
sides, except that at the front or side where ashes are removed, it
shall extend not less than 18 inches beyond the incinerator.
(2) Domestic-type incinerators that are specifically approved for
installation on a combustible floor may be mounted in accordance
with the conditions of such approval.
D. Masonry chimneys for incinerators. Masonry chimneys for domestic
type incinerators shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements for masonry chimneys. All flues shall terminate in a
substantially constructed spark arrester with openings not greater than
1/2 inch or be provided with other suitable means for avoiding
discharge of fly particles. Such screen shall be kept in repair at all
times.
(1) Domestic-type incinerators shall be connected to a chimney
suitable for solid-fuel-burning appliances.
E. Clearances.
(1) Domestic-type incinerators, except as provided herewith, shall be
installed to provide clearances between the unit and woodwork or
other combustible material of not less than 36 inches at the sides
and top and not less than 48 inches at the front, and in no case shall
the clearance above the charging door be less than 48 inches.
(2) Domestic-type incinerators that are specifically approved for
installation with clearance less than specified above may be
installed in accordance with the conditions of such approval,
provided that in any case, the clearances shall be sufficient to
afford ready accessibility for firing, clean out and any necessary
servicing and with a minimum clearance of three inches between
the sides and combustible material.
(3) Domestic-type incinerators may be installed in rooms, but not in
confined spaces such as alcoves, with reduced clearance to
woodwork or other combustible material, provided that the
combustible material is protected with an approved protective
material, but in no case shall this clearance be less than three
inches to the protection.
F. Smoke pipes for incinerators.
§ 756-35 FOX POINT CODE § 756-35
1:638
(1) Domestic-type incinerator smoke pipes, except as herein provided,
shall be installed to provide clearance of not less than 18 inches to
woodwork or other combustible material.
(2) Domestic-type incinerator smoke pipes may be installed in rooms,
but not in confined spaces such as alcoves, with reduced clearances
to woodwork or other combustible material provided the
combustible material is protected with an approved protective
material.
(3) Domestic type incinerator smoke pipes shall not pass through any
combustible wall or partition unless protected at the point of
passage.144
G. Refuse chutes. Refuse chutes shall not feed directly into incinerators.
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-35
1:639

ARTICLE XI
Garages and Accessory Buildings
§ 756-36. General requirements.145
A. Definitions.
(1) An attached private garage shall mean a private garage attached
directly to the principal building, or attached by means of an
enclosed or open breezeway, porch, terrace or vestibule, or a
private garage so constructed as to form an integral part of the
principal building.
(2) A detached private garage shall mean a private garage entirely
separated from the principal building.
(3) Accessory buildings shall conform to all requirements of this
chapter.
B. Locations. Detached garages shall be governed by the following unless
otherwise provided for in appropriate zoning codes.
(1) Garages of wood frame construction shall be located not less than
10 feet from any residence building, except that such distance may
be reduced to not less than five feet when the adjacent wall is
protected as required for attached garages.
(2) Garages of masonry wall construction shall not be located less than
five feet from any residence building.
C. Area. All private detached garages shall be governed by such setback
and green space ratios as otherwise provided by Chapter 745, Zoning.
D. Foundations and footings. Attached privates garages shall be provided
with the same type footings and foundations as required herein for the
principal building. Concrete floors shall be not less than four inches in
thickness. Detached private garages may be built with a continuous
floating slab of reinforced concrete not less than four inches in
thickness. Reinforcement shall be a minimum of six inches by six
inches, number 10 by 10 wire mesh. The slab shall be provided with a
thickened edge all around, eight inches wide and eight inches below the
top of the slab. Exterior wall curbs shall be provided not less than four
inches above the finished ground grade adjacent to the garage. Bolts 3/
8 inch in diameter with nuts and washers attached, six inches long,
shall be embedded three inches in the concrete curb of detached
garages, eight feet on centers.
E. Floor surface. The floor in all private garages shall be of concrete
construction and sloped toward the exterior garage door or opening. No
openings or pits in the floor shall be permitted, except for drainage.
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-36
1:641
F. Construction. Private garages shall be constructed as follows:
(1) Load-bearing foundations, walls and partitions shall be constructed
as herein regulated except as stated above.
(2) Detached private garages of wood frame construction shall be
constructed with the following requirements:
(a) Studs may have a maximum spacing of 24 inches on centers.
(b) Diagonal corner bracing may be applied on the inside surface
of studs.
(c) Corner posts may consist of two two-inch-by-four-inch studs or
a single four-inch-by-four-inch stud.
(d) Horizontal bracing and collar beams may be two-inch-by-sixinch
with a maximum spacing of four feet on centers.
G. Attached private garages. Private garages may be attached to or made
part of residence buildings when in compliance with the following
regulations:
(1) Separation from dwelling areas. Attached garages shall be
separated from the dwelling unit by at least:
(a) Two-inch brick or stone veneer.
(b) Metal lath or perforated rock lath and 3/4 inch of plaster.
(c) Five-eighths inch of vermiculite plaster board.
(d) Five-eighths inch fire code gypsum plaster board.
(2) An attached private garage may have a door connecting directly
into the principal building, provided that the floor of such garage is
at least eight inches below the floor of such principal building. Such
door shall be a metal or solid wood door not less than 1 3/4 inches
in thickness. A maximum 100 square inches of one-quarter-inch
stationary wire glass window may be permitted in such door.
H. Garage heating. All open flame equipment shall be effectively separated
by not less than one-hour fire-resistive wall, floor or ceiling; however,
suspended furnaces or direct-fired units that are fired with a liquid fuel
or gas may be used without an enclosure, provided that they are located
at least seven feet above the floor and at least six inches from any
combustible wall or ceiling. All units shall be supported by
noncombustible brackets or hangers.
§ 756-36 FOX POINT CODE § 756-36
1:642
ARTICLE XII
Miscellaneous and Violations
§ 756-37. New materials and methods.
No provision in this chapter is intended to prohibit or prevent the use of
any alternate material or method of construction not specifically mentioned
in this chapter. Approval of alternate materials or methods of construction
shall be obtained from the Department. Requests for approval shall be
accompanied by evidence showing that the alternate material or method
of construction performs in a manner equal to the material or method
required by this chapter. The Department may require any claims made
regarding the equivalent performance of alternate materials or method to
be substantiated by test.
§ 756-38. Tests.
The Department may require that the materials, methods, systems,
components or equipment be tested to determine the suitability for the
intended use. The Department will accept results conducted by a
recognized independent testing agency. The cost of testing shall be borne
by the person requesting the approval.
§ 756-39. Prefabricated dwellings or accessory buildings.
A. The test method used to determine the performance shall be one that is
a nationally recognized standard.
B. If no nationally recognized standard exists, past performance or
recognized engineering analysis may be used to determine suitability.
C. Ungraded or used building materials may be used or reused as long as
the materials possess the essential properties necessary to achieve the
level of performance required by this chapter for the intended use. The
Department or the municipality enforcing this chapter may require
tests in accordance with this section.
A. Manufacture, sale and installation of dwellings. No manufactured
dwelling, manufactured building system or component of the building
system subject to this part shall be manufactured for use, sold for initial
use or installed in this state unless it is approved by the Department
and it bears the Wisconsin insignia issued or a state seal or an insignia
reciprocally recognized by the Department.
B. Installation. A permit shall be obtained before any on-site construction
falling within the scope of this chapter is commenced for a
manufactured dwelling.
C. Approval. An application for the approval of any manufactured
dwelling, building system or component shall be submitted to the
Department, in the form required by the Department, along with the
§ 756-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-39
1:643
§ 756-40. Identification of products.
All materials shall be identified by the approved label, the grade mark, the
trademark or by other approved manufacturer's identification.
§ 756-41. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter
shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the
provisions so adjudged and the rest of this code shall remain valid and
effective.
§ 756-42. Violations and penalties.
§ 756-43. Failure to obtain permit.
It shall be unlawful to commence work prior to obtaining a permit therefor.
Double fees shall be charged if work is commenced prior to the issuance of
a permit.
§ 756-44. Decks.
appropriate fees in accordance with the Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, use, occupy or maintain any
building or structure in violation of any provisions of this Code, or to
cause, permit or suffer any such violations to be committed. Any person,
firm or corporation found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-4. It shall be the
responsibility of the offender to abate the violation as expeditiously as
possible, and each day that such violation is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense.146
B. If, in any action, a permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense
nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the
Building Inspector constitute a defense.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ATTACHED DECK — Any deck which is physically connected to the
principal building or accessory structure.
DECK — Any structure which serves as a raised horizontal platform or
floor constructed of wood or other materials, without enclosing walls or
roof.
DETACHED DECK — Any deck which is not physically attached to the
principal building or accessory structure.
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 756-39 FOX POINT CODE § 756-44
1:644
B. Soil and excavation requirements for deck piers or foundations.
(1) No pier shall be placed on soil with a bearing capacity of less than
2,000 pounds per square foot unless the pad support is designed
through structural analysis.
(2) All organic material (roots, etc.) shall be cut off at the sidewalls of
the borings or trench. All organic and loose material must be
removed from the cavity area prior to pouring concrete.
C. Deck piers, pads and foundations.
(1) General footings, pads or piers shall be of adequate bearing area to
safely distribute all live and dead loads to the supporting soil
without exceeding the bearing capacity of the soil.
(2) Type and size of concrete pads, piers or foundations.
(a) Decks attached to the principal buildings.
[1] Concrete pads. The minimum depth of the pad shall be 48
inches below grade. The minimum dimensions of this pad
shall be four inches in depth and eight inches in diameter.
[2] Piers. The minimum depth of concrete piers shall be 48
inches below grade. The minimum dimensions of this pier
shall be eight inches in diameter [the concrete pier(s) shall
extend a minimum of six inches above grade unless an
approved mounting bracket is secured at the top surface of
the pier(s)].
[3] Deck foundations. Shall be in accordance with the
requirement of § 756-18A, B(1) or C in this chapter if used
instead of piers or pads.
[4] Direct burial wood posts shall be placed on a minimum two
inches nominal thickness treated plate or other approved
materials at a uniform depth below grade. Posts shall be
treated to CCA.40 for direct soil contact and must be
placed a minimum of 48 inches below established final
grade.
(b) Detached decks.
[1] Concrete pads shall be provided at a uniform depth below
grade with all loose or organic material removed from the
pad area prior to placement of concrete. The pad shall
have a minimum depth of four inches and eight inches in
diameter.
[2] Piers. The minimum eight-inch diameter concrete piers
shall be at a uniform depth below grade.
§ 756-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-44
1:645
[3] Direct burial posts shall be placed on a minimum two
inches nominal pressure-treated plate or other approved
materials at a uniform depth below grade. Posts shall be
treated to CCA.40 for direct soil contact.
[4] Ground contact framing shall be allowed for decks which
are less than 24 inches above grade. All materials in direct
contact with soil shall be treated to CCA.40.
D. Framing.
(1) General requirements.
(a) Materials. All wood framing used in deck construction shall be
pressure treated against decay or shall be a species of wood
that is naturally decay resistant or shall be protected from the
weather.
(b) Design loading. Decks shall be designed for a minimum of a
forty-pound-per-square-foot live load.
(2) Column posts.
(a) Column spacing. Column posts shall be spaced per Table No.
3.147
(b) Column size.
[1] All columns posts not exceeding six feet in height shall be
a minimum of four inches by four inches nominal
thickness.
[2] All column posts exceeding six feet in height shall be a
minimum of six inches by six inches nominal thickness
unless designed through structural analysis.
(c) Lateral support. Column posts shall be constructed in such a
manner or mechanically attached to the deck and foundation to
resist lateral movement.
(3) Beams.
(a) Beam size. All beams shall be sized per Table No. 3.148
[1] Beams, except as otherwise noted in Table No. 1, shall be a
minimum of two, two-inch thick member or one four-inch
thick member (i.e., two 2 x 8 or one 4 x 8).
[2] Beams may be spaced on each side of the post, provided
that blocking is installed a minimum of 24 inches on center
between the beam members.
147. Editor's Note: Table No. 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
148. Editor's Note: Table No. 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 756-44 FOX POINT CODE § 756-44
1:646
(b) Bearing. Beams bearing directly on the posts shall be attached
by means of approved metal anchors or other approved
methods.
(c) Ledger boards. Ledger boards attached to the building or
accessory building may be used to replace a beam or beams. A
single member of equal depth to the required size beam shall
be used. The ledger beam shall be attached with bolts, lag bolts
or nails, spaced no less than 16 inches on center, secured
directly to the building structure. Flashing shall be installed
between the ledger and building structure.
(d) Beams attaching to the side of the post shall be through-bolted
with galvanized bolts, supported with approved hangers or
attached in accordance with the National Design Standard.
(4) Joist.
(a) Joist size. All deck joist shall be sized and spaced per Table No.
3.149
(b) Bearing. Deck joists shall bear a minimum of 1.5 inches on the
beam or ledger board. Joists fastened to the face of the beam or
ledger shall be attached with approved galvanized metal
hangers.
(c) Overhanging joists. Joists which are at right angles to the
supporting beam shall not be cantilevered more than two feet
past the supporting beam, unless designed by structural
analysis.
(5) Decking.
(a) Material. All decking material shall be a minimum of 1.25
inches thick, nominal thickness. One-inch nominal thickness
may be used, provided that the joists are spaced no more than
16 inches o.c.
(b) Decking orientation.
[1] Decking shall be installed diagonally or at right angles to
the joist.
[2] Decking shall be centered over joists with cuts made
parallel to joists. Not more than two adjacent boards may
break joints on the same joist except at ends and at
openings.
(6) Guardrails and handrails.
149. Editor's Note: Table No. 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 756-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-44
1:647
(a) Guardrails. All decks which are more than 24 inches above
grade shall be protected with guardrails.
(b) Handrails. Every stairway of more than three risers shall be
provided with at least one handrail. Handrails shall be
provided on the open sides of stairways.
(c) Guardrail and handrail detail.
[1] Height. Handrails shall be located 30 to 34 inches above
the nosing of the treads. Guardrails shall be located at
least 36 inches above the surface of the deck.
[2] Open railings. Open guardrails or handrails shall be
provided with intermediate rails or an ornamental pattern
to prevent the passage of a sphere with a diameter greater
than nine inches.
[3] Railing loads. Handrails and guardrails shall be designed
and constructed to withstand a two-hundred-pound load
applied in any direction and any location.
(7) Stairway treads and risers.
(a) Risers. Risers shall not exceed eight inches in height measured
from tread to tread.
(b) Treads. Treads shall be at least nine inches wide, measured
horizontally from nose to nose.
(c) Variation. There shall be no variation in uniformity exceeding
0.188 inch in the width of a tread or the height of the risers.
(d) Stair stringers shall be supported in accordance with the same
manner as used for the deck.
(8) Fasteners. All fasteners exposed to the weather shall be made of
either stainless steel or galvanized steel.
E. Spas, hot tubs and other extraordinary weight loads. If a spa, hot tub, or
other extraordinary weight load is intended to be placed on a deck, this
must be noted in the application to the Building Inspector. The Building
Inspector may require plans stamped by a registered engineer to prove
that the deck will support such a load. This approval is required before
a deck can be constructed which is intended to support such a load, and
is also required for all existing decks before such a load can be placed
on the deck. The Building Inspector may required pads, piers,
foundations, load-bearing capacities, beam sizes, joist sizes and spacing
which exceed the otherwise applicable standards of this chapter as the
Building Inspector deems to be necessary or appropriate. [Added
5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 756-44 FOX POINT CODE § 756-44
1:648
F. Permits required. No deck or any other structure, as defined in this
section, or any part thereof, shall hereafter be built, enlarged, or
altered within the Village, except as hereinbefore provided, and unless
a permit therefor shall first be obtained by the owner or his agent from
the Building Inspector. Permits issued under this section shall be
subject to the requirements and provisions of § 756-7A(1). [Added
8-13-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-13; amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-03]
§ 756-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-44
1:649

ARTICLE XIII
Additional Regulations
§ 756-45. Permit not necessary for minor repairs.
The Building Code shall not be construed to require a permit for any
repairs or minor alterations which do not affect the use, area, structural
strength, fire protection, exits, light, sanitation, ventilation or aesthetics of
the building.
§ 756-46. Construction on or over lake bluff or bank of a ravine.
Construction of any structure or building on over the lake bluff or the slope
of the bank of a ravine must meet the requirements of Article I of Chapter
285, Fox Point Village Code, before a building permit is issued for such
construction.
§ 756-47. Assistance of other officials.
It shall be the duty of all Fox Point Police Department officers to report at
once to the Building Inspector any buildings within their respective districts
at which building operations are being carried on without a building permit
as required by the Building Code. It shall be the duty of other Village
enforcement officers to cooperate with the Building Inspector in the
enforcement of the Building Code.
§ 756-48. Change of occupancy. [Amended 2-12-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-03; 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03; 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-09; 11-11-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-04; 4-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-04]
A. Need.
(1) Prevent deterioration. In order to prevent the development of
hazardous conditions presenting a threat to the health and safety of
occupants of buildings and to other persons, and to prevent the
deterioration of buildings resulting in substantial depreciation in
the property values of the neighborhood, it is necessary that
buildings be kept in a reasonable state of repair.
(2) Eliminate nuisance. The sanitary sewers in the Village were not
designed to and do not have the capacity to carry off all clear water
entering said sewers in periods of heavy surface water runoff.
Many buildings in the Village have the drain tile around the
footings of such building connected to the sanitary sewer; some
buildings also have other sources of entrance of clear water to the
sanitary sewer. In times of heavy rains or melting snow, the sanitary
sewers are surcharged and through sewer overflows discharge into
ravines or ditches and then into Lake Michigan or the Milwaukee
River. The Department of Natural Resources has ordered the
Village to eliminate such sewer overflows and to eliminate the entry
§ 756-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-48
1:651
of clear water into the sanitary sewers. The elimination of the
sewer overflows without the elimination of the entry of clear water
into the sanitary sewers will result in the backup of the sanitary
sewers into the basements of houses. The backing up of sanitary
sewage into the basements of houses causes a pollution problem, a
menace to health and safety, and constitutes a public nuisance.
(3) Multifamily residential rental units. Section 66.0104(2)(e), Wis.
Stats., allows municipalities to inspect rental property or rental
units as part of a program of regularly scheduled inspections
conducted in compliance with § 66.0119, Wis. Stats., as applicable,
and the Village hereby intends to exercise this authority. The
Village finds that multifamily residential buildings with rental units
have unique health, safety and welfare concerns due to the
frequency of the turnover in occupancies, the commercial nature of
the ownership interests, and the lack of owner occupancies, which
warrant this exercise of statutory authority with regard to rental
units in multifamily buildings while not imposing comparable
routine inspection of single-family residential buildings within the
Village.
B. Special inspection warrant. In the event an inspection of any building is
to be made pursuant to the provisions of this section, and permission is
not voluntarily given to the Building Inspector to make such inspection,
he may apply for and obtain a special inspection warrant to make such
inspection, as provided by § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
C. Annual Inspections of multifamily residential buildings.
(1) The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all residential
buildings that contain more than one separate rental unit,
including, but not limited to, duplexes, apartments, townhouses,
and condominiums. When more than one such residential building
is owned by all the same owners, said multiple residential buildings
shall be treated by the Village as one entire residential building
with respect to the application of the provisions of this Subsection
C.
(2) An owner's residential building may be inspected by the Village
once during each calendar year and said inspections shall be
accomplished on a sampling basis of the separate units.
(a) For a residential building containing a total of at least two
separate rental units, but not more than 20 separate rental
units, one unit may be annually inspected, as selected by the
Village.
(b) For a residential building containing a total of more than 20
separate rental units, 5% of the separate rental units, may be
annually inspected, as selected by the Village.
§ 756-48 FOX POINT CODE § 756-48
1:652
§ 756-49. Rainwater drainage.
(c) To the extent possible, the separate rental units selected for
inspection shall be vacant units. Subject to Subsection C(1)(d)
below, any separate rental unit inspected in a previous annual
inspection shall not be subject to annual inspection again until
all of the separate rental units in the entire residential building
have been inspected.
(d) If the Village determines upon inspection of the separate rental
units that there are code violations that affect the safe, decent
and sanitary living conditions for the occupants in the
residential building, then the Village may inspect as many
rental units within the residential building as it deems
reasonably necessary to enforce its ordinances.
(3) The Building Inspector shall seek consent for entry to the
scheduled unit(s), and upon refusal shall seek a special inspection
warrant in compliance with § 66.0119, Wis. Stats., as applicable,
prior to conducting the inspection.
(4) The provisions of this Subsection C shall not alter the Village's
authority to inspect all common areas within a residential building
during normal business hours upon at least 24 hours' prior written
notice addressed to the owner of a residential building as it
appears on the real estate tax records maintained by the Village.
(5) The provisions of this Subsection C shall not alter, limit or
otherwise effect the Village's ability to utilize special inspection
warrants as provided under § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
D. Penalty. Any person who violates this chapter, including this section,
shall be subject to the penalties and remedies described in § 1-4 of this
Code.
A. Water from the roof of every building in the Village shall be conveyed
from the roof to a point not less than three feet from the foundation wall
of said building and also at least three feet from the lot line and shall be
discharged in such a manner so as to not directly or indirectly enter the
sanitary sewer system of the Village.
B. The ground around every building in the Village shall be pitched away
from the foundation wall so that water flows away from the wall to help
prevent surface water from seeping down along the foundation walls
into the drain tile.
C. No surface water drain connected directly or indirectly to the sanitary
sewer is permitted.
D. Any person violating any provision of this section shall upon conviction
be subject to such penalties as provided in § 1-4 of the Village Code.
Each act of violation and every day upon which violation occurs or
§ 756-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-49
1:653
§ 756-50. Floodplain zoning.
When applicable to the lands involved, the provisions of Chapter 724 of this
Code (Floodplain Zoning) shall also be complied with on the application and
granting of a building permit.
§ 756-51. Garbage grinders, incinerators and smoke detectors.
exists constitutes a separate offense. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-08]
A. Every single-family residence shall be equipped with a garbage grinder
or an incinerator.
B. Every two-family residence shall be equipped with either a garbage
grinder in each residential unit, an incinerator for each unit, or one
incinerator servicing both units.
C. Every multiple-family residential building shall be equipped with either
a garbage grinder in each residential unit or an incinerator servicing
one or more units providing all units are serviced by an incinerator.
D. The installation of smoke detectors approved by Underwriters
Laboratory, Inc. is hereby required for all new and existing single- and
two-family residential units. There shall be a minimum of one smoke
detector on each floor of each home which includes the basement. All
existing residential homes shall comply within one year of the effective
date of this section or at the time a certificate of compliance is required,
whichever occurs first, and failing to so comply, the resident, or if no
resident, the owner, shall be fined pursuant to § 1-4 of the Fox Point
Village Code and a certificate of compliance shall be denied. [Added
2-9-1988 by Ord. No. 88-546]
§ 756-49 FOX POINT CODE § 756-51
1:654
ARTICLE XIV
Historic Preservation
[Added 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-627]
§ 756-52. Purpose and intent.
It is hereby declared a matter of public policy that the protection,
enhancement, perpetuation, and use of improvements or sites of special
character or special architectural, archaeological, or historic interest or
value is a public necessity and is required in the interest of the health,
prosperity, safety, and welfare of the people. The purpose of this article is
to:
§ 756-53. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The certificate issued by the
Commission approving alteration, rehabilitation, construction,
reconstruction, or demolition of a historic structure or historic site.
COMMISSION — The Historic Preservation Commission created under this
article.
HISTORIC SITE — Any parcel of land of historic significance due to a
substantial value in tracing the history or prehistory of man, or upon which
a historic event has occurred, and which has been designated as a historic
site under this article, or an improvement parcel, or part thereof, on which
is situated a historic structure and any abutting improvement parcel, or part
thereof, used as and constituting part of the premises on which the historic
structure is situated. In addition, it shall mean any site located within the
Village of Fox Point that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places
by the United States Department of the Interior or the State Register of
Historic Places as maintained by the State Historical Society of Wisconsin.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any improvement which has a special character
or special historic interest or value as part of the development, heritage, or
cultural characteristics of the Village, state, or nation, and which has been
designated as a historic structure pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
In addition, it shall mean any structure located within the Village of Fox
Point that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places by the United
A. Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and preservation
of such improvements and sites which represent or reflect elements of
the Village's cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural
history.
B. Safeguard the Village's historic, prehistoric, and cultural heritage as
embodied and reflected in such historic structures and sites.
C. Maintain and improve property values and enhance the visual and
aesthetic character of the Village.
§ 756-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-53
1:655
States Department of the Interior or the State Register of Historic Places as
maintained by the State Historical Society of Wisconsin.
IMPROVEMENT — Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other
object constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of
such betterment, including streets, lighting fixtures, signs, and the like.
§ 756-54. Historic Preservation Commission composition.
A Historic Preservation Commission is hereby created, consisting of five
members. Of the membership, if available in the community and willing
to serve, one shall be a registered architect; one shall be a historian; one
shall be a licensed real estate broker; one shall be a Village Trustee, and
one shall be a citizen member. Each member shall have, to the highest
extent practicable, a known interest in historic preservation. The Village
President shall appoint the Commissioners subject to confirmation by the
Village Board. Of the initial members so appointed, one shall serve a term of
one year, one shall serve a term of two years, and one shall serve a term of
three years, one shall serve a term of four years, and one shall serve a term
of five years. Thereafter, the term for each member shall be five years. The
Commission shall meet as from time to time directed by the Village Board
or at the call of the Chair.
§ 756-55. Historic structure and historic site designation criteria
and guidelines.
A. For purposes of this article, a historic structure or historic site
designation may be placed on any site, natural or improved, including
any building, improvement or structure located thereon, or any area of
particular historic, architectural, archaeological, or cultural
significance to the Village such as historic structures or sites which:
(1) Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political, economic, or
social history of the nation, state, or community;
(2) Are identified with historic personages or with important events in
national, state, or local history;
(3) Embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type
or specimen inherently valuable for a study of a period, style,
method of construction, or of indigenous materials or
craftsmanship;
(4) Are representative of the notable work of a master builder,
designer, or architect who influenced his or her age; or
(5) Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important to
prehistory or history.
B. The Commission shall adopt specific operating guidelines for historic
structure and historic site designation, providing such are in
conformance with the provisions of this article.
§ 756-53 FOX POINT CODE § 756-56
1:656
§ 756-56. Powers and duties.
A. Designation. The Commission shall have the power, subject to § 756-57,
to designate historic structures and historic sites. Such designations
shall be made based on § 756-55. Once designated, such historic
structures and sites shall be subject to all the provisions of this article.
Any historic site or historic structure located within the Village of Fox
Point that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places by the
United States Department of the Interior or the State Register of
Historic Places as maintained by the State Historical Society of
Wisconsin shall automatically be designated a historic site or structure
under this article.
B. Regulation of construction, reconstruction, alteration, and demolition.
(1) No person, firm, or corporation shall reconstruct, alter, or demolish
all or any part of the exterior of a historic structure or historic site
on such property or construct any improvement upon such
designated property or properties or cause or permit any such
work to be performed upon such property or demolish such
property unless a certificate of appropriateness has been granted
by the Historic Preservation Commission. Also, unless such
certificate has been granted by the Commission, the Building
Inspector shall not issue a permit for any such work.
(2) Upon filing of any application for a certificate of appropriateness
with the Commission, it shall approve the application unless:
(a) In the case of a designated historic structure or historic site,
the proposed work would detrimentally change, destroy, or
adversely affect any exterior feature of the improvement or site
upon which said work is to be done;
(b) In the case of the construction of a new improvement upon a
historic site, the exterior of such improvement would adversely
affect or not harmonize with the external appearance of other
neighboring improvements on such site;
(c) The building or structure is of such architectural or historical
significance that its demolition would be detrimental to the
public interest and contrary to the general welfare of the
people of the Village, the greater community, the state, or the
nation;
(d) In the case of a request for the demolition of a deteriorated
building or structure, any economic hardship or difficulty
claimed by the owner is self-created or is the result of any
failure to maintain the property in good repair.
(3) If the Commission determines that the application for a certificate
of appropriateness and the proposed changes are consistent with
the character and features of the property, it shall issue the
§ 756-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-56
1:657
§ 756-57. Procedures.
certificate of appropriateness. The Commission shall make this
decision with 45 days of the filing of the application.
(4) The issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall not relieve the
applicant from obtaining other permits and approvals required by
the Village, including but not limited to approval by the Building
Inspector, the Building Board, and the Plan Commission. A building
permit or other municipal permit shall be invalid if it is obtained
without the presentation of the certificate of appropriateness
required for the proposed work.
(5) Should the Commission fail to issue a certificate of
appropriateness, it shall, with the cooperation of the applicant,
work with the applicant in an attempt to obtain a certificate of
appropriateness within the guidelines of this article.
(6) Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be undertaken without a
certificate of appropriateness, provided that the work involves
repairs to existing features of a historic structure or site, or the
replacement of elements of a structure with pieces identical in
appearance, and provided that the work does not change the
exterior appearance of the structure or site and does not require
the issuance of a building permit.
C. Appeals. Should the Commission fail to issue a certificate of
appropriateness due to the failure of the proposal to conform to the
guidelines, the applicant may appeal such decision to the Village Board
within 30 days. The Village Board may overturn a Commission denial by
2/3 majority vote of the full Board.
D. Recognition of historic structures and sites. At such time as a historic
structure or site has been properly designated, the Commission, in
cooperation with the property owner, may cause to be prepared and
erected on such property at Village expense a suitable plaque declaring
that such property is a historic structure or site.
A. Designation of historic structures and historic sites.
(1) A petition for the nomination or recision of the designation of a
historic structure or site shall be made on a form provided by the
Commission. Nominations shall be made 45 days before the annual
May meeting or at any other time designated by the Commission.
(2) The Commission may, after notice and public hearing, designate
historic structures and historic sites, or rescind such designation,
after application of the criteria in § 756-55 above. At least 20 days
prior to such hearing, the Commission shall notify the owners of
record, as listed in the office of the Village Assessor, who are
owners of property in whole or in part situated within 500 feet of
the boundaries of the property affected. Notice of such hearing
§ 756-56 FOX POINT CODE § 756-57
1:658
§ 756-58. Interim control.
No building permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector for alteration,
construction, demolition, or removal of a nominated historic structure or
historic site from the date of the meeting of the Historic Preservation
Commission at which a nomination form is first presented until the final
disposition of the nomination by the Historic Preservation Commission
unless such alteration, removal, or demolition is authorized by a majority
of the Village Board as necessary for public health, welfare, or safety. The
delay shall not be for more than 180 days without good cause.
§ 756-58.1. Moving historic structures. [Added 10-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-07]
shall also be published as Class 2 notice under the Wisconsin
Statutes in the official Village newspaper. Owners and their agents
have the right to address and consult with the Commission.
(3) The Commission shall then conduct such public hearing, and, in
addition to the notified persons, may hear expert witnesses and
shall have the power to subpoena such witnesses and records as it
deems necessary. The Commission may conduct an independent
investigation into the proposed designation or recision. Within 10
days after the close of the public hearing, the Commission may
designate the property as either a historic structure or a historic
site, or rescind the designation. After the designation or rescission
has been made, notification shall be sent to the property owner or
owners. Notification shall also be given to the Village Clerk/
Treasurer, the Village Assessor, and the Building Inspector. The
Commission shall cause the designation by the Commission,
including automatic designation, or rescission to be recorded, at
Village expense, in the County Register of Deeds office.
(4) Commission designations of historic structures or historic sites
may be appealed to the Village Board within 30 days. The Village
Board may overturn a Commission designation by 2/3 majority vote
of the full Board.
A. Any person or entity listed as the owner of record of a historic structure
or historic site may petition to rescind the historic structure or site
designation of this article in order to move the structures. The petition,
notice and hearing procedures of § 756-57A(1) through (3) shall apply,
but the decision criteria shall be as described in this section. Such
petition may be granted by the Commission upon finding that the
petitioner has demonstrated all of the following:
(1) The owner is not willing to maintain the structures in their current
location.
(2) The owner seeks to maintain the structures in an alternative
location.
§ 756-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 756-58.1
1:659
§ 756-59. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-08]
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-4.
B. Commission denial of a petition under this section may be appealed to
the Village Board within 30 days of the decision. The Village Board may
overturn such decision by a two-thirds majority vote of the Village
Board members present and voting.
C. All historic structure designations and historic site designation that
may apply to the lot where the structure is removed shall automatically
be rescinded and have no further effect for purposes of this article,
following the grant of a petition pursuant to this section, unless in its
decision the Commission expressly allows any specifically identified
historic designation to remain in effect.
D. The petitioner shall reimburse the Village for costs incurred by the
Village in the matter, pursuant to Chapter 67, Article III, of the Village
Code.
§ 756-58.1 FOX POINT CODE § 756-59
1:660
Chapter 770
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 756.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 781.
Plumbing — See Ch. 825.
§ 770-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "The Electrical Code of the Village of Fox
Point."
§ 770-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Electrical Code is to safeguard life and property by
regulating and providing for the inspection of the installation and condition
of electrical wiring, equipment and devices, and providing for the licensing
of persons, firms and corporations undertaking electrical work, and fixing a
penalty for violation of the provisions of the Electrical Code.
§ 770-3. Electrical Inspector.
A. The office of Electrical Inspector may be held by the Building Inspector.
An Electrical Inspector, appointed by the Village Board, shall act as
head of this department, performing such inspection and other duties
as the Village Board may direct from time to time. [Amended
11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
B. Duties of the Electrical Inspector. The Electrical Inspector shall have
the general management and control of all matters pertaining to
electrical inspection and shall enforce all state laws and Village
ordinances relating thereto. Where requirements of the state laws and
regulations and the provisions of the Electrical Code conflict, the
stricter requirements shall govern.
C. Rights. The Electrical Inspector or his authorized agent shall have the
power and authority at all reasonable hours, for any proper purpose, to
enter any public or private building or premises in the discharge of his
official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the
electrical wiring, equipment or devices contained therein. The
Inspector or his agent shall be given prompt access to any premises
upon request made to the owner or person in immediate charge of the
premises.
D. Records. There shall be kept in the Department of Electrical Inspection
a complete record of all applications and permits, regularly numbered
in the order of their issue, of all inspections made, and other official
§ 756-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 770-3
1:661
§ 770-4. Assistance of other officials.
It shall be the duty of all police officers to report at once to the Electrical
Inspector any buildings within their respective districts at which electrical
work is being done without a permit as required by this chapter. It shall be
duty of other Village enforcement officers to cooperate with the Electrical
Inspector in the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 770-5. State Code adopted.
The Wisconsin State Electrical Code is hereby made, by reference, a part
of this chapter. A copy of the Wisconsin State Electrical Code is on file in
the office of the Building Inspector. In case of conflict between the State
Electrical Code and this Electrical Code, the more stringent requirement
shall apply.
§ 770-6. (Reserved)150
§ 770-7. Electrical license required. [Amended 5-13-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-05]
No person shall alter, install or repair electrical wires, equipment or devices
for any purpose in the Village of Fox Point without first having procured
a license or registration per Wisconsin Statutes § 101.862, subject to the
exceptions noted therein. A license or registration issued by the State of
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services is also required
for a residential property owner who installs, repairs, or maintains
electrical wiring on premises that the property owner owns and/or occupies
as a residence.
§ 770-8. Permits.
work performed under the provisions of the Electrical Code, so
arranged as promptly to afford information concerning electrical
installation.
A. Permits required. No person shall alter, install, or repair electrical
wires, equipment, or devices for any purpose whatsoever in the Village
of Fox Point (except as hereinafter provided) without first having
procured a permit from the Electrical Inspector.
B. Application for permits. Application for an electrical permit shall be
made in writing upon blank forms to be furnished by the Electrical
Inspector. The form shall be made out in full and shall describe the
nature of the work as well as such other information as may be
required.
150. Editor's Note: Former § 770-6, Definitions, as amended, was repealed 8-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-06. Original Sec. 13.07, Electrical license, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08.
§ 770-3 FOX POINT CODE § 770-9
1:662
§ 770-9. Permit exceptions. [Amended 5-13-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-05]
The electrical permit regulation of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
§ 770-10. Temporary and emergency work.
A. The installation, alteration, or repair of electrical generation,
transmission, or distribution equipment owned and operated by an
electrical public utility company.
B. The installation, alteration, or repair of signal or communication
equipment where such equipment is owned and operated by a public
utility company.
C. Any work in ships, railway cars, trailers, trolleys, buses, aircraft,
automobiles, tractor or trailer houses.
D. Any work in connection with electrical equipment used for radio and
television transmission, but not including supply wires to such
equipment.
E. Any work involved in the manufacturing or testing of electrical
equipment or apparatus, but not including any permanent wiring or
equipment.
F. Any work associated with the following:
(1) The repair of plug-connected electrical equipment or devices.
(2) Permanently connected electrical appliances which have been
electrically and mechanically disconnected and separated from all
sources of electrical supply. The opening of switches or the blowing
or removal of fuses shall not be considered electrical or mechanical
disconnection or separation.
(3) The installation or replacement of approved fuses which are not
oversize for the circuit involved.
(4) The installation or replacement of plug connected portable
appliances which do not overload the circuit involved and are not
located in hazardous locations.
G. Portable devices such as grinders, drills, portable signs, washing
machines, vacuum cleaners, radios, television sets and similar devices
not permanently wired to but intended to be connected to the circuit by
flexible cord and plug and not in conflict with the Electrical Code.151
151. Editor's Note: Original § 13.10, Permit fees, amended by Ord. No. 2008-07, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-12. See now
Ch. 63, Fees, § 63-7, Electrical Code fees.
§ 770-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 770-10
1:663
§ 770-11. Inspections.
A. Temporary work. On applying for a permit for temporary work, a
specified period of time during which such wiring is to remain in service
must be stated, but not exceeding 90 days. Service shall be cut off at the
end of this period and shall not again be connected without written
permission from the Electrical Inspector. For buildings where conduit
wiring is required, special permits for temporary work may be granted
by the Electrical Inspector for the installation of open work and exposed
wiring, lights, power for building operations, display, decorative
lighting, etc., for use for a limited period, subject to discontinuance and
complete removal at expiration, and to condemnation and revocation
within such period.
B. Emergency work. In emergency work, the person doing or causing such
work to be done shall report the same to the Electrical Inspector
immediately after beginning work, and such work shall be done in
accordance with the provisions of the Electrical Code.
A. Inspection required. Upon the completion of the wiring in or on any
building, and before any wiring is to be hidden from view, it shall be the
duty of the person, firm or corporation doing the same to notify the
Electrical Inspector in writing and he shall inspect the installation after
such notice is received. If, upon inspection, it is found that the
installation is in compliance with the Electrical Code and with the
Wisconsin State Electrical Code and does not constitute a hazard to life
or property, he shall approve the same and authorize concealment of
the wiring or authorize connection for electrical service. If the
installation is incomplete or not strictly in accordance with applicable
codes, the Electrical Inspector shall issue orders to the person
installing the same to remove all hazards and make the necessary
changes or additions within seven days. In the event that corrections
are not made within the specified time, the Electrical Inspector may
request the Building Inspector to stop all work on the premises until
such time as all lawful orders of the Electrical Inspector are complied
with, or he may order discontinuance of service as set forth in § 770-12.
Reinspections shall be made as stipulated in § 63-7C.
B. Final inspection. Upon the completion of any building, structure,
equipment, or construction for which a permit was issued and before
the same is occupied or used, a final inspection shall be made by the
Electrical Inspector and until such building, structure, or equipment is
in compliance with all the requirements of the Electrical Code and the
Wisconsin State Electrical Code and terms of the permit, no occupancy
shall be maintained. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
C. Periodic inspections. The Electrical Inspector shall periodically visit
and inspect all buildings and premises, especially those occupied by the
public such as places of amusement and places of assemblage, and
make a thorough examination of all the electrical wiring, equipment
and devices installed, and when found to be in a dangerous or unsafe
§ 770-10 FOX POINT CODE § 770-11
1:664
§ 770-12. Authority to discontinue electrical operation.
The Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to order the cutting off of
all electrical current from any electrical system which is found to be in an
unsafe condition, and to order the cutting off of electrical current in cases
of emergency and where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or
property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department. No person
shall reconnect any equipment thus cut off until permission is given by the
Electrical Inspector.
§ 770-13. Appeal from decision of Electrical Inspector.
When the Electrical Inspector condemns all or part of the electrical
installation in any building, the owner may within five days after receiving
written notice from the Electrical Inspector file with the Village Clerk/
Treasurer a petition in writing for review of said action of the Electrical
Inspector. Upon receipt of the petition, the Board of Appeals shall, as soon
as convenient, proceed to a hearing on whether said electrical construction
complies with the Electrical Code, and within 24 hours after such hearing,
shall make a written finding.
§ 770-14. Conformity with codes. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08]
No certificates of inspection shall be issued unless the electrical light,
power or heating installation and all other electrical apparatus connected
with it are in conformity with the provisions of the Electrical Code, the
rules and regulations of the Wisconsin State Electrical Code issued by
the Department of Safety and Professional Services of Wisconsin under
condition, he shall notify the person owning, using, operating or
installing same to place them in a safe condition. The necessary repairs
or changes shall be completed within 15 days after the receipt of
such notice; each day which shall expire after the expiration of said
period shall constitute a separate offense, and the Electrical Inspector
is hereby authorized to order the discontinuance of electrical service
to such defective electrical system until it shall have been repaired,
removed or changed as directed by the Electrical Inspector. Failure
to obey any such order shall subject the person failing to make such
disconnection to the penalties herein provided.
D. Certificate of inspection. Upon acceptance of work by the Electrical
Inspector, he shall note approval on a placard posted on the premises.
Until such time as this approval is posted, no work requiring
inspections shall be concealed. Current shall not be turned on any
electrical installation until a certificate of inspection has been issued by
the Electrical Inspector. However, in occupied buildings where a permit
for lighting fixtures has been issued, the Electrical Inspector may
authorize the installation of meters for electrical service after wiring
has been inspected and approved.
§ 770-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 770-14
1:665
authority of the state statutes and all amendments thereof and supplements
thereto.
§ 770-15. Approved materials.
§ 770-16. (Reserved)152
§ 770-17. Signs.
A. No electrical materials, devices or appliances shall be used or installed
in the Village of Fox Point unless they are in conformity with the
provisions of the Electrical Code, the Wisconsin Statutes and the rules
and regulations issued by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services of Wisconsin and the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin
and all amendments thereof and supplements thereto under authority
of the Wisconsin Statutes, and unless they are in conformity with
approved methods of construction for safety to life and property.
[Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
B. The maker's name, trademark or other identification symbol shall be
placed on all electrical material, devices and appliances used or
installed under the Electrical Code; also the rating in volts, amperes,
watts, or horsepower, etc. to permit proper identification. Except as
otherwise regulated in the Electrical Code, all electrical methods and
materials shall comply with all laws, rules, orders and regulations of the
State of Wisconsin and the Electrical Code issued by the Industrial and
Public Service Commission.
A. Electrically illuminated signs shall not be hung or erected until after
inspection and approval by the Electrical Inspector.
B. Small socket signs may be connected to an existing lighting circuit,
provided the total wattage of lighting circuit, together with socket sign,
does not exceed 1,650 watts. A switch shall be installed within sight of
sign to individually disconnect sign from a source of supply.
C. Vacuum and inert-gas tube signs may be connected to an existing
lighting circuit, providing the total wattage of the lighting circuit
together with the wattage of transformer for this type of sign does not
exceed 1,650 watts. The volt ampere rating of the transformer used in
connection with this type of sign shall be considered as watts. A
separate individual switch shall be installed to disconnect transformer
from source of supply. This switch is to be of such type that it can be
locked in the open position.
D. As applied to neon or gas tube signs, "portable" means less than 75
pounds in weight and less than 10 square feet over the largest surface,
with all high-tension wires and tube terminals within the sign enclosure
152. Editor's Note: Former § 770-16, Installation regulations, as amended, was repealed
8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-06.
§ 770-14 FOX POINT CODE § 770-17
1:666
§ 770-18. Notching of girders, beams or joists.
Before any notching or cutting of girders, beams or joists is done,
permission must be obtained from the Building Inspector.
Chapter 781
FIRES AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 756.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 770.
Plumbing — See Ch. 825.
property, and the tubes or lamps fastened only to and not extending
beyond the sign surface or background. All portable gas tube signs shall
have the metal enclosure grounded by a three-wire cord connected to a
three-point receptacle, and the portable cord shall be limited to six feet
in length. All gas tube signs not coming within the above definition of
"portable" shall be wired in accordance with the Electrical Code rules
and permits procured for each sign installed.
§ 770-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 770-18
1:667

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Codes
§ 781-1. Codes adopted.
§ 781-2. Conflicting provisions.
In cases of conflict between local, state and national code provisions, the
most restrictive provisions shall govern, except as listed by § SPS 361.03,
Application, Subsection (5), Local Ordinances, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 781-3. North Shore Fire Department.
The term "fire department" as used within this chapter shall mean the
North Shore Fire Department, and the term "fire chief" or "chief of the fire
department" shall mean the Chief of the North Shore Fire Department and
the chief's designees or authorized assistants.
§ 781-4. Governing authority.
The term "governing authority" shall mean the Village of Fox Point. The
Village of Fox Point shall determine what items it wants to control by permit,
establish the procedures for plan reviews, establish fees, as well as the
steps that will be followed for noncompliance or appeals.
§ 781-5. Time of applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applied retroactively to building
construction or a project that was in conformity with the codes and
regulations in effect at the time of the grant of the building permit.
A. All orders, rules and regulations of the Department of Safety and
Professional Services, as are set forth in the Wisconsin Administrative
Code and from time to time as amended, are hereby adopted. This
includes but is not limited to the Commercial Building Code, the Fire
Prevention Code, the Electrical Code, and all Administrative Codes not
listed. The Fire Prevention Code (NFPA, most recent edition), the Life
Safety Code (NFPA, most recent edition) and all standards actually
referenced in Chapters 1 to 31 of NFPA 1, and listed in Chapter 32 of
NFPA 1, and only such standards as actually referenced in Chapters 3
to 42 of NFPA 101, and listed in Chapter 2 of NFPA 101 are also
incorporated herein by reference and adopted as part of this Fire
Code.153
B. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief and the Chief's authorized
assistants to enforce all laws, orders, regulations and all other
ordinances set forth in this chapter.
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 781-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 781-5
1:669

ARTICLE II
Fire Inspections
§ 781-6. Duty and authority of Chief of Fire Department.
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to inspect or
cause to be inspected as often as may be necessary all buildings and
premises except the interior of private dwellings for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause
fire, or any violations of the provisions of this chapter.
(1) Whenever any such inspector shall find in any building or upon any
premises combustible waste material or explosive matter, which is
so situated as to endanger property, or shall find in any building or
structure obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways,
doors or windows liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire
Department or egress of occupants in case of fire, the inspector
may order the same to be removed or remedied.
(2) Whenever any such inspector shall find any building or other
structure that, for want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes,
automatic or other fire alarm apparatus, or fire extinguishing
equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated conditions, or from
any other cause, is especially liable to cause or support fire and
which is so situated as to endanger other property or the occupants
thereof, and whenever such inspector shall find in any building
combustible waste material, explosive matter or flammable
conditions dangerous to the safety of such building or the
occupants thereof, the inspector may order such dangerous
conditions or materials to be removed or remedied.
(3) If in any existing building or structure because of its use or
occupancy additional exits are required or repairs to existing exits
are necessary or where repairs to any structural part of such
building or structure are required, the inspector will notify the
Building Inspector who may reinspect such building or structure,
thereafter instituting the proper remedies as may be required.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department is hereby empowered to order
compliance with the regulations of this chapter and all other lawful
orders or laws relating to fire prevention and fire protection in all
existing buildings and structures. Further, the Chief of the Fire
Department is hereby empowered to close any building or structure and
order it vacated whenever violations of any of the regulations of this
chapter are found and are not corrected within the time stipulated by
the Chief or the chief's authorized representative. Where the public is
exposed to immediate danger, the Chief is hereby empowered to order
the closing and vacating of the building at once. This section shall apply
to all buildings, structures and premises in the Village of Fox Point.
§ 781-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 781-6
1:671
§ 781-7. Notice.
§ 781-8. Right of entry.
C. The Fire Chief and the chief's designees are authorized to issue
citations for violations of this chapter.154
A. Any orders shall be provided in writing to the occupant and owner of
the premises. In case the owner or occupant of the premises cannot be
found, such written order shall be affixed in a conspicuous place on the
entrance door to such building or structure or on the premises.
Thereafter, a copy of such order shall be mailed to the owner or
occupant addressed to their last known post office address. It shall be
unlawful for any person to remove such affixed notice without the
written consent of the Fire Chief.
B. Any such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner and
occupant of such building, structure, or premises. The owner or
occupant may within 24 hours appeal to the Fire Chief for a review of
such order, and who shall thereafter as soon as possible file his
decision. Unless such order is revoked or modified by the Chief of the
Fire Department, it shall remain in full force and be complied with
within the time fixed in said order.
A. The Chief of the Fire Department, or any fire inspector, may, at all
reasonable hours, enter any public buildings, public structures, or enter
upon any public premises or portions thereof, for the purpose of routine
preventative inspections, in order to ascertain whether conditions exist
which are liable to cause fire, or whether any violation of any law or
order relating to fire hazards or fire prevention exists or has occurred.
The owner, agent, or occupant of any such public premises who refuses
to permit or prevents or interferes with any entry into or upon the
public premises by such fire inspector, or interferes with any such fire
inspection, shall be deemed guilty of violating this section.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department, or any fire inspector, may, at all
reasonable hours, enter any buildings, structures, premises or areas in
the Village of Fox Point, or portions thereof, with the consent of the
owner or the owner's authorized agent, for the purpose of routine
preventative inspection, in order to ascertain whether conditions exist
which are liable to cause fire or whether any violation of any law or
order relating to fire hazards or prevention of fires exists or has
occurred. No consent is needed in case of an emergency.
C. Without consent, and in cases other than emergencies, the Chief of the
Fire Department, or in the chief's absence, the officer in charge of said
department, shall obtain a warrant from the Municipal Judge of the
154. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 11.02(1)(D), Providing a fee for third and subsequent
inspections, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 781-6 FOX POINT CODE § 781-8
1:672
§ 781-9. Investigation of fires; police powers.
Municipal Court of the Village of Fox Point, or from any judge of a
court of record in Milwaukee County, prior to entering any building,
structure, or premises or any portion thereof, other than those portions
open to the public, in accordance with § 66.0119, Wis. Stats., for the
purpose of inspection as referred to in Subsection B hereof.
A. The Fire Department may investigate the origin and cause and
circumstances of fires occurring in the Village by which property has
been destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, determine whether
the fire is the result of arson, carelessness, or design. Such
investigations may begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a
fire, and if it appears to the officer making such an investigation that
such fire is of suspicious origin, the Chief of the Fire Department shall
be immediately notified of the facts. The Chief shall notify the proper
authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such
matters and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the
collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case. A member of
the Fire Investigation Team in charge of such fire shall file a written
report of damage associated with every fire in a timely manner. It shall
contain a statement of all facts relating to the origin and cause and
circumstances of such fire and other information as may be required.
B. The Village Attorney and any other department of the Village, upon
request of the Fire Chief, shall assist in the investigation of any fire that,
in the chief's opinion, is of suspicious origin.
C. The Fire Chief or officers in command at any fire are hereby vested with
full and complete police authority. Any officer of the Fire Department
may cause the arrest of any person failing to give the right-of-way to the
Fire Department in responding to a fire.
D. The Fire Chief or officers in command may prescribe certain limits in
the vicinity of any fire within which no persons, excepting fire fighters
and police officers and those admitted by order of any officer of the
Department, shall be permitted to enter.
E. The Fire Chief or officers in command shall have the power to cause the
removal of any property whenever it is deemed necessary and prudent
for the preservation of such property or to prevent the spread of fire or
to protect any adjoining property. During the progress of any fire, they
shall have the power to cause the removal of all wires or other facilities
and the turning off of all electricity or other services where the same
impedes the work of the Department during the progress of a fire.
§ 781-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 781-9
1:673

ARTICLE III
Fire Prevention
§ 781-10. Connection to water system; required fire hydrants.
§ 781-11. Automatic sprinkler systems.
A. It is the intent of this section to insure an adequate water supply for
firefighting purposes to structures or buildings that are located on
private property at extended distances from Village hydrants.
B. All buildings or parts thereof to be used for residential or commercial
must be fully equipped with all necessary plumbing and piping for
water and sewer service and the same shall be connected adequately
with Village water and sewer systems.
C. Any building hereafter erected or structurally altered to increase the
floor area by 50% or more shall provide, at the owner's expense, an
approved water hydrant when such building is set back more than 150
feet from a Village hydrant. Hydrants shall be freestanding and shall be
installed not more than 50 feet nor less than 25 feet from the building.
One hydrant shall be located at the main entrance to such building.
Additional hydrants shall be provided around the perimeter of the
building so that no hydrant is more than 250 feet from any other
approved hydrant measured by normal access routes. All such hydrants
shall be incorporated as part of a grid water main system connected
from two or more water mains.
D. An approved water hydrant shall mean a water hydrant connected to
the Village water mains, and such hydrant shall have a four-and-onehalf-
inch discharge connection. The connecting water line between the
Village water mains and the approved water hydrant shall not be less
than eight inches. All water hydrants shall be approved by the Chief of
the Fire Department or the chief's designee, and shall be installed in
compliance with the standards of the Village Water Utility. All water
hydrants shall be installed in such a manner and location so as to be
accessible at all times to the Fire Department.155
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to provide a standard means for the
automatic extinguishing of fires in buildings that, because of their size,
construction or occupancy or lack of suitable protective equipment,
constitute a special fire hazard to life or property.
B. Definitions.
(1) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall be
applicable:
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 781-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 781-11
1:675
APPROVED — As applied to automatic fire sprinkler systems,
means the approval of equipment and installation by the North
Shore Fire Department applying recognized national fire codes and
industry testing standards as to manufacture and installation. All
sprinkler installations shall be installed to the appropriate NFPA
standard. The edition of that standard shall be the most current
printed edition unless specifically identified otherwise. The
Authority Having Jurisdiction shall provide all local approvals.
AREA — The entire space within the surrounding exterior walls not
to include vent shafts or courts. For purposes of calculating egress,
two-hour walls meeting the design of horizontal exits can be used
to limit area.
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION (AHJ) — As used in this
chapter and in all NFPA documents, shall mean the Chief of the
North Shore Fire Department or the chief's designee. The AHJ shall
be responsible for the enforcement of the Fire Code as well as
approving all sprinkler and fire alarm plans.
AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER EQUIPMENT — A system of piping
connected to a water supply or other recognized suppression agent
provided with approved automatic fire sprinklers and/or devices so
arranged and located as to discharge water or other recognized
suppression agent automatically to control or suppress a fire.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building or structure that is
partially or completely below the level of exit discharge.
CLASSES OF CONSTRUCTION — The classes of construction
referenced are set forth in the International Building Code.
Type I A or B
Type II A or B
Type III A or B
Type IV HT
Type V A or B
EXISTING OCCUPANCY — All buildings or portions of buildings
occupied at the time this chapter is adopted.
SUBBASEMENT — Any level below a basement. This level is
entirely below grade.
(2) Occupancy definitions. The following are the occupancy
classifications and their definitions that will be used to determine
the building, structure or tenant use of any given space. The
following are referenced from the International Building Code.
(a) Assembly:
§ 781-11 FOX POINT CODE § 781-11
1:676
Group A-1 Assembly uses with seating for the production
or viewing of motion pictures or viewing
performing arts.
Group A-2 Assembly uses intended for the consumption of
food or drink.
Group A-3 Assembly uses intended for worship, recreation
or amusement (uses not classified elsewhere in
Group A).
Group A-4 Assembly uses intended for viewing indoor
sports events with spectator seating.
Group A-5 Assembly uses intended for participation in or
viewing outdoor.
(b) Business:
Group B The use of a building or portion thereof for office,
professional or service type transactions.
(c) Educational:
Group E The use of a building or structure for educational
purposes by six or more persons at any one time
through the 12th grade.
Day care used for the education, supervision or
personal care of more than five children over the
age of 2 1/2 shall be part of this group.
(d) Factory and industrial:
Group F-1 Factory or industrial uses which pose a moderate
hazard (all uses not fitting the F-2 category).
Group F-2 Factory or industrial uses that involve the
fabrication or manufacturing of noncombustible
materials and the processing or packaging of the
finished product does not pose a significant fire
hazard.
(e) High hazard:
Group H-1 Buildings or structures that contain materials
that pose a threat of detonation.
Group H-2 Buildings or structures that contain materials
that present a deflagration hazard or hazard
from accelerated burning.
Group H-3 Buildings or structures that contain materials
that readily support combustion or present a
physical hazard.
§ 781-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 781-11
1:677
Group H-4 Buildings or structures that contain materials
that contain materials that are health hazards.
Group H-5 Semiconductor fabrication facilities and
comparable research and development.
(f) Institutional:
Group I-1 Buildings or structures or portions thereof
housing more than 16 persons on a twenty-fourhour
basis because of age, mental disease or
other reasons live in a supervised residential
care environment (persons in this group can
respond to emergencies without physical
assistance).
Group I-2 Buildings or structures or portions thereof used
for medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or
custodial care on a twenty-four-hour basis of five
or more persons not capable of self-preservation.
A facility that provides child care on a twentyfour-
hour basis to more than five children 2 1/2
years of age or less or part of this group.
Group I-3 Buildings or structures or portions thereof that
are inhabited by more than five persons who
are under restraint or security. Persons in this
group are usually incapable of self-preservation
because of security measures.
Group I-4 Buildings or structures or portions thereof
occupied by persons of any age who receive
custodial care for less than 24 hours by persons
other than family in a place other than the home
of the person being cared for.
(g) Mercantile:
Group M Buildings or structures or portions thereof for
the display and sale of merchandise (involves
stocks of goods, wares or merchandise incidental
to such purposes and accessible to the public).
(h) Residential:
Group R-1 Residential occupancies where the occupants
are primarily transient (less than 30 days).
Group R-2 Residential occupancies containing more than 2
dwelling units where occupants are permanent
in nature.
§ 781-11 FOX POINT CODE § 781-11
1:678
Group R-3 Residential occupancies are permanent in nature
where buildings do not contain more than 2
dwelling units or adult or child-care facilities
that provide accommodations for five or fewer
persons of any age for less than 24 hours.
Group R-4 Residential occupancy buildings for residential
care/assisted living for more than five but not
more than 16 persons.
(i) Storage:
Group S-1 Moderate hazard storage.
Group S-2 Low-hazard storage of noncombustible items (can
be on combustible surface).
(j) Utility and miscellaneous:
Group U Covers all buildings and structures not covered
in any other occupancy chapter.
C. Where required. An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be
installed and maintained per the requirements of the Life Safety Code,
NFPA 101. Where conflicts arise between this section and any other
code section, the most restrictive requirements shall apply. Nothing in
this section shall apply to one and two-family dwellings.
(1) Special structures and high-rise buildings:
(a) Open structures (occasional occupants): provide automatic,
manual or other protection that is appropriate for the hazard.
(b) Towers (occasional occupants): provide automatic, manual or
other protection that is appropriate for the hazard.
(c) Water-surrounded structures (occasional occupants): provide
automatic, manual or other protection that is appropriate for
the hazard.
(d) Piers: protection dependent on use of pier.
(e) Vehicles and vessels: where immobile, check specific
occupancy use chapter for requirements.
(f) Underground and windowless structures: approved automatic
sprinkler system (occupant load of 50 or more).
(g) High-rise buildings: protected throughout by an approved
automatic sprinkler system.
(h) Permanent membrane structures: portable fire extinguishers.
(i) Temporary membrane structures: portable fire extinguishers.
§ 781-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 781-11
1:679
(j) Tents: portable fire extinguishers.
(2) Assembly. Throughout buildings with assembly occupant load of
300 or more. Throughout the story containing the assembly
occupancy. Throughout all stories below the story containing the
assembly use. In cases where the assembly use is located below the
level of exit discharge, then all intervening stories including the
level of exit discharge.
(3) Educational: all levels below the level of exit discharge.
(4) Day care: check size for special requirements.
(5) Health care: buildings containing health care occupancies
throughout.
(6) Ambulatory health care: check occupancy chapter.
(7) Detention and correction occurrences:
(a) Use Condition I: check occupancy chapter.
(b) Use Condition II: throughout.
(c) Use Condition III: throughout.
(d) Use Condition IV: throughout.
(e) Use Condition V: throughout.
(8) Lodging or rooming house: throughout.
(9) Hotels and dormitories: throughout.
(10) Apartment building: throughout.
(11) Residential board and care occupancies: throughout.
(12) Mercantile occupancies: throughout, if:
(a) All mercantile occupancies three or more stories in height.
(b) All mercantile occupancies exceeding 12,000 square feet in
gross area.
(c) Stories below the level of exit discharge where such stories
have an area exceeding 2,500 square feet us for the sale,
storage, or handling of combustible goods and merchandise.
(13) Business occupancies: check occupancy chapter.
(14) Industrial occupancies:
(a) General industrial (check size and use).
§ 781-11 FOX POINT CODE § 781-11
1:680
§ 781-12. Fire extinguisher systems.
(b) Special purpose (check special processes or equipment for
additional protection requirements).
(c) High hazard: throughout.
(15) Storage occupancies. Special provisions for certain types of
storage uses.
D. Hazardous properties or special concerns. Throughout every building
which by reason of its construction or the highly combustible nature of
its occupancy involves a severe hazard to the life of its occupants or, in
the judgment of the authority having jurisdiction, constitutes a fire
hazard which by its very nature may more directly affect adjoining
properties.
E. How installed. All required fire extinguishing and fire alarm systems
shall be installed in accordance with current editions of the National
Fire Protection Association, hereinafter referred to as "NFPA" Fire
Protection Code or Codes, or other standards, which substantially meet
or exceed NFPA standards as approved by the Fire Chief.
F. Maintenance. The owner or occupant of a building or structure
containing any required automatic sprinkler system shall maintain that
system in an operative condition at all times which includes periods
where the building may not be occupied. The occupant of the building
shall notify the Fire Chief immediately in case the sprinkler protection
is rendered out of service for any reason. All sprinkler systems shall be
tested to meet the requirements of NFPA 25. A person(s) or company
holding testers credentials issued by the State of Wisconsin shall
perform the tests.
A. Automatic fire extinguisher cooking systems.
(1) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall be applicable:
ACCEPTED — All provisions of this section have been complied
with and have been approved in writing by the Fire Department.
APPROVED AUTOMATIC FIRE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM — A
package unit as listed by the Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (or
other nationally recognized testing laboratory), fire protection
equipment list in effect at the date of installation, for the
extinguishing of fires in hoods, filters and ducts used for the
ventilation of cooking equipment, or a system individually designed
to the appropriate applicable standard.
COOKING EQUIPMENT — Ranges, ovens, broilers, deep fryers,
grills and other cooking appliances or devices designed for use in
preparing food.
§ 781-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 781-12
1:681
DUCT SYSTEMS — Metal enclosures or pipes attached to the
hood and leading to the outside for the purpose of venting and
dissipating cooking vapors and residues.
ESTABLISHMENT — A building or portion of a building, room,
public or private, where food is prepared for consumption by
customers either on or off the premises, patients, members or
inmates of such building. Included in this definition are schools,
churches, hospitals, nursing homes, lodges, hotels, motels,
cafeterias, restaurants, food kitchens and places of detention.
HOOD — The portion of the cooking equipment usually installed
above the cooking equipment and designed for the primary
collection of cooking vapors and residues, constructed of materials
listed and approved for that use.
PACKAGE UNIT — A complete automatic fire extinguishing system
as designed by the manufacturer, listed by a testing organization
and installed in compliance with the manufacturer's instructions
and recommendations. Systems designed for individual installation
by competent authority and approved by the Fire Department shall
be deemed to be in compliance with this section.
(2) Where required.
(a) A hood and duct system shall be installed in any restaurant,
and over all other equipment used for frying, cooking and
similar preparation of food in all establishments, shall be
equipped with or have immediately available, an approved
automatic fire extinguishing system designed for manual and
automatic operation, or with a system approved by the Fire
Department which will safeguard the premises, occupants and
frequenters thereof.
(b) All establishments affected by the requirements of Subsection
A(2)(a) hereof shall comply with the requirements of this
subsection. All new installations shall comply before the
Building Inspector shall grant a certificate of occupancy.
(3) Installation requirements.
(a) All equipment shall conform to the appropriate NFPA standard.
The equipment shall be either a "package unit" as listed in the
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., Fire Protection Equipment
List, for the extinguishment of fires in hoods, filters, and ducts
used for ventilation of restaurant cooking equipment or a
system individually designed ("engineered systems") to the
applicable NFPA standard for the type of extinguishing
equipment. A manual actuation control which is accessible to
kitchen personnel shall be provided. The control shall be
located near the hood not more than five feet above the floor,
readily accessible and not obstructed by cabinets or any other
objects, permanent or temporary that would affect a persons
§ 781-12 FOX POINT CODE § 781-12
1:682
§ 781-13. Pre- and postconstruction requirements.
ability to see the device. Instructions on operation of the
manual control system shall be posted. A visual indicating
device shall be provided and so located that at any time it can
readily be determined if the system's extinguishing agent has
discharged. An automatic fuel shutoff device shall be provided
on all gas-fired appliances.
(b) No fuel shutoff device is required for electric appliances except
electrically operated deep fat fryers. The installation shall
conform to NFPA No. 96, Ventilation of Cooking Equipment.
Package units shall be installed in conformance with the
limitations in the Underwriters' Laboratories, Fire Protection
Equipment List as established by tests for the various unit sizes
and nozzle arrangements. In the ventilating system, all areas
that are enclosed or partly enclosed shall be protected,
including areas behind filters, duct work, including in some
cases fresh air intakes, and enclosed air intakes ahead of
filters. All hood systems shall be engineered regardless of size.
(c) Plans. A dimensional drawing or sketch showing the hood and
ducts and the extinguishing system shall be prepared together
with a form showing the size of the hood and ducts, the area of
the protected surface, the model, size and number of package
units, the size and length of piping, the number and type of
fittings and the number of nozzles and distance of nozzles
above the cooking surface, if protected.
(4) Maintenance requirements. All extinguishing systems shall be
inspected and maintained at least semiannually by a factory
authorized representative, and the unit shall have a certification
tag of the inspection which shall be attached to the extinguishing
agent.
A. Access for firefighting.
(1) Access for use of heavy firefighting equipment shall be provided to
the immediate job site at the start of construction and maintained
until all construction is completed.
(2) Free access from the street to fire hydrants, and to outside
connections for standpipes, sprinklers or other fire extinguishing
equipment, whether permanent or temporary, shall be provided
and maintained at all times. No material or construction shall be
placed within 10 feet of such hydrants or connections, nor between
it and the center line of the street.
(3) During building operations, free access to permanent, temporary,
or portable first aid fire equipment shall be maintained at all times.
§ 781-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 781-13
1:683
(4) In all buildings over 50 feet in height, at least one stairway shall be
provided in usable condition at all times. This stairway shall be
extended upward as each floor is installed.
(5) Arrangements shall be made so that fire fighters will have access to
the premises when called to a fire.
B. Supervision and watch service.
(1) A capable person having the necessary authority shall be placed in
charge of fire protection. That person's responsibilities shall
include maintenance and location of fire protective equipment,
general supervision of safeguards and location of salamanders or
portable heating equipment, and the establishment and
maintenance of safe cutting and welding operations.
(2) No owner or occupant of any building or any person or corporation
engaged, either as a contractor, worker or in any other capacity, in
any work upon any building, shall maintain a fire in any building
within this Village in a stove, salamander, or other similar
contrivance without having some person at all times present in
such building to attend such fire unless a fireproof substance is at
all times maintained immediately under such stove, salamander or
other similar contrivance and unless the same is connected with
the outside of said building by means of a noncombustible pipe or
chimney in such manner that all of the smoke and gases arising
from such fire are conducted directly to outside of said buildings.
C. Cutting and welding operations. A permit system to be administered by
the Fire Department shall be used for cutting and welding operations
on the job site under the supervision of the construction superintendent
or the person in charge of fire protection. This permit system shall be
applicable to subcontractors' personnel as well as the contractors. A
permit shall not be issued until:
(1) It has been determined that cutting and welding can be safely
conducted at the desired location;
(2) Combustibles have been moved away or safely covered; and
(3) A fire watchman with extinguisher is posted for the duration of the
work, and for 30 minutes thereafter, to see that sparks or drops of
hot metal do not start fires.
D. Fire stopping.
(1) Concealed spaces. In the construction of new buildings or
structures involving structural or substantial alterations amounting
to more than 50% of the assessed valuation of the building or
structure, any concealed space in which materials having a flamespread
rating greater than Class A are exposed, shall be effectively
§ 781-13 FOX POINT CODE § 781-13
1:684
§ 781-14. Waste material.
§ 781-15. Oily waste and materials.
fire-stopped as hereinafter provided with materials approved by
the Fire Department.
(a) Every interior and exterior wall and partition shall be firestopped
at each floor level, at the top story ceiling level and at
the level of support for roofs.
(b) Every unoccupied attic space shall be subdivided by fire stops
into areas not to exceed 3,000 square feet.
(c) Any concealed space between the ceiling and the floor or the
roof above shall be fire-stopped for the full length of the space
along the line of support for the floor or roof structural
members and if necessary, to be determined by the Fire
Department, at other locations, to form areas not to exceed
1,000 square feet for any space between the ceiling and the
floor, and 3,000 square feet for any space between the ceiling
and the roof.
A. No owner or owners, agent or occupants of any buildings situated
within the Village shall allow any wastepaper, hay, straw, rags, or other
waste material of combustible nature to accumulate or to remain in any
building or on any premises more than 24 hours unless stored as
provided in Subsection D of this section.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department may order the immediate removal of
such accumulated combustible waste material from any building or
premises when in his opinion such storage would create a fire hazard.
Ashes, when kept in basements in buildings under this section, shall be
placed in fireproof tins, areas or containers.
C. Every person who violates the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for every 24 hours such violations shall
continue and shall be subject to a separate penalty for each and every
offense.
D. Combustible cuttings, disposal of waste, cloth, paper, or other waste
combustible cuttings shall be cleared up and removed from the building
at the close of each day's work, and shall be stored in a separate
fireproof storage building, or in a metal container with cover or in a
metal-lined box with cover or in a fireproof vault or room.
A. Oily waste and oily rags, when not in actual use, during the day, shall be
kept in approved, standard, self-closing metal waste cans, set firmly on
three-inch legs. One such waste can shall be installed for every 2,500
square feet of floor area, on each floor, where oily waste or oily rags are
used. The contents of all such waste cans shall be destroyed, burned or
removed from the building at the close of each day's work.
§ 781-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 781-15
1:685
§ 781-16. Burning materials. [Amended 8-11-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02A; 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
B. Sweeping compounds within buildings shall be kept and stored in
covered metal drums or containers.
C. Sweepings shall be immediately burned or deposited in approved metal
receptacles.
D. Oily or greasy clothing shall not be allowed to remain on wooden floors
or work benches, nor placed in wooden lockers, or hung against
wooden walls or partitions. All such items shall be stored in a properly
listed storage locker or container.
E. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any building or
premises to store or permit the storage in any building or on any
premises any loose or baled hay, straw, hemp, flax, tow, shavings,
sawdust or any other combustible materials of like nature.
A. Prohibition; exceptions. Open burning, outdoor burning and refuse
burning are prohibited unless the burning is specifically permitted by
§ 276-4 of this Code, subject to the additional exceptions in this
§ 781-16.
B. Grilling exception. Fires using charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas
in cooking or grilling appliances are allowed if located in approved
locations as follows: No hibachi, gas-fired grill, charcoal grill, electric
grill or other similar device used for cooking shall be used or kindled
above grade level on any balcony or under any overhanging portion or
within 10 feet of any structure, any combustible material, combustible
wall or partition, exterior window opening, exit access or exit.
C. (Reserved)
D. Permanent gas-fire feature exception. Permanent outdoor gas-fire
features may be utilized for open burning upon compliance with all
applicable codes and standards. Fuel for this type of fire shall only be
those designated for the appliance. The appliance shall have an
enclosure that is permanently anchored to the exterior of the fire
feature. Fire features shall not be located closer than 10 feet from the
nearest building, accessory structure, fence, deck or any other
combustible surface and shall be used on a noncombustible, safe and
level surface. No combustible materials shall be allowed within five feet
of the appliance. Features must be located a minimum of 10 feet from
building air intakes or other openings. Any open burning of this type
shall be constantly attended and supervised by competent persons of at
least 18 years of age; this includes the time from ignition until the fire is
extinguished. These persons shall have readily available for use such
fire-extinguishing equipment as may be necessary for the total control
and extinguishment of the fire. The igniter shall be secured to prevent
§ 781-15 FOX POINT CODE § 781-16
1:686
§ 781-17. Carrying fires and open flame lights and devices.
§ 781-18. Smokers.
Any person who by attempting to light or to smoke cigarettes, cigars, pipes,
tobacco products of any type, or any smoking materials in any manner in
which lighters or matches are employed, shall set fire whether willfully or
unauthorized persons from igniting the burner. A visible emergency
shut-off shall be provided within reach.
E. Negligent handling prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing
exceptions, whoever handles burning materials in a highly negligent
manner is subject to the penalties hereinafter enumerated. Burning
material is handled in a highly negligent manner if, under the
circumstances, the person should realize that it creates an
unreasonable risk and high probability of death or great bodily harm to
another or serious damage to another's property.
A. No persons shall carry, keep or maintain any fire in, through, or upon
any public thoroughfare or premises, except within an approved,
closed, secure pan, vessel or vehicle.
B. No open flame candles or other open flame fixture, whether equipped
with a guard or not, shall be used in any place of assembly, except
within duly constituted church or lodge buildings. Such open flame
candles or other flame fixtures, whether equipped with a guard or not,
shall not be used in auditoriums of church or lodge buildings, except
when such candles or fixtures are actually held by persons seated,
standing, or in procession in such auditorium. Such candles or fixtures
need not be held by persons in the auditorium if they are securely
supported on noncombustible bases and the flame is at least seven feet
above the floor; are so located as to avoid danger of ignition of
combustible material; are under constant observation and supervision
by a responsible person designated for each aisle; are kept lighted only
when necessary during the ceremony or ritual; and are extinguished
before the occupants leave the auditorium.
C. Open flame devices used for the warming of food may be used in
restaurants and dining areas, provided such devices and their location
are approved by the Fire Department.
D. Open flame devices may be used on stages where a necessary part of
theatrical performances, provided adequate precautions, satisfactory to
the Fire Department, are taken to prevent ignition of any combustible
materials.
E. The use of other open flame lights and devices, not herein regulated,
may be permitted by the Chief of the Fire Department, or the chief's
designees, under such restrictions as in their judgment is necessary to
avoid danger of ignition of combustible material or injury to persons.
§ 781-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 781-18
1:687
wantonly or not to any bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes, house or any
house hold furnishings or any part of a building shall be guilty of violating
this section.
§ 781-19. Fuel storage.
A. The keeping or storing of fuel for internal combustion engines is
prohibited within a dwelling or dwelling unit, excepting garages.
B. Subject to the provisions of Subsection A hereof, the storage of more
than 10 gallons of fuel for internal combustion engines on any property
in the Village is prohibited, excepting herefrom such fuels stored in
factory installed and attached fuel tanks of motor vehicles and power
equipment and filling station storage tanks.
§ 781-18 FOX POINT CODE § 781-19
1:688
ARTICLE IV
Access to Roofs and Attics
§ 781-20. Access to attics and roof required.
A. In every commercial or multifamily building and structure, there shall
be provided a permanent means of access to the attic or roof.
B. All attics and roofs of commercial and multifamily buildings and
structures shall be accessible by means of a stairway or scuttle. If the
scuttle opening in the attic floor is provided in lieu of a stairway, the
same shall be located in a public hallway situated below the attic floor
and shall be provided with an approved fixed ladder or balanced
stairway to such opening, securely anchored in place.
C. Roof and ceiling scuttles of commercial and multifamily buildings and
structures shall be at least two feet by three feet, and roof scuttles shall
be located immediately above the attic stairway or ceiling scuttle or in a
location approved by the Fire Department or the Building Inspector.
The roof scuttle cover shall be covered with noncombustible material
and shall be held in place by means approved by the Fire Department or
the Building Inspector.
§ 781-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 781-20
1:689

ARTICLE V
Appeals; Penalties
§ 781-21. Appeals.156
Any person aggrieved by any order or ruling of the Chief of the Fire
Department, or any of the chief's subordinate inspectors may appeal from
such ruling to the Fox Point Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be in
writing designating with particularity the relief which is sought and the
remedy proposed and shall be submitted to the Village Clerk/Treasurer
within 30 calendar days of the ruling, order or decision. The fee for
appealing in each case shall be as provided in Chapter 63, Fees.
§ 781-22. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalties assessed in this chapter, any person,
corporation, or legally cognizable entity, violating, or allowing or
contributing to the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to all penalties as set forth in § 1-4 of the Village
Code.
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 781-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 781-22
1:691
Chapter 825
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 756.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 770.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 781.
Swimming pools, wading pools and
spas — See Ch. 842.
§ 825-1. Plumbing Code.
This chapter of the Fox Point Village Code is the Fox Point Plumbing Code,
which code applies to and governs all plumbing installations in the Village
of Fox Point.
§ 825-2. Plumbing defined.
Plumbing, for the purpose of this chapter, will be defined as set forth in
§ 145.01, Wis. Stats.
§ 825-3. Plumbing Inspector.
A. Appointment. The Village Board shall appoint a plumbing inspector who
shall be a practical plumber, skilled sanitarian, or competent person
familiar with plumbing installation. The Plumbing Inspector shall serve
for an indeterminate term. The Plumbing Inspector shall act under the
direction and supervision of the Village Manager. Said Inspector shall
inspect and have supervision over all plumbing and plumbing
installations within the Village of Fox Point.
B. Duties. The Plumbing Inspector shall maintain public office hours
necessary to efficiently administer the provisions of this chapter and
shall perform the following duties:
(1) Prepare suitable forms for the application of permits required, and
keep in his office a proper detailed record of all the transactions of
his office. He shall file such reports as requested by this
municipality on all transactions of his office.
(2) Examine and check plans, specifications, drawings, descriptions or
diagrams where necessary to show clearly the kind and extent of
plumbing work covered by the permit application.
(3) Administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter in a manner
consistent with the intent thereof and inspect all plumbing work
authorized by any permit to assure compliance with provisions of
this chapter, approving or rejecting said work in whole or in part as
conditions require.
§ 781-22 FOX POINT CODE § 825-3
1:692
§ 825-4. Entry of premises.
The Plumbing Inspector or his assistants shall carry proper credentials
of their respective office and exhibit such credentials when demanded by
those whose permission is sought to gain entry into or unto a premises.
When refused such entry, the Plumbing Inspector is authorized to seek and
gain legal entry.
§ 825-5. Sewer or water improvement tax or assessment.
No permit shall be issued for any sewer or water connection, and no person
shall be allowed to connect with the public sewer or water system of
this community, while there is outstanding against the premises for which
the permit is applied for any delinquency in the payment of any tax or
assessment for the installation, maintenance or operation of any sewer,
public sewerage or water system, except in cases where special permission
to do so has been granted by the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 825-6. Authority to stop work.
Whenever any construction regulated by this chapter is being or has been
done contrary to the requirements of this chapter, the Plumbing Inspector
may order all work stopped on that portion of the installation on which
such violation has occurred and to order removal or correction on which the
violation has occurred. No person shall do any work on any portion of the
installation after a stop order has been issued by the Plumbing Inspector.
(4) Collect all fees or permits issued as provided by this chapter, issue
receipts and turn over all such collected fees to the Village Clerk/
Treasurer.
(5) Issue upon request a certificate of approval for any work approved
by him.
(6) Condemn and reject all work done or materials used or being used
which do not in all respects comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
(7) Keep a record of all main sewer connections, if such sewer is
available, showing location of all junctions and other data
necessary for the efficient service of his department.
(8) File a monthly report governing permit transactions with the
Village Manager.
§ 825-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 825-7
1:693
§ 825-7. Provisions of Wisconsin Administrative Code adopted.157
Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 381 to 387 and NR 812, as
now written and as may be amended from time to time, are herewith
adopted by reference, with the same force as if set forth herein in full.
§ 825-8. Insurance.
§ 825-9. Assistance of other officials.
A. Prior to the issuing of a permit for plumbing, which necessitates
excavation in a public street or road, the Plumbing Inspector shall
require satisfactory evidence that the person or corporation applying
for such permit carries public liability insurance in a solvent insurance
company, in the sum of at least $100,000 for injury to one person and
$300,000 for one accident, and $50,000 for injury to property. Such
certificate of insurance shall be conditioned that the applicant will
indemnify and save harmless the Village of Fox Point, its officers and
agents against any all claims for injuries and/or property damage
resulting or arising from any negligence on the part of the applicant, his
agents, employees and subcontractors.
B. Provided further that any bona fide association of plumbers or
plumbing contractors may file such certificate of insurance on behalf of
its members providing the above required coverage for each of its
members for a given period of time, not to exceed one year from the
date of the filing thereof. Upon the filing of such certificate of
insurance, each such member applying for a permit shall be deemed to
have complied with the insurance requirements of this section. Such
certificate of insurance shall be accompanied by an appropriate
instrument or instruments authorizing any such association to execute
such certificate of insurance for and on behalf of its members.
A. Cooperation. It shall be the duty of all police officers to report at once to
the Plumbing Inspector any buildings within their respective districts at
which plumbing work is being carried on without permits as required
by the Plumbing Code. It shall be the duty of other Village enforcement
officers to cooperate with the Plumbing Inspector in the enforcement of
the Plumbing Code. It also shall be the duty of the police officers,
Plumbing Inspector, or Health Officer to inquire into cases of violation
of the Plumbing Code and to report the same to the proper officer for
investigation and prosecution.158
B. Report of existing unsanitary conditions. Whenever it shall be reported
to the Health Officer by the Plumbing Inspector that the plumbing in
any building is contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or is of faulty
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 825-7 FOX POINT CODE § 825-9
1:694
§ 825-10. Connection to sewer required; Beach Drive connections.
Every building intended for human habitation which has access to a public
sewer shall have a connection with that sewer. Such buildings which have
access to the sewer on Beach Drive built in 1988 shall have a connection
with that sewer by June 1, 1989.
§ 825-11. Sump pumps.
All sump pumps installed for the purpose of discharging clear waters from
foundation drains and ground infiltration, and where the building is not
serviced by a storm sewer, shall either discharge into a conduit leading
to a drainage ditch or shall discharge onto the ground at least three feet
out from the building and one foot above the permanent grade. The sump
discharge pipe shall be to the front of the building except where a drainage
ditch or ravine is on another side of the property, it may be located on that
side of the building. Every discharge pipe shall be at least three feet from
the corner of the building and be located in such a manner that the drainage
shall be across the owner's property toward a street or drainage easement
so as not to run on adjacent properties or to create a nuisance.
§ 825-12. Plumbing permit.
construction and liable to spread sickness or disease, or is a menace
to health, or upon complaint made to the Health Officer by any person
that the plumbing in any building is defective, then said Health Officers
shall direct the Plumbing Inspector to examine such plumbing in said
building and report his findings, in writing, to the Health Officer,
suggesting such changes as are necessary to put the same in proper
condition. Said Health Officer thereupon shall direct such changes to
be made as he deems necessary and fix the time for doing the same.
Any person refusing to comply therewith shall be deemed guilty of
a violation of this section, and each day's continuance thereof shall
constitute a separate offense.
A. No plumbing work, as herein defined, shall be started or continued
within the jurisdiction or this chapter until a permit therefor has first
been obtained from the Plumbing Inspector. Except as stipulated in
§ 145.06 of the Wisconsin Statutes, such permits will only be issued to
licensed master plumbers.
B. The application for a permit to do plumbing work in the Village of Fox
Point shall fully and truly give owner's name, address and telephone
number, description of property, work to be accomplished and must be
signed personally by the master plumber or property owner making
application. In the event a master plumber shall fail to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, or shall fail to remedy any defective work
after the serving of a written notice by the Plumbing Inspector, then the
Plumbing Inspector may determine whether further permits may be
issued to such plumber.
§ 825-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 825-13
1:695
§ 825-13. Permit term.
§ 825-14. Permit fees.
The applicable fees as described in Chapter 63 of this Code shall be paid to
the Village of Fox Point prior to the issuance of a plumbing permit or at such
later date as determined by the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 825-15. Deposits required.
For plumbing work that involves work in a right-of-way or upon a Village
street or sidewalk, a deposit shall be required as described in § 292-9 of the
Village Code.
§ 825-16. Street excavations.
A. A plumbing permit shall remain in force for six months after the date of
issuance. In the event that all plumbing work is not completed within
such time, the permit can be revoked at the discretion of the Plumbing
Inspector.
B. A plumbing permit also may be revoked at any time during the sixmonth
period if the plumber does not comply with all provisions of the
Plumbing Code.
C. Should a plumber request that this permit be voided before any
inspections are made, all fees paid with the exception of $10 which shall
be retained for clerical expenses shall be refunded. In the event that
partial inspections have been made, the entire permit fee shall be
retained.
A. When opening any street surface or other public way, all excavated
material between main and lot line must be removed from the site. A
passageway for stormwater must be maintained. All excavations
between main and lot line shall be refilled with crushed road gravel.
The top two inches in the roadway shall be asphalt. No street opening
shall be left open between 4:30 p.m. Friday and 8:00 a.m. Monday. No
more than 50% of the roadway shall be excavated at one time. The
above excavation procedures shall be followed except when, because of
unusual conditions, special permission for a variance has been granted
by the Plumbing Inspector.
(1) Every plumber must enclose each opening he may make in the
road, street or public way with sufficient barriers to warn persons
using such road, street or public way of the existence of such
opening. Caution lights must be kept burning from sunset to
sunrise, one light to be placed at each end of the opening in the
street and additional lights to be placed in between at the intervals
of three feet. All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the
public effectually from accident or damage to persons or property
from the beginning to completion of work. Plumbers and owners
§ 825-13 FOX POINT CODE § 825-16
1:696
§ 825-17. Assessment costs.
For each sewer or water connection with public mains, for the construction
of which sewer or water no assessment has previously been levied against
the premises defined in the application for permit, an assessment fee in
proportion to the fee paid by other owners of property in the area for the
construction of said public sewer or water shall be paid by the owners of
such premises.
§ 825-18. Plan approval.
All new proposed building plans for buildings in all zoning districts except
residential districts shall be approved by the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer and Plumbing Inspector as to stormwater drainage before
a building permit is issued.
§ 825-19. Unlawful damage or injury to plumbing.
Any person who shall intentionally, willfully, or maliciously injure, obstruct
or damage any plumbing as defined in this chapter while being installed or
after being installed will be subject to penalties as provided herein.
§ 825-20. Violations and penalties.
Persons violating this chapter shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 1-4 of the Code of the Village of Fox Point.
§ 825-21. Appeal from decisions of Plumbing Inspector.
Any person feeling himself aggrieved by any order or ruling of the Plumbing
Inspector may appeal to the Board of Appeals within the time and in the
manner as provided for an appeal from a decision of the Building Inspector
in accordance with the rules of the Board of Appeals. After hearing such
appeal the Board of Appeals shall affirm, reverse, or modify the order or
ruling of the Plumbing Inspector as it determines proper on the evidence
produced at the hearing. The order or ruling of the Plumbing Inspector shall
will be held liable for all damages, including costs, incurred by the
Village of Fox Point, in defending any action brought against it for
damage and costs of any appeals that may result from the neglect
of the servants, agents or employees of said plumber, or of the
plumber, or of any failure to take any necessary precaution against
injury, or damage to persons, houses, vehicles or property of any
kind.
B. Notification of inspector. The plumber in charge shall notify the
Plumbing Inspector at least 24 hours before starting any work in any
road, street, or public way. If in the judgment of the Plumbing Inspector,
sufficient equipment and material is on hand for the job to be done, he
shall grant permission to commence work. Work shall not be started
without such permission.
§ 825-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 825-21
1:697
remain in full force and effect until reversed or modified by the Board of
Appeals.
Chapter 842
SWIMMING POOLS, WADING POOLS AND SPAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 745.
Building construction — See Ch. 756.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 770.
Plumbing — See Ch. 825.
§ 842-1. Findings.
Because of a possibility of toddlers falling into and being drowned in a
swimming pool, spa or wading pool, it is necessary that any swimming
pool, spa or wading pool be protected to prevent such occurrence. An
unprotected swimming pool, spa or wading pool is hazardous.
§ 842-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words have the meanings
herein set forth:
SPA — An outdoor structure containing a body of water in an artificial
or semiartificial receptacle or other container having a capacity for water
exceeding 24 inches in depth at any point, used primarily for recreation or
relaxation purposes, such as a hot tub, built above or below the surface of
the ground elevation.
SWIMMING POOL — An outdoor structure containing a body of water in
an artificial or semiartificial receptacle or other container having a capacity
for water exceeding 24 inches in depth at any point, used primarily for
bathing or swimming, built above or below the surface of the ground
elevation, used or intended to be used by the owner, operator or lessee
thereof and his family and friends, and in the case of a public swimming
pool or pools owned or operated by a club, to be used by members of the
public and by club members and their friends and guests, and includes
all structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances and other facilities
appurtenant thereof and intended for the operation and maintenance of the
swimming pool.
TODDLER — A child under the age of five years.
WADING POOL — An outdoor structure containing a body of water in an
artificial or semiartificial receptacle or other container having a capacity for
water exceeding 12 inches in depth and not exceeding 24 inches in depth at
any point located above or below the surface of the ground elevation used
primarily for children wading or playing therein. There is not included in
§ 825-21 FOX POINT CODE § 842-2
1:698
this definition a container with sides made of a material that will collapse
under the weight of a toddler.
§ 842-3. Protection for swimming pools.
Every person who owns, directly or indirectly, or operates or has custody or
control of any swimming pool located in the Village of Fox Point shall protect
and guard such swimming pool at all times by one or more of the following
manners:
§ 842-4. Fence permit.
A permit to erect a fence in compliance with this chapter is required the
same as for the erection of any other fence, as provided by § 745-7 of this
Code.
§ 842-5. Swimming pool compliance.
A. Erect and maintain an enclosure consisting of a fence, wall, or building
or combinations thereof around any swimming pool in the ground, or
with sides less than three feet five inches above ground level. The fence
or wall shall not be less than three feet five inches in height and not
exceed six feet. There shall be no gaps or openings in the fence material
after erected that would permit a toddler to get through the fence.
There shall be no gaps between the bottom of a fence and the ground or
apron of the swimming pool in excess of four inches. A residence or
accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. Every gate or
door in the enclosure shall be kept securely closed and fastened at all
times in a manner to prevent a toddler from opening the gate or door,
except when in actual use.
B. Instead of an enclosure as above required, aboveground or partially
aboveground swimming pools, where the sides are at least three feet
five inches above ground level, shall have the ladder or steps which are
used for ingress and egress thereto moveable and shall have such
ladder or steps removed at all times, except when in actual use.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B hereof, after the effective date of
this chapter, no swimming pool shall be erected, placed, constructed,
installed, maintained or permitted to exist anywhere in the Village that
does not comply with this chapter.
B. Swimming pools in the Village in existence at the time of the effective
date of this chapter, if not already in compliance with this chapter, shall
be brought into compliance not later than July 1, 1978.
C. The plans and specifications filed in connection with an application for a
building permit for a swimming pool to be erected after the effective
date of this chapter shall show the protection to be provided for the
swimming pool. In respect to a pool constructed or erected after the
§ 842-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 842-5
1:699
§ 842-6. Protection for wading pool.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the owner of any property
in the Village on which a wading pool is situated shall protect the wading
pool in the one of the following manners:
§ 842-7. Protection for spa.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the owner of any property
in the Village on which a spa is situated (whether in existence or
constructed hereafter) shall protect the spa in one of the following manners:
§ 842-8. Compliance.
Section 756-48 of the Village Code in respect to the issuance of a certificate
of compliance shall include compliance with this chapter.
§ 842-9. Violations and penalties.
Persons violating this chapter shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 1-4 of this Code.
Part VIII: Traffic Code
Chapter 870
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches and boating — See Ch. 586. Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 713.
effective date of this chapter, the protection required shall be erected
and in place not later than when the pool is first filled with water.
A. Comply with the provisions of § 842-3 above; or
B. When the wading pool is not in use:
(1) Drain all water from the wading pool; or
(2) Securely cover the wading pool with a cover of sufficient strength
and sufficiently fastened so that it will bear the weight of a toddler.
A. Comply with the provisions of § 842-3 above; or
B. At all times when the spa is not physically occupied, the spa must be
securely covered with a locking cover which is locked and cannot be
opened by a toddler, and is of sufficient strength and sufficiently
fastened so that it will bear the weight of a toddler.
§ 842-5 FOX POINT CODE § 842-9
1:700
§ 870-1. State traffic forfeiture laws adopted.159
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all provisions of
Chapters 340 through 348, Chapter 350, Chapter 941 and Chapter 947 of
the Wisconsin Statutes, describing and defining regulations with respect
to vehicles and traffic, for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, including
penalties to be imposed and procedure for prosecution, are hereby adopted
and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated
herein by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future
amendments, revisions, or modifications of statutes incorporated are
intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure uniform
statewide regulation of traffic on the highways, streets, and alleys of the
State of Wisconsin.
§ 870-2. Other laws.160
There are also hereby adopted by reference the following sections of the
Wisconsin Statutes, but the prosecution of such offenses under this chapter
shall be as provided in Chapters 340 to 348 of the Wisconsin Statutes and
the penalty for violation thereof shall be limited to a forfeiture as provided
in § 1-4 of this Code:
§ 870-3. Speed limits.
A. Section 941.01, Negligent operation of vehicle.
B. Section 941.30, Recklessly endangering safety.
C. Section 943.11, Entry into locked vehicle.
D. Section 943.23, Operating vehicle without owner's consent.
A. State speed limits adopted. The provisions of Sections 346.57, 346.58
and 346.59 of the Wisconsin Statutes relating to the maximum and
minimum speed of vehicles are hereby adopted as part of this section as
if fully set forth herein, except as specified by this section pursuant to
Section 349.11(3)(c) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Speed limits increased. The speed limits are increased as hereinafter
set forth upon that portion of the following streets lying within the
Village limits:
(1) Thirty-five miles per hour on North Lake Drive.
(2) Thirty-five miles per hour on North Port Washington Road.
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 842-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 870-4
1:701
§ 870-4. Through streets designated.
The following streets, in the interest of public safety, are hereby declared to
be through streets:
Name of Street Location
East Bradley Road From a point 100 feet east of North Regent
Road to a point 100 feet west of Regent
Road
East Calumet Road From a point 100 feet east of the
intersection of Crossway Road to a point
100 feet west of Regent Road
East Calumet Road [Added
by Ord. No. 393]
From a point 100 feet east to a point 100
feet west of North Bell Road
East Calumet Road [Added
by Ord. No. 393]
From a point 100 feet east to a point 100
feet west of North Seneca Road
East Dean Road From a point 100 feet east of North Regent
Road to a point 100 feet west of North
Regent Road and from a point 100 feet east
of North Santa Monica Boulevard to a point
100 feet west of North Santa Monica
Boulevard
East Dean Road [Added by
Ord. No. 393]
From its eastern terminus at Doctor's Park
west a distance of 100 feet
East Fox Lane From North Lake Drive to a point
approximately 100 feet east of East
Goodrich Lane
East Goodrich Lane From North Lake Drive to East Fox Lane
East Green Tree Road From the west Village limits, being
approximately 500 feet west of North Yates
Road to North Lake Drive
East Mall [Amended by Ord.
No. 376]
From the west Village boundary to a point
100 feet east of North Crossway
North Beach Road [Added by
Ord. No. 414]
From the northwest terminus thereof at the
foot of the bluff east to where said road
turns south
North Beach Road [Added by
Ord. No. 393]
From the southern limits of said road at the
point where said road, which is running
north and south, intersects with a portion
of said road running east and west in the
7400 north house numbered block to a
point 100 feet north from said south limit
line
North Crossway From a point 100 feet south of East Mall to
a point 100 feet north of East Mall
§ 870-4 FOX POINT CODE § 870-4
1:702
Name of Street Location
North Crossway Road
[Added by Ord. No. 393]
From 100 feet south to 100 feet north of
Good Hope Road
North Lake Drive From the south Village limits at East
School Road to the north Village limits,
being approximately 200 feet north of the
intersection of the center lines of North
Lake Drive and East Dean Road
North Lombardy [Added
3-14-1989 by Ord. No.
89-558]
From a point 100 feet south of East Mall to
100 feet north of East Mall
North Port Washington Road From the south Village limits the north
Village limits
North Regent Road From a point 100 feet south of East Dean
Road to a point 100 feet north of Indian
Creek Parkway
North Santa Monica
Boulevard
From the south Village limits at East
School Road to 100 feet south of East Dean
Road
North Yates Road From North Santa Monica Boulevard to
100 feet north of East Green Tree Road
§ 870-5. No-passing zones.
The following portions of streets, in the interest of public safety, are hereby
declared to be "No Passing Zones":
A. North Lake Drive lying between a point 1,393 feet south of East Green
Tree Road and a point 1,050 feet north of East Green Tree Road.
B. North Beach Drive 286 feet east of North Lake Drive for a distance of
1,071 feet.
C. The northbound lane of North Lake Drive lying between a point 41 feet
north of the center line of East Juniper Lane and a point 105 feet south
of the center line of East Thorne Lane.
D. The northbound lane of North Lake Drive lying between a point 112 feet
north of the center line of East Daisy Lane and a point on the
intersection of the center line of North Beach Drive.
E. The northbound lane of North Lake Drive lying between 165 feet north
of the center line of East Hyde Way and a point 150 feet south of the
center line of East Goodrich Lane.
F. The southbound lane of North Lake Drive lying between a point 124 feet
south of center line of East Fox Lane and a point 345 feet south of the
center line of East Bradley Road.
§ 870-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 870-6
1:703
§ 870-6. Traffic regulated.
A. Stop signs; location. Operators of vehicles shall stop at the posted stop
signs in accordance with § 346.04(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes, as
follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Acacia Road East Lake Drive
Acacia Road West Santa Monica Boulevard
Apple Tree Road East Lake Drive
Barnett Lane West Lake Drive
Bayfield Road West Port Washington Road
Beach Drive North (7300 block)
Beach Drive West Lake Drive
Bell Road East Lake Drive
Bell Road East Santa Monica Boulevard
Bell Road North Calumet Road
Bell Road South Calumet Road
Bell Road West Santa Monica Boulevard
Belmont Lane West Lake Drive
Bergen Drive East Port Washington Road
Bergen Drive West Port Washington Road
Bradley Road East Lake Drive
Bradley Road East Santa Monica Boulevard
Bradley Road West Santa Monica Boulevard
Bridge Lane West Lake Drive
Bywater Lane West Lake Drive
Calumet Road East Lake Drive
Calumet Road East Santa Monica Boulevard
Calumet Road West Santa Monica Boulevard
Churchill Lane East Lake Drive
Clovernook Lane East Santa Monica Boulevard
Club Circle West Lake Drive (7700 and 7800)
Community Place East Santa Monica Boulevard
Crossway Road North Calumet Road
Crossway Road North Mall Road
Crossway Road South Mall Road
Daisy Lane West Lake Drive
§ 870-6 FOX POINT CODE § 870-6
1:704
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Daphne Road East Lake Drive
Daphne Road West Santa Monica Boulevard
Dean Road East Lake Drive
Dean Road East Regent Road
Dean Road East Santa Monica Boulevard
Dean Road West Lake Drive
Dean Road West Regent Road
Dean Road West Santa Monica Boulevard
Dunwood Road West Port Washington Road
Fairchild Road East Santa Monica Boulevard
Fairchild Road North Calumet Road
Fairchild Road South Calumet Road
Fox Dale Road East Santa Monica Boulevard
Fox Dale Road East Yates Road
Fox Dale Road West Yates Road
Fox Lane East Lake Drive
Fox Lane North Dean Road
Fox Lane West Lake Drive
Good Hope Road East Crossway Road
Goodrich Court North Goodrich Lane
Goodrich Lane North Fox Lane
Goodrich Lane North Goodrich Lane (1500 block)
Goodrich Lane West Lake Drive
Gray Log Lane North Fox Lane
Gray Log Lane South Fox Lane
Gray Log Lane South Goodrich Lane
Gray Log Lane West Lake Drive
Green Tree Road East Lake Drive
Green Tree Road East Santa Monica Boulevard
Green Tree Road East Yates Road
Green Tree Road West Lake Drive
Green Tree Road West Santa Monica Boulevard
Green Tree Road West Yates Road
Greenvale Road North Dean Road
Greenvale Road South Dean Road
§ 870-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 870-6
1:705
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Holly Court East Lake Drive
Hyde Way East Lake Drive
Indian Creek
Parkway
Dean Road
Indian Creek
Parkway
East Regent Road
Indian Creek
Parkway
South Dean Road (Santa Monica)
Indian Creek
Parkway
West Port Washington Road
Indian Creek
Parkway
West Regent Road
Juniper Lane West Lake Drive
Lake Drive East 6800 and 6900 Lake Drive
(frontage road)
Lilac Lane West Lake Drive
Links Circle East Lake Drive (7800 and 7900)
Lombardy Road East Santa Monica Boulevard
Lombardy Road South Santa Monica Boulevard
Longacre Road East Santa Monica Boulevard
Longacre Road South Santa Monica Boulevard
MacArthur Road East Santa Monica Boulevard
Mall Road East Crossway Road
Mall Road East Lombardy Road
Mall Road West Crossway Road
Port Washington
Court
North Port Washington Road
Portage Road East Lake Drive
Quarles Place East Lake Drive
Regent Road North Bradley Road
Regent Road North Dean Road
Regent Road South Bradley Road
Regent Road South Calumet Road
Regent Road South Dean Road
Reynard Road South Santa Monica Boulevard
Santa Monica
Boulevard
East (8000 and 8100 block)
§ 870-6 FOX POINT CODE § 870-6
1:706
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Santa Monica
Boulevard
North Dean Road
Santa Monica
Boulevard
North Green Tree Road
Santa Monica
Boulevard
South Green Tree Road
Santa Monica
Boulevard
South Yates Road
School Road West Santa Monica Boulevard
Seneca Road North Calumet Road
Seneca Road South Calumet Road
Spooner Road East Lake Drive
Spooner Road East Santa Monica Boulevard
Thorne Lane West Lake Drive
View Place West Lake Drive
Willow Road East Santa Monica Boulevard
Wye Lane West Lake Drive
Yates Road North Green Tree Road
Yates Road North Santa Monica Boulevard
Yates Road South Green Tree Road
B. Traffic lights.
(1) The intersection of Dean Road and Port Washington Road is
controlled by a traffic light.
(2) The intersection of Bradley Road and Port Washington Road is
controlled by a traffic light.
(3) The intersection of Calumet Road and Port Washington Road is
controlled by a traffic light.
(4) The entrance/exit to River Point Village Shopping Center in the
8600 block of North Port Washington Road is controlled by a stop
light.161
C. Yield right-of-way intersections; location. Operators of vehicles shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles in accordance with § 346.18(6)
of the Wisconsin Statutes, as follows:
(1) Vehicles on all roads or streets intersecting (which includes dead
ending at) Dean Road shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on
161. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 870-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 870-6
1:707
Dean Road, except that this shall not apply to roads or streets
intersecting Dean Road that are through streets as established by
§ 870-4.
(2) Vehicles on all roads or streets intersecting (which includes dead
ending at) Bradley Road shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on
Bradley Road, except that this shall not apply to roads or streets
intersecting Bradley Road that are through streets as established
by § 870-4.
(3) Vehicles on all roads or streets intersecting (which includes dead
ending at) Calumet Road shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on
Calumet Road, except that this shall not apply to roads or streets
intersecting Calumet Road that are through streets as established
by § 870-4 or to North Fairchild Road. [Amended 2-11-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-587]
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Allen Lane North Dean Road
Beach Drive South 7600 Beach Drive
Bell Road North Crossway Road
Bell Road South Crossway Road
Belmont Lane North Green Tree Road
Belmont Lane South Green Tree Road
Bergen Drive East Seneca Road
Boyd Way North Calumet Road
Boyd Way South Calumet Road
Clair Court North Yates Road
Crossway Road South Yates Road
Fairchild Circle South Yates Road
Fairchild Road East Regent Road
Fairchild Road West Regent Road
Fielding Road South Dean Road
Indian Creek
Parkway
North Dean Road
Indian Creek
Parkway
South Dean Road
Lilac Lane East Club Circle
Links Way North Calumet Road
Links Way North Dean Road
Links Way South Bradley Road
Links Way South Calumet Road
§ 870-6 FOX POINT CODE § 870-6
1:708
§ 870-7. Parking restrictions.
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Lombardy Road North Bell Road
Lombardy Road North Yates Road
Lombardy Road South Bell Road
Lombardy Road South Yates Road
Longacre Road North Bell Road
Longacre Road North Yates Road
Longacre Road South Bell Road
Longacre Road South Yates Road
MacArthur Road East Regent Road
MacArthur Road West Regent Road
Mohawk Road North Bradley Road
Mohawk Road North Calumet Road
Mohawk Road South Bradley Road
Navajo Road North Calumet Road
Navajo Road South Bradley Road
Point Drive North Regent Road
Poplar Drive North Dean Road
Poplar Drive South Bradley Road
Seneca Road South Bradley Road
Spooner Road East Regent Road
Spooner Road West Regent Road
Whitney Road North Dean Road
Whitney Road South Bradley Road
Willow Road East Regent Road
Willow Road West Regent Road
A. No person shall park a vehicle on any street or public way except:
(1) On Beach Road pursuant to a permit issued under Chapter 586 of
this Code; or
(2) In a district zoned residential or institutional while visiting or
transacting business with a person in the Village whose private
driveway or other facilities for parking are unavailable for such
purpose.
(3) Except for vehicles in Subsection A(1) and (2), all other vehicles
must receive permission from the Police Department.162
§ 870-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 870-7
1:709
§ 870-8. Towing vehicles. [Added 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 596]
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle stopped, standing, or parked
in violation of any law, ordinance, or local authority of the Village of Fox
Point, he/she may cause the same to be removed by an appropriate towing
company until the owner of the vehicle pays the charges for towing and
storage, and presents proof of payment to any Fox Point police officer who
shall then authorize release.
§ 870-9. Advertising.
No person shall operate or park on any street or public way any vehicle
primarily as an advertisement or the primary purpose of advertising.
§ 870-10. Vehicular weight limits.
B. When parking is permitted:
(1) No vehicle shall be parked in a manner which violates any of the
restrictions of Chapter 346 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) And two or more vehicles are parked in close proximity, they shall
all be parked on the same side of the street, except that on streets
that have a divided roadway with a grass or planting strip on the
center, parking (when permitted) may be on the right-hand side of
each of said roadways and by permission as specified in Subsection
A(3) of this section. [Amended by Ord. No. 328163]
A. Class "B" highways designated. All streets, except the following
enumerated streets and alleys, are hereby designated Class "B"
highways and shall be subject to the weight limitations imposed by
§ 348.16 of the Wisconsin Statutes:
(1) North Lake Drive and North Port Washington Road.
B. Heavy traffic routes designated.
(1) The following streets and parts of streets are hereby designated
heavy traffic routes:
(a) North Lake Drive.
(b) East and West Dean Road.
(c) East and West Bradley Road.
(d) East and West Calumet Road.
(e) East Green Tree Road.
162. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 870-7 FOX POINT CODE § 870-10
1:710
§ 870-11. Destruction of barriers; violations and penalties. [Added
by Ord. No. 426164]
Any person who, without lawful authority, removes, takes down, alters the
position of, destroys, passes over or beyond any barrier erected or placed
pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes § 86.06, or travels with any vehicle upon
any portion of a highway closed by barriers so erected, or walks or travels
in any manner upon the materials placed thereon as part of the repair or
construction work. Any person violating this section is subject to penalties
in § 1-4.
§ 870-12. Official traffic signs and signals.
(f) East School Road.
(g) North Port Washington Road.
(2) Restrictions on use of other streets by heavy traffic. No vehicle,
except a motor bus, which is not equipped with pneumatic tires or
has a combined vehicle load weight exceeding 6,000 pounds, shall
be operated or moved on any street or alley not part of the heavy
traffic route designated in this Subsection B, except for the purpose
of obtaining orders for, moving or delivering supplies or
commodities to or from a place of business or residence facing
thereon, provided that in no event shall the weight of vehicle and
load on such other street exceed the limitations of §§ 348.15 or
348.16(3) of the Wisconsin Statutes pertaining to Class "A"
highways or deliveries on Class "B" highways.
A. Village Manager authorized to procure and erect signs and signals. The
Village Manager is hereby authorized and directed to procure, erect
and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings
conforming to the rules of the State Department of Transportation
giving such notice of the provisions of this chapter as required by state
law. Signs shall be erected in such locations and manner as the Village
Manager shall determine will best effect the purposes of this chapter
and give adequate warning to users of the street or highway.
B. Removal of unofficial signs and signals. The Village Manager shall have
the authority granted by § 349.09, Wisconsin Statutes, and is hereby
directed to order the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device
placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this chapter or § 346.41,
Wisconsin Statutes. Any charge imposed on a premises for removal of
such an illegal sign, signal or device shall be reported to the Village
Board at its next regular meeting for review and certification.
[Amended by Ord. No. 405]
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 870-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 870-13
1:711
§ 870-13. Safety school attendance.
The provisions of § 345.60 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall apply to
adjudication of violation of any provisions of this chapter.
§ 870-14. Accident reports. [Added by Ord. No. 405]
The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall within 10 days
after such accident file with the Village Police Department a copy of the
report required by § 346.70, Wisconsin Statutes, if any. If the operator is
unable to make such report, any occupant of the vehicle at the time of the
accident capable of making such report shall have the duty to comply with
this section. Such reports shall be subject to the provisions and limitations
in §§ 346.70(4)(f) and 346.73, Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 870-15. Use of compression brakes prohibited.165
No person shall use compression brakes or operate a motor vehicle using
brakes which are in any way activated or operated by the compression of
the engine of any such motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof, unless
such brakes are necessarily used in an emergency situation. The prohibition
contained in this section shall not apply to fire, police, EMS and/or other
emergency vehicles.
§ 870-16. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be a
forfeiture as hereinafter provided, together with the cost of prosecution
imposed as provided in § 345.20 through 345.53, Wisconsin Statutes.
A. Uniform offenses. Forfeitures for violation of any provisions of Chapters
341 through 348 adopted by reference in § 870-1 of this chapter shall
conform to forfeitures for violation of the comparable state offense,
including any variations or increases for second offenses as listed in the
current Revised Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule.166,167
B. Parking violation penalties. [Amended 5-28-1991 by Ord. No.
91-576168]
(1) The forfeitures for violating any parking regulations shall be $15 if
paid within 30 days, $30 if paid after 30 days, and $45 if
registration is suspended.
165. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
167. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 340.0012(2), Other offenses, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 870-13 FOX POINT CODE § 870-16
1:712
§ 870-17. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
§§ 345.20 through 345.53, Ch. 799, and § 66.0114 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) Handicap parking is specified in Uniform Deposit Schedule and
issued on a traffic citation.
(3) Any person against whom a forfeiture has been assessed pursuant
to Subsection C(1) or (2) above who defaults in the payment thereof
and of the costs of prosecution shall have the registration on the
vehicle suspended pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 345.28.
A. Stipulation of guilt or no contest. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may
be made by persons arrested for violations of this chapter in
accordance with § 66.0114(1)(b), Wisconsin Statutes, whatever the
provisions of § 345.27, Wis. Stats., are inapplicable to such violations.
Stipulations shall conform to the form contained on the uniform traffic
citation and complaint under § 345.11, Wisconsin Statutes, and may be
accepted within five days of the date of the alleged violation.
Stipulations may be accepted by the Village Police Department.
B. Deposits. Any person stipulating guilt or no contest under Subsection A
of this section must make the deposit required under § 345.26,
Wisconsin Statutes, or if the deposit is not established under such
statute, shall deposit a penalty as provided in the schedule established
by the Chief of Police and approved by the Village Board. Deposits may
be brought or mailed to the office of the Police Department as directed
by the arresting officer. Deposits for parking or nonmoving violations
shall be mailed or brought to the Court Clerk.169
C. Notice of demerit points and receipt. Every officer accepting a forfeited
penalty or money deposit under this chapter shall receipt therefor in
triplicate as provided in § 345.26(3)(b), Wisconsin Statutes. Every
officer accepting a stipulation under the provisions of this chapter shall
comply with the provisions of §§ 343.28, 345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2),
Wisconsin Statutes, and shall require the alleged violator to sign a
statement of notice in substantially the form contained on the uniform
traffic citation and complaint promulgated under § 345.11, Wisconsin
Statutes.170
D. Forfeitures in treasury. Any officer accepting deposits or forfeited
penalties under this chapter shall deliver them to the Village Clerk/
Treasurer within 30 days after receipt.171
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 870-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 870-18
1:713
§ 870-18. References to statutes. [Amended by Ord. No. 496]
The term "Wisconsin Statutes" wherever used in this chapter shall mean
the Wisconsin Statutes as of the effective date of this chapter (including but
not limited to the provisions of Chapters 20 and 184 of the Laws of 1981)
and as such statutes may be amended, consolidated, recreated, reenacted,
repealed, renumbered, revised or otherwise modified or altered by the state
legislature.
Appendix
Chapter A1000
CHARTER ORDINANCES
Chapter A1001
VILLAGE BOARD BYLAWS
§ 870-18 FOX POINT CODE § 870-18
A1000:714
ARTICLE I
Meetings
§ A1001-1. Regular meetings.
The regular meetings of the Village Board shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the
second Tuesday of each month, provided that a regular meeting may be held
at another time pursuant to motion duly adopted by the Village Board.
§ A1001-2. Special meetings.
Special meetings of the Village Board may be called as provided by
Wisconsin Statutes. [Statutes 1981 Section 61.32: Called by any two
Trustees in writing filed with Village Clerk. Clerk reasonably gives notice to
all Trustees of time and place in manner provided by bylaws. Open Meeting
Law § 19.81 et seq.]
§ A1001-3. Notice.
Notice of regular meetings and of duly called special meetings of the Village
Board shall be given to all Trustees by the Clerk orally, personally or by
telephone, or in writing.
A. Oral notice shall be considered properly given to a Trustee when the
Clerk personally advises him of the time and place of the meeting, or
when given by telephone, when the Clerk talks to the Trustee
personally advising him of the time and place of the meeting, or the
Clerk leaves a message at the home or at the regular place of business
of a Trustee giving the time and place of the meeting.
B. Written notice shall be considered properly given when a writing
setting forth the time and place of the meeting is delivered to the
Trustee personally or left at his home, or when such writing is mailed to
a Trustee at his home or business address at least two days before the
meeting.
§ A1001-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § A1001-3
A1000:715
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1961 Code to 2014 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1961 Code Location in 2014 Code
Ch. 1, General Provisions
§§ 1.01, 1.03, 1.04, 1.08, 1.09 and 1.10 NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. II
§§ 1.02, 1.05, 1.06 and 1.07 Ch. 1, Art. I
§ 1.11 Ch. 7
§ 1.12 Ch. 19, Art. VIII
Ch. 2, Village Administration
§ 2.01 Ch. 19, Art. VII
§§ 2.02 to 2.045 Ch. 112, Art. I
§ 2.046 Ch. 112, Art. III
§ 2.047 Ch. 50
§ 2.05 Ch. 112, Art. IV
§ 2.06 Repealed 12-13-2005
§ 2.07 Ch. 19, Art. VI
§ 2.075 Ch. 19, Art. V
§ 2.08 Ch. 19, Art. I
§ 2.09 Ch. 19, Art. II
§§ 2.11, 2.12 and 2.13 Ch. 67, Art. I
§§ 2.14, 2.145 Ch. 46, Arts. I and II
§ 2.15 Ch. 116
§ 2.16 Ch. 143
§ 2.17 REP
§ 2.18 Ch. 55
§ 2.19 Ch. 67, Art. V
§ 2.20 Ch. 128
§ 2.21 Ch. 67, Art. III
§ A1001-3 FOX POINT CODE § DT-1
A1000:716
Chapter/Title From 1961 Code Location in 2014 Code
§ 2.22 Ch. 67, Art. IV
Ch. 3, Department of Police
§§ 3.01 to 3.16 and 3.18 Ch. 112, Art. II
§ 3.17 Ch. 19, Art. III
Ch. 4, Water Code Ch. 325, Art. I
Ch. 4A, Storm Sewer Districts REP
Ch. 4B, Illicit Discharges and/or
Connections to Storm Drainage System
Ch. 285, Art. V
Ch. 5, Streets and Sidewalks
§§ 5.01 to 5.04 and 5.06 Ch. 310, Art. I
§ 5.05 Ch. 310, Art. III
§§ 5.07 to 5.15 Ch. 292
§ 5.16 (penalty) Ch. 292; Ch. 310, Art. I
Ch. 6, Beach Area Ch. 586
Ch. 7, Sewer Rate Ordinance, Metropolitan Ch. 260, Art. I
Ch. 8, Sewer User Charges, Local Ch. 260, Art. II
Ch. 9, Stormwater Utility Ch. 288
Ch. 10, Multiple Installment Payments of
Real Estate Taxes or Special Assessments
Ch. 67, Art. II
Ch. 11, Fire Code Ch. 781
Ch. 12, Plumbing Code
§§ 12.01 to 12.21 Ch. 825
§ 12.22 Ch. 325, Art. II
§ 12.23 Ch. 325, Art. III
§ 12.24 Ch. 325, Art. IV
Ch. 13, Electrical Code Ch. 770
Ch. 14, Zoning Ch. 745
Ch. 15, Subdivisions Ch. 738
Ch. 16, Signs Ch. 540
Ch. 17, Regulation of Construction On or
Over, and Control of Cutting On, Banks of
Ravines and Lake Bluff
Ch. 285, Art. I
Ch. 18, Regulation of Solid Fill and Grades Ch. 272
Ch. 19, Signal-Receiving Antennas Ch. 455
Ch. 20, Prohibited Discharge into Public
Sanitary Sewer System
Ch. 260, Art. III
Ch. 21, Food Dealers Ch. 362
§ DT-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § DT-1
A1000:717
Chapter/Title From 1961 Code Location in 2014 Code
Ch. 22, Cigarettes
§§ 22.01 and 22.02 Ch. 469
§ 22.03 (Possession by minors) Ch. 670
Ch. 23, Bicycles, Skateboards, Roller
Skates and Skis, Roller Blades and
Pedestrians
Ch. 591
Ch. 24, Rubbish
§§ 24.01 to 24.04 Ch. 276, Art. I
§ 24.05 Ch. 624
Ch. 25, Dogs, Cats and Other Animals Ch. 579, Art. I
Ch. 26, Trees and Shrubs Infected with
Injurious Insects and Disease - Declaration
and Abatement of Public Nuisance
Ch. 310, Art. II
Ch. 27, Offenses Against Public Peace,
Safety and Welfare
Ch. 670
Ch. 28, Municipal Court and Municipal
Judge
Ch. 31
Ch. 29, Regulations Re: Constructing Trade
or Business
§§ 29.01 and 29.02 Ch. 579, Art. II
§ 29.03 Ch. 340, Art. I
§ 29.04 Ch. 417, Art. I
§ 29.05 Ch. 450, Art. I
§ 29.06 REP
§ 29.07 Repealed by Ord. No.
2011-04
§ 29.08
§§ 29.08(1) to (2p), (4), (8) and (9) Ch. 612
§§ 29.08(3), (5) and (6) Ch. 19, Art. IV
§ 29.08(7) Repealed by Ord. No. 86-538
§ 29.09 Ch. 340, Art. III
§ 29.095 Ch. 340, Art. IV
§ 29.10 Ch. 450, Art. II
§ 29.11 Ch. 340, Art. II
§ 29.12 Ch. 546
Ch. 30, Building Code Ch. 756
Ch. 30P
§ 30P.05(9) Ch. 285, Art. II
§ DT-1 FOX POINT CODE § DT-1
A1000:718
Chapter/Title From 1961 Code Location in 2014 Code
All other sections Ch. 756
Ch. 31, Transient Merchants and Solicitors
§§ 31.01 to 31.12 Ch. 417, Art. II
§§ 31.13 to 31.19 Ch. 482
Ch. 32, Regulation of Private Alarm
Systems
Ch. 441
Ch. 33, Maintenance of Property Ch. 681
Ch. 34, Swimming Pool, Spa, and Wading
Pool Enclosures
Ch. 842
Ch. 35, Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 724
Ch. 36, Recycling Ch. 276, Art. II
Ch. 37, Stormwater Management
Regulations
Ch. 285, Art. III
Ch. 38, Construction Site Erosion Control Ch. 285, Art. IV
Ch. 39, Clear Cutting of Lots and
Properties Prohibited
Ch. 310, Art. IV
Ch. 40, Fees Ch. 63
Ch. 41, Human Health Hazard and Public
Health Nuisance Ordinance
Ch. 630
Ch. 42, North Shore Health Department to
Enforce State Laws Relating to
Environmental Health and Sanitation in the
Village of Fox Point
Ch. 375
Ch. 43, Wind Energy Systems License and
Regulations
Ch. 567
Ch. 47, Parks and Parkways
§ 47.001 Ch. 239, Art. I
§ 47.002 Ch. 239, Art. II
Ch. 125, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 445
Ch. 339, Abandonment of Motor Vehicles
Prohibited
Ch. 713
Chs. 340 to 350, 941, Traffic Ch. 870
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DT-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § DL-1
A1000:719
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-12 12-8-2009 Investment Policy Ch. 67, Art. V
2009-13 12-8-2009 Fees amendment; solid fill
and grades amendment
Ch. 63; Ch. 272
2010-01 2-12-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 63
2010-02 2-12-2010 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 756
2010-03 2-12-2010 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 756
2010-04 Comprehensive Plan NCM
2010-05 3-9-2010 Business hours amendment Ch. 340, Art. III
2010-06 3-12-2010 Parks and parkways:
Longacre Pavilion
Ch. 239, Art. II
2010-07 4-19-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 745
2010-08 4-13-2010 Solid fill and grades
amendment
Ch. 272
2010-09 4-19-2010 Construction and cutting on
banks of ravines and lake
bluff amendment
Ch. 285, Art. I
2010-10 5-11-2010 Parks and parkways:
Longacre Pavilion
amendment
Ch. 239, Art. II
2010-11 6-8-2010 Discharges into sanitary
sewer system
Ch. 260, Art. III
2010-12 8-10-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 745
2010-13 9-14-2010 Meetings amendment Ch. 19, Art. VIII
2010-14 11-9-2010 Offenses against public
peace, safety and welfare
amendment
Ch. 670
2010-15 12-14-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 63
2010-16 12-14-2010 Animals amendment Ch. 579, Art. I
2010-17 12-14-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 63
2010-18 12-14-2010 Charges for professional fees
amendment
Ch. 67, Art. III
2010-19 12-14-2010 Offenses against public
peace, safety and welfare
amendment
Ch. 670
2011-01 3-8-2011 Discharges into sanitary
sewer system amendment
Ch. 260, Art. III
§ DL-1 FOX POINT CODE § DL-1
A1000:720
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-02 3-8-2011 Fair housing amendment Ch. 612
2011-03 3-8-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 63
2011-04 3-8-2011 Offenses against public
peace, safety and welfare
amendment; repeal of
§ 29.07, Smoking in theaters
Ch. 670
2011-05 4-12-2011 Stormwater management
regulations
Ch. 285, Art. III
2011-06 4-12-2011 Floodplain zoning
amendment
Ch. 724
2011-07 6-14-2011 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 756
2011-08 7-12-2011 Longacre Pavilion
amendment
Ch. 239, Art. II
2011-09 8-9-2011 Animals amendment Ch. 579, Art. I
2011-10 9-13-2011 Offenses against public
peace, safety and welfare
amendment
Ch. 670
2011-11 10-11-2011 Health and sanitation licenses
and permits amendment
Ch. 375
2011-12 12-13-2011 Fees amendment; electrical
standards amendment
Ch. 63; Ch. 770
2011-13 12-13-2011 Fees amendment;
construction and cutting on
banks of ravines and lake
bluff amendment
Ch. 63; Ch. 285,
Art. I
2012-01 2-14-2012 Offenses against public
peace, safety and welfare
amendment
Ch. 670
2012-02 2-14-2012 Solid fill and grades
amendment
Ch. 272
2012-03 3-13-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 745
2012-04 3-13-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 63
2012-05 4-1-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 745
2012-06 6-12-2012 Investment Policy amendment Ch. 67, Art. V
2012-07 8-14-2012 Trees, shrubs and other plant
material amendment
Ch. 310
2012-08 8-14-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 63
2012-09 8-14-2012 Municipal Court amendment Ch. 31
§ DL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § DL-1
A1000:721
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-10 8-14-2012 Discharges into sanitary
sewer system amendment
Ch. 260, Art. III
2012-11 9-11-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 745
2012-12 11-13-2012 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 55
2012-13 12-11-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 63
2013-01 3-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 745
2013-02 3-12-2013 Offenses against public
peace, safety and welfare
amendment
Ch. 670
2013-03 5-14-2013 Building Board amendment;
building construction
amendment
Ch. 19, Art. II;
Ch. 756
2013-04 6-11-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 745
2013-05 6-11-2013 Records Ch. 143
2013-06 7-9-2013 Board of Review amendment Ch. 19, Art. I
2013-07 8-13-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 63
2013-08 8-13-2013 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 756
2013-09 9-10-2013 Business hours amendment Ch. 340, Art. III
2013-10 12-10-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 745
2014-01 1-14-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 63
2014-02 1-14-2014 Bicycles, play vehicles and
pedestrians amendment
Ch. 591
Charter
Ord. No. 9
2-11-2014 Charter ordinance (office of
Village Clerk-Treasurer)
Ch. A1000
2014-03 3-11-2014 Offenses against public
peace, safety and welfare
amendment
Ch. 670
2014-04 4-8-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 63
2014-05 5-13-2014 Fees amendment; electrical
standards amendment
Ch. 63; Ch. 770
2014-06 8-12-2014 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 770
2014-07 10-14-2014 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 756
2014-08 11-11-2014 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
2014-09 11-11-2014 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 756
§ DL-1 FOX POINT CODE § DL-1
A1000:722
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-10 11-17-2014 Officers and employees:
Village Manager amendment
Ch. 112, Art. I
2015-01 4-16-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 63
2015-02 6-16-2015 General provisions: Code
construction and penalties
amendment; Building Board
amendment; building
construction amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I; Ch.
19, Art. II; Ch.
756
2015-02A 8-11-2015 Fires and Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 781
2015-03 10-13-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 745
2015-04 11-11-2015 Fees amendment; building
construction amendment
Ch. 63; Ch. 756
2015-05 12-9-2015 Ordinances and notices
amendment
Ch. 116
2016-01 2-9-2016 Building Board amendment Ch. 19, Art. II
2016-02 4-12-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 745
2016-03 4-12-2016 Business regulation: weights
and measures
Ch. 340, Art. V
2016-04 4-12-2016 Fees amendment; building
construction amendment
Ch. 63; Ch. 756
2016-05 4-12-2016 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 441
2016-06 4-12-2016 Health and sanitation licenses
and permits amendments
Ch. 375
2016-07 4-12-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 745
2017-01 5-9-2017 Lost and abandoned property Ch. 128
2017-02 6-13-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2017-03 8-8-2017 Food, lodging and
recreational safety and
licensing
Ch. 375
2017-04 11-14-2017 Offenses against public
peace, safety and welfare
amendment
Ch. 670
2017-05 11-14-2017 Offenses against public
peace, safety and welfare
amendment
Ch. 670
2017-06 12-5-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 63
2018-01 3-13-2018 Transient Merchants and
Solicitors: Registration and
Permit Amendment
Ch. 417, Art. II
§ DL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § DL-1
A1000:723
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-02 5-8-2018 Offenses Against Public
Peace, Safety and Welfare
Amendment
Ch. 670
2018-03 6-12-2018 Solid Waste: Collection and
Disposal Amendment; Fires
and Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 276, Art. I;
Ch. 781
2018-04 6-12-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 63
2018-05 6-12-2018 Boards, Commissions and
Committees: Board of Review
Amendment
Ch. 19, Art. I
2018-06 7-10-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 63
2018-07 8-14-2018 Solid Fill and Grades
Amendment; Offenses Against
Public Peace, Safety and
Welfare Amendment
Ch. 272; Ch. 670
2018-08 9-13-2018 Stormwater Management,
Erosion Control and Bluff
Regulation: Drainage
Amendment
Ch. 285, Art. II
2018-09 9-13-2018 Fees Amendment; Animals:
General Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 63; Ch. 579,
Art. I
2018-10 11-13-2018 Fees Amendment; Solid
Waste: Recycling
Amendment; Trees, Shrubs
and Other Plant Material:
Diseased Trees and Shrubs
Amendment
Ch. 63; Ch. 276,
Art. II; Ch. 310,
Art. II
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp
No.
2019-01 1-8-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 745 7
2019-02 1-8-2019 Vacation Rentals Ch. 573 7
2019-03 4-9-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 745 7
2019-04 4-9-2019 Streets, Sidewalks
and Rights-Of-Way
Amendment
Ch. 292 7
§ DL-1 FOX POINT CODE § DL-1
A1000:724
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp
No.
2019-05 3-12-2019 Boards,
Commissions and
Committees: Board
of Review
Amendment
Ch. 19, Art. I 7
2019-06 3-12-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 63 7
2019-07 8-13-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 63 7
2019-08 8-13-2019 Animals
Amendment; Fees
Amendment
Ch. 579; Ch.
63
7
2019-09 10-10-2019 Offenses Against
Public Peace,
Safety and Welfare
Amendment
Ch. 670 7
2019-10 12-10-2019 Boards,
Commissions and
Committees:
Building Board
Amendment
Ch. 19, Art. II 7
§ DL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § DL-1
A1000:725